   From: Paul Pugh                             cc: Mr Michael
         Head of Operational Policing              Mr O’Brien
         Policy Unit                               Mr Howarth
         Room 539                                  Sir Richard Wilson
         Queen Anne's Gate                         Miss Wheldon
         S 0171-273-3141                           Mr Boys Smith
         13 June 1997                              Mr Granatt
                                                   Mr Middleton LAB
                                                   R/Io I ai
                                                   Mr Edmunfteon
                                                   Mr Warner
                                                   Mr Owen




  Home Secretary


  HILLSBOROUGH


 Issue

 Taking forward the establishment of the independent review of the evidence in the
 light of the letters from the Attorney General and the Lord Chancellor.

 Timing

             Pressing - the sooner we can clear the air and announce the Inquiry the


 Summary

3.    Lord Irvine wrote on 6 June (attached at A) proposing Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to carry out the review. You have indicated that you would be hapov to
appoint him.

^a          Attorney General ^as a9reed in principle with commissioning an
independent examination of the evidence but has concerns about the terms of
reference which you proposed (his letter is attached at B). He is anxious not to
compromise the statutory responsibilities which he and the DPP exercise. He wants
to make sure that the terms of reference do not appear to fetter or pre-empt their
discretion. He proposes amended terms of reference to meet that concern.




f:'oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd.doc
      Recommendation

      5.    That you agree to the amended terms of reference proposed by the Attorney,
      subject to some minor qualifications; and that you confirm that you are happy for
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be appointed. A draft letter is attached.

      Consideration

     6.     You wrote on 29 May to the Lord Chancellor about who would be a suitable
     person to carry out the examination. He considers that it would be better not to
     appoint Mr Justice Collins, who was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry, but to appoint a
     senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. He proposes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
     whom he describes as “in first class intellectual order. He has the requisite
^    experience; his public presence is impressive." Home Office experience of Lord
     Justice Stuart-Smith through his work in dealing with complaints against the security
     services confirms the opinion expressed by the Lord Chancellor that Lord Justice
     Stuart-Smith is very impressive both intellectually and in public presence - although
     he can be austere and lacking in warmth. You have already indicated that you
     would be content to appoint him and the draft letter attached confirms that.

     7.      Your letter of 5 June (attached at C) proposed terms of reference asking the
     person appointed to advise on whether there is new evidence which provides
     sufficient grounds for you to establish a Public Inquiry, or for the Attorney to consider
     applying to the High Court for a new Inquest, or for the DPP to consider bringing
     criminal charges against any person. The Attorney is concerned that terms of
     reference which specifically ask the person to advise on those issues could fetter or
    pre-empt the discretion which rests with him and the DPP. We anticipated this
    concern when we discussed the terms of reference with you on 4 June, but the
    Attorney considers that the terms of reference are still too specific and invite the
    person appointed to impinge on the statutory responsibilities which rest with him and
    the DPP. He raises a particular concern in relation to the possibility of any future
    criminal proceedings; if a High Court Judge had publicly expressed a view that there
    were grounds for criminal proceedings, such views would be likely to carry such
    weight that they might be regarded as making a fair trial impossible. This last point
    seems particularly telling: it would be completely counter-productive if terms of
    reference which invited a Judge to make specific recommendations about criminal
    proceedings were later held to make a fair trial impossible.

    8.    I have consulted Home Office legal advisers, and our view is that you should
    accept the Attorney’s assessment of how the terms of reference might affect the
    statutory responsibilities which he and the DPP exercise. Although the terms of
    reference which the Attorney proposes are not as explicit as those which we would
    have liked, they still allow sufficient scope for the examination to deal with the main
    issue of concern - that is, whether there is any new evidence.

    9.     There are a couple of minor qualifications which he might want to raise: the
    draft proposed by the Attorney makes no reference explicitly to the Home Secretary.


    f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd.doc
   We think it should. Secondly, our original draft allowed for the possibility that the
   Judge might comment on whether there is any other action which should be taken in
   the public interest, beyond the specific issues covered in the terms of reference. We
    hink a sentence to that effect should appear in the terms of reference. The draft
   letter attached at D covers these two points.

   Handling

          If the Attorney is content with the slightly amended proposals, that should
  allow the terms of reference to be agreed during the course of next week. We need
  to consider when an oral statement might be made: I suggest Private Office should
  sound out the business managers about possible dates. We need to take account
  of when you might announce the inquiry into relations between the police and
  minority ethnic communities. (Steve Wells is putting forward further advice on that in
  parallel with this submission). If that inquiry is also announced by way of an oral
  statement, we should keep some distance between the two announcements, so that
 you are not making two oral statements announcing inquiries in the same week. We
 will put forward further advice on the handling of an announcement on Hillsborough
 during the course of next week, together with a first draft of an oral statement. We
 need to prepare the handling of this one very carefully, but I suggest we might be
 looking to an announcement at the end of the week beginning 23 June or the
 following week.




                                                                         PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd.doc
9 u6    97    09   :2(1   FAX 0171     !19 4711                                                   HOME OFFICE                0001/002


                           F r o m T h e R ig h t H o n o u r a b l e T h e L o r d I r v in e o f L a ir g




                                                                                                 H ouse of L o r d s ,
                                                                                                       L o n d o n s w i a opw
                                                                                             V-K.



       The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
       Secretary o f State for the Home Department
       Home Office
       50 Queen Airne’s Gate
                                      c c wr H o u ix tU                                               *
                                                                                            L oui^Qn
       London SW 1H 9A T                  ^        CV^ai
                                                                                    l*r     £ n1cV\/>
                                                   iv O'
                                                    ferrw S<? C,                   fw       iC W /var         L    Tim . | 007
                                                                                    Nat      0 ^ 2 -0 -
                                                     W 2)05^             •^V->
                                                                                                                   RECEIVED 8 V
       Dear                                                                                                           09 JUN 1997
                                                     %*r G ro r\C ij£
                                                         ^(Jfvto^oScvv
                                                         M - * o ^ a4<Jlr~ (.MS)                                  HOME SECRETARY!
                                  THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

       I have seen your Private Secretary’s letter to my Private Secretary o f 29 May 1997 about the
       possibility that you may wish to establish some form o f further judicial examination o f the
       Hillsborough Stadium disaster in 1 9 8 9 .1 agree in principle that, if you do decide to proceed in
       that way, it would be a suitable task for a High Court Judge.

       I consider that, in terms both o f his ability and standing, Mr Justice Collins would be well able
       to carry out this task. However, my own feeling, and my advice, is that the fact that Collins J
       was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry makes it preferable for the task to be given to another
       Judge, almost certainly from a Queen’s Bench Division background.

       There is, however, a more fundamental point. Although the terms o f reference do not in any
       way suggest that the Inquiry may result in any criticism or questioning o f his findings in the
       Taylor Report, that could arise or be thought to have arisen. It is therefore my view, and the
       view o f the Lord Chief Justice, that it would be appropriate for this task to be entrusted to a
       senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal.

       I took the view after our discussion about this after Cabinet yesterday, that the quickest way
       through was for me to have a direct word with the Lord Chief Justice. He and I agree that
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is the best choice. He is 69 and approaching retirement and in first
       class intellectual order. He also has the requisite experience; his public presence is impressive;
       and if the Inquiry were to result in a Public Inquiry (which 1 appreciate may w ell be unlikely),
       it will be no disadvantage for him to carry on as Chairman o f that Public Inquiry in retirement.
       I believe that he may become Treasurer o f Gray’s Inn next year but that merely adds to his
       status and in no way diminishes his capacity to undertake the task. I therefore strongly
       recommend him to you, with the support o f the Lord Chief Justice.
0 9 06    97   09.21    FAX 0171 219 4711                                               HOME OFFICE sfcc   uu*




         The Lord Chief Justice is taking steps to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will be
         willing to accept this task but is reasonably confident that he will be. It would be helpful if
         you could let me know as soon as possible;

                (a) whether you wish Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake this task and;

                (b) your decision on whether there is to be another judicial examination o f
                Hillsborough.

         In view o f your letter o f 5 June, I am copying this letter to John Morris.

                                                        Yours
                             ■01"': 02S 0593                                                           i   'o'K^U
                    ATTOR.VEV G E N E R A L                  TEL-1     123 0 5 9 5                  P. 001



                                   The Rt Hon John Mort is QC MP
                                                                                                    0
                                                                               9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                     LONDON SW1E 6JP
                                                                           M.,
                                                                     ^ o N&r.C r\
Oi 71-823 18 94
                                                                      IU- H
   The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                                            P j_rr*
   Secretary of State for the Home Department                          \ a £> uiV-^»o)cv>
   Home Office
   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
   LONDON SW1H 9AT                Mr                                   &V Gr-TCVMXfet
                                                                       K PoqV>                  M/ vOor^e-
    10 June 1997
                                                                       K/-£> L o o


                                                                            O U.   v>
                                                                                 -io n
                                                                        1      \1 JUN 1997
                                                                                        SECRETARY
   THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

   Thank you for your letter of 5 June 1997 outlining the considerations which
   have led you to conclude that we should initiate an independent examination
   of the alleged new evidence because this appears to be the only way to allay
   public concern.

  I have no difficulty in principle with your approach. There undoubtedly
  remains deep rooted dissatisfaction amongst the relatives of those who died as
  well as some of the survivors and their relatives about the manner in which the
  public authorities conducted themselves at the material time. They have
  manifested themselves in calls for official action which, even if acceded to.
  would in all probability not then address the concerns. For example, a further
  inquest - which can only be ordered by the High Court - would have to
  consider the statutory issues prescribed by the Coroners Act 1988 and could
  not properly become a wide ranging or generalised enquiry.

 But I do have difficulty with the draft Terms of Reference. They do not
 distinguish adequately between the question of a further public enquiry which
 is properly a m atter of political judgment and the questions of a further
 inquest or possible prosecution which have to be addressed on a quasi-judicial
 basis and according to established criteria. We start from a position where
 tnere is nothing to suggest that the Director of Public Prosecutions and my
 predecessor have failed properly to consider, in accordance with the relevant
 tests all the evidence which has been made available to them. The sole issue
 vShShJ*    r reIf lon t0 questions about further inquests or prosecution is
 whether there is any evidence which has not already been considered.
    oreover. consideration of that further evidence would be a m atter for the DPP
 ° r ki^ S as aPPr0Pr^a*-e- ^ would for a number of reasons be wrong for a
 public enquiry to express a view, for example, on possible criminal charges.
 A G /0 9 0 0 / I
-Jl'\   '■)' ( T H l ' i 0 8 1 4   ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                                   T E L - - O n 828 0595




        m u s f n o T . ^ C 3 2 K t e t o S f r reStS^                                      « * W . we
        of a public enquiry would create a n a lm n e t 3™ 6?*P S d ' Any recommendatlon
        could not properly be c o m n a r S ^ 5V I7 f lstl“ e P « s s u « : this scenario
        counsel. In relaUon             to                     J
                                                              ° f private     advl<* from

        !3SKW-^a“^=asss




                                                 JOHN MORRIS




   AO/OSOfi/ I
-JIN     riTH U     0 8 14   ATTORNEY GENERAL                 TEL O l ' l 828 0593            P. 0 0 3




          SUGGESTED TERMS OF REFERENCE


         To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
         Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


         (a)       to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor: or


         (b)       to the Director of Public Prosecution or the Attorney General for the
                   purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities:


         (c)       to the chief officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
                    .. . .. * / 'i   r
                   discipline matter:


        and in relation to (a) above to advise whether any evidence not previously
        available is of such significance as to justify establishment of a further public
        inquiry and. in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence
        not previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
        duties.


               I         U                                    ^                  ^




       «w/ono«/s
  The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
  The Attorney General                              Av O'Qfui**
  70 Whitehall                                     Hr Ko-vC'/ ^'
  London                                            IP.ar»K (be
  SW1A 2AS                                          K 4 ^ ^ tU d a ^
                                                    W H d 'j f - S ^ J A
                              _   *                      C/>rc*\tU d
                                                   fV
                                                   ^      (LucicUjzbe^ LAG
                                                   <0V £oJ-*t'w'CvC^f C/'*'
                                                     M-o          <?■->
                                                    /V      <&VCK*^


 THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

 As you know I have been considering the representations which have been
 made about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster
 was of course fully investigated by the late Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, but
 rnnsirfA .a* been raiSed about a number of features of the case and material
 considered by some to represent new evidence has been brought to our
 attention. These and related matters were raised in the Granada Television
 documentary drama "Hillsborough" last December.

My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the
allegations made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that
   ere are no grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has
also been considered by the Attorney General's Office and the DPP's Office
None of those who have examined the material consider that there is evidence
 Ldivw! L a T , ?         enquirv: 3 re'°P enln9 of the inquest, or the prosecution of
 individuals. But I am certain that continuing public concern will not be allayed
 with a reassurance from the Home Office that there is no new e^dence I
 therefore propose that there should be an independent examination of the
 alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a respected judge (serving or
 recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be important to ensure that
whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior and respected to command
public confidence. My personal preference would be for a judge. The proposed
terms of reference are:
  "To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new
  evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
  which provides sufficient grounds for:

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department to establish a
               t i i r ^ U A*          ___ *
               further        public !inquiry;

        ii.    the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
               Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

        in.   The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
              charges against V iy person;

        iv.   The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary
              action against any police officer.

 Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public


 There will need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the
independent examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the
announcement w ill have to be made in the House. But I shall want to make sure
that the ground is properly prepared before the announcement is made with
those outside Government with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster
including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor's advice on a suitable figure to lead
the independent examination, and for your comments and those of copy
recipients on the proposed terms of reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister W ithout Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.




                                 JACK STRAW
                                                                                            ANNEX D


  DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY


  The Right Hon John Morris QC MP
  Attorney General


  THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


 Thank you for your letter of 10 June about the proposed independent examination of
 the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.


 I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle with what I proposed.                             I
 understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
 responsibilities which rest with you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
 Although           I would             prefer terms of reference which        invited   more   explicit
 recommendations, I am broadly content with the amended terms which you
 proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer explicitly to
 my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to advise on any
other action which should be taken in the public interest. I suggest therefore terms
of reference along the following lines:


            To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
            Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                       (a)         To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                       (b)         To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                       for        the     purpose   of   discharging   their   respective   statutory
                       responsibilities; or




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pddoc
                            (c)     To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                            police disciplinary matters;


               And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
               is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State
               for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
               (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
              which which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise
              whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.


  I would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy with the slightly amended
  version.


  I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might take
 on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind. If Derry is
 able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the task, I suggest
 the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet officials to discuss his
 requirements.                 The appropriate official is Paul Pugh, Head of the Operational
 Policing Policy Unit here (0171-273 3141).


 I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
 Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the Secretary
 of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and to Sir Robin
 Butler.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd. doc
