                                                         r    wdtW (J)

NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE
OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION HELD AT 12.00 ON TUESDAY 28 NOVEMBER IN
QUEEN ANNE'S GATE


Present:    Lord Justice Taylor            Mr   K   E Rose
            Mr Johnson                     Mr   M   Rogers
            Mr Whalley                     Mr   R   Graham
            Mrs Wither                     Mr   A   Jones


Green Guide


1.   CACFOA feel that the Green Guide was too flexible and its
status should be strengthened to a mandatory standard similar to
the English Building Regulations. Aspects of the Green Guide
could be made mandatory under Section 19 of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.   The standard of the Green
Guide must ensure the basics of safety were legal requirements.


2.   Areas of particular concern, which they wish to see made
mandatory included (i) strength of crush barriers, (ii) crowd
density (Section 16 of Green Guide) (iii) means of escape. They
were however happy with the 1987 Act and Section 11 of the Green
Guide as regards risk of fire.


Perimeter Fences and Evacuation of Pitch


3.   While recommendations 6-10 cover this area, CACFOA did not
feel that people were in a place of safety when hemmed in by
perimeter fences and sufficient exits for safe egress should be
provided.   They agreed that gates should be open.       Lord Justice
Taylor pointed out that the options were to leave the perimeter
fence up, take them down or prohibit pitch invasion by criminal
sanction.


4.   It was also noted that it was correct to regard access to
the pitch as one method of evacuation, since one could never
foresee all possible dangers as at Hillsborough.        CACFOA said
that 3 minutes was the period of escape they aimed at in non-fire
risk situation but the limit would be less if there was
combustible material there. They said they were pleased that
gates should be left open and supervised but the width of the
gates, which was an important aspect, had been left for the
moment. However, generally, CACFOA were against barriers of any
description but, if they had to be used, adequate openings should
be provided.

Cutting Gear


5.   Recommendation 10 dealt with the provision of cutting gear
but this did cause problems as there were a variety of fences to
be dealt with eg heavy cutting gear was needed for Manchester
United. CACFOA felt that if the exits were right cutting gear
would not be needed. However, Lord Justice Taylor said these
were very much interim recommendations. CACFOA said that if the
equipment was necessary it must be maintained and people trained
to use it.     Lord Justice Taylor asked if senior stewards could be
trained to use it but Mr Graham said this already happened and
that some grounds hired the equipment for the day because it was
so costly. Mr Rose said he hoped a final decision on fencing and
gates would remove the need for cutting equipment.


6.   CACFOA were also concerned that, at Hillsborough, injury
could have been caused to the spectators by the cutting equipment
itself and therefore the decision to use it should be taken by
someone who could see the consequences. It was not acceptable to
rely on cutting equipment or the Fire Brigade: adequate gates
should be provided.


7.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for CACFOA's views on the
situation where the bottom level of the terrace was below the
level of the pitch.     Mr Rose said that people must be able to
negotiate the means of escape by their own unaided efforts.


8.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for CACFOA's view on a Senior Fire
Officer being one of the emergency team in the control room.       Mr
Rose said that in certain circumstances, the safety team may
identify the need for a Fire Officer to be present but generally
there was no reason to make a blanket requirement. It was
recognised that, at special events, the circumstances might
require fire authority presence but this would be exceptional and
appropriate at a very high risk match only and should be at the
cost of the club not the Fire Authority.


9.   The Metropolitan Police graded matches from A-C but a Fire
Officer was not necessary at any less them a grade A.


Locking of Final Exits


10. The arrangement that final exits were locked until 10
minutes after kick-off worked well and there were no problems if
the exits were unlocked but manned and shut.

Local Authorities


11. Lord Justice Taylor asked if, at working party meetings, due
consideration to the Police and Fire Authority's views was given.
They agreed that generally it was but that some local authorities
had been overreacting and that the Green Guide ought to be
interpreted sensibly.


12. Lord Justice Taylor asked how CACFOA viewed the Football
Licensing Authority's role as an inspectorate and overseer of
local authorities. Mr Jones said they were conscious that
similar inspectorates had had difficulties in the past but that
the idea sounded sensible. It was pointed out that in some local
authorities, the elected members were also the chairmen of the
football club and this could lead to them being under pressure.
So a national body might be helpful in these circumstances.


13.   Mr Rose said there were some liaison and consultation
difficulties since there was no obligation on local authorities
to take note of the views of the fire service. CACFOA felt
consultation needed to take the form of a minuted meeting and all
parties should be aware of the others' areas of responsibility.
Co-ordinat ion


14. Lord Justice Taylor asked how an emergency situation could
be reacted to with maximum speed. Mr Rose said it was a matter
for a police officer and others to call on the fire brigade if
necessary. Regarding Hillsborough, the public did not understand
that the Fire Control HQ covered all of South Yorkshire mnd the
person who received the call should not be expected to know the
address of a football ground. Recommendation 36 therefore
covered this situation.


Command and Control of Resource Operations at Non-Fire Emergency


15.   In the event of a fire, there was clear legislation that
control of the situation was by the officer in charge of local
authority fire brigade. However, his did not apply in a non-fire
situation and CACFOA feel there was a need for legislation to
avoid the ambiguity which existed and show clear lines of
responsibility.

All-Seater Stadia


16.   CACFOA were in support of all seater stadia as they felt it
overcame or at least reduced the need for perimeter fencing and
prevented overcrowding.
