From:   G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                   WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        CHIEF CONSTABLE                                       HEADQUARTERS
                                                              PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                              Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                              Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                              Telephone: 021-236 5000 .



                                                                JMJ/VSC

                                                                8 January 1990

        R M Whalley Esq
        Secretary to the Inquiry
        Room 662
        Home Office
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        London
        SW1H 9AT




        As you know since the conclusion of Lord Justice Taylor's oral hearings
        in Sheffield, followed by the publication of his Interim Report, we have
        continued our Investigations into the events at Hillsborough on 15 April
        1989. Initially, our enquiries continued to service the needs of
        HM Coroner in Sheffield. However, as a result of a communication from
        the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police to the Director of Public
        Prosecutions, following the publication of the Interim Report, It was
        decided that a full criminal investigation into all aspects should
        follow.  I was invited to lead that investigation and I asked my
        Assistant Chief Constable, M r Mervyn Jones, to continue to manage the
        investigation on my behalf.

        We have continued to process the information we gathered in those early
        weeks and have, in addition, made further enquiries, obtained further
        documents and compiled more statements and questionnaires. Lord
        Justice Taylor will rightly wonder before he submits his final report,
        whether anything significantly new has emerged from our subsequent
        investigations. Having discussed this likely concern with Mervyn Jones
        I am satisfied that nothing significantly new has emerged over and above
        that information already supplied, in the early stages of the
        investigation, to Mr Andrew Collins QC and Treasury Solicitors.

        I say this simply to confirm the present position and I stress that the
        criminal inquiry is continuing.  I shall, of course, supply details if
        any significant matters come to light in the course of the c ri M n a l
        investigation and prior to the completion of the final report.

        I hope that the above statement helps Lord Justice Taylor to make
        suitable comment in his final report. The form of words used have been
        discussed with senior members of the office of the Director of Public
        Prosecutions and they are happy that they do not compromise in any way
        the criminal investigation continuing at present, nor any decision
        to be made later.




        Chief Constable
