                                                                                                01SI2252356                       P h G E :02
-G6-':                          FFOt'l:SOL. I'llTOPS BUS UNIT       01512252356                                                                     (fi)


                      • *•

                                      I            mm®
                                                  Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                                              Sf/Pfflfr




                   26 June 1997                                                          21 Rosemont Road
                                                                                         Liverpool
                                                                                         L17 6XB


                  Mr P Edmundaon
                  OPPU
                  Room 527
                  Home Office


                                                  f / & 2fe|t>
                   Dear P q fc /r

                  Firstly may I thank you for taking the trouble to contact me
                  yesterday regarding the Home Secretary's announcement on Monday.
                  Your courtesy meant that all members of the Hillsborough Family
                  Support Group were notified prior to today's media speculation.

                   Please find enclosed a brief paper which sets out a summary of
                   matters which families feel ought to be considered in any new
                   enquiry.  The paper also spells out the conditions under which
                   such enquiry should be set up.  I hope that the Home Secretary's
                   decision can encompass such matters,  X should be grateful ifyou                                                        1\
                   could let the Home Secretary have sight of the same.                                                                         ’


                   I thank you for your assistance.

                   Yours sincerely




                   Ann Marie Adlington
                   Solicitor




         chairman                                                VlC&CnAttMAN/ffitONflrARV                TftBASDKKK
                                                                 r.iiMitmoM                               M » J .T w jiw
         I.HM*                                                                                               A h tw fiijd k m d
         Tern Hill lUffi                                         21 R m u m m i A n ri
         n   «w (v h m c L a ik , uflnj h w * »                  UrapMri                                  UirttcnhMrt
         SkiiHonnnn ion                                          117MIX                                   Mcnrjxvtc
         •W /P m r.O I'W * « # * >                               -IWItS!M5J.104vrn
                  W?.v<UJ(W»                                            0SW-3J4I2I
                                                        0151^52          PH'iE:03
06-97 15:03   FP0I1: SOLICITORS BUS UNIT   015122523%




                             HILL8B0R0UQH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP

       Any new enquiry into the Hillsborough disaster of 15th April 1989
       must consider the impact of the new evidence upon the findings of
       the Taylor Enquiry and of the inquests held in 1989-90 when formal
       verdicts of accidental death were returned.  This evidence was
       recently submitted to the Home Office and Crown Prosecution
       Service.

       A summary of this evidence is as follows:

       1.     Video evidence and the evidence of Roger Houldsworth show
              that crucial evidence available on the day of the disaster
              was suppressed.  This evidence reveals that the police were
              aware in their control box that the terraces were
              overcrowded, and that subsequent police assertions that
              cameras were faulty were untrue.

       2.     New evidence from, for example. Dr. Ed Walker shows that the
              very simple explanation presented to the jury at the inquests
              that death followed very soon upon unconsciousness to all or
              almost all victims was wrong.  Contrary indications to this
              simplistic analysis were improperly withheld from the jury.

       3.     Further evidence shows failures on the part of the police in
              that they refused access to the injured and dying by
              paramedics.

       4.     Cumulatively, these failings raise deeply disturbing
              questions about the way in which evidence was selected by the
              West Midlands Police for presentation to the jury.

       5.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group continues to argue that
              perjury was committed, and the course of justice at the
              inquest and     Taylor Enquiry was perverted.

       In order that the truth be established finally, a new enquiry
       should be set up  under the following conditions:

       (A)    It should be chaired by a Lord Justice of Appeal,   or other
              senior judge.

       (B)    Lay assessors of genuine and obvious independence should sit
              with the judge.

       (C)    Witnesses ought to give evidence under oath.

       (D)    The Support Group must, in the overwhelming interests of
              justice, be allowed legal representation.

       (E)    Full disclosure of relevant documents ought to be made in
              advance to interested parties, in contrast to the inadequate
              provision for disclosure that prevailed at the inquests.


       be/solicitors/a.adlingto/statement/26069?
(F)   The Enquiry must have the power to recommend the quashing of
      the verdicts at the inquests.

(G)   It is accepted that the Enquiry cannot be as detailed or time
      consuming as the original Enquiry and Inquests.  Nonetheless
      it is imperative that the new evidence be comprehensively
      examined.




be/solicitors/a.adlingto/statement/260697
