From: Linda Rushton                                    cc: Mr Michael
      APS/Mr Howarth                                       Mr O’Brien
      Room 702                                             Lord Williams
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                    Mr Omand
      S 273 4238                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                           Ms Wheldon
                                                           Mr Middleton
                                                           Mr R Evans
                                                           Mr Pugh
                                                           Mr Edmundson
                                                           Mr Butler
                                                           Ms Clifford
                                                           Mr Warner
                                                           Mr Owen
       12 February 1998


Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

As requested, Mr Howarth met Jane Kennedy and Peter Kilfoyle yesterday
evening to discuss the handling of the publication of the Hillsborough scrutiny
and the Home Secretary’s response to its recommendations. They agreed the
following:

♦     They would try and ensure that all local MPs were ‘on message’ (ie.
      would support the Government’s position once the report is published)
      without revealing to them the conclusions of the report in advance.

♦     They would also try to neutralise the local media in advance of
       publication and the Home Secretary’s statement. Jane Kennedy will
       speak to Granada; Mr Howarth will speak to the Liverpool Echo and
       Radio Merseyside and it would be a good idea for Ed Owen to speak
      to his contact at the Daily Post. This would obviously require revealing
      the slant of the report however without entering into the details of the
       report.

♦     They also felt that if there is a debate on the Hillsborough report it
      would be a good idea for Mr Howarth to perhaps wind up the debate in
      view of the fact that he is a local MP and a Home Office Minister.

♦     It was considered that Ed Owen should prepare questions for Paddy
       Tipping to distribute to Merseyside MPs to ask during the debate
       following the Home Secretary’s statement covering in particular the
       issue of the missing video tapes; action regarding police disciplinary
       process and action regarding Coroners inquests following disasters of
       this kind.
2. In addition, Mr Howarth has seen Sarah Clifford’s submission of 11
February regarding the media handling of the publication of Hillsborough
scrutiny and has commented that if the Home Secretary does not wish to pen
the article for the Liverpool Echo he would be willing to do so.




                           L^i'vda dmShtax.




                            LINDA RUSHTON
