 GUIDE TO SAFETY
        AT
SPORTS GROUNDS
Home Office/Scottish Office




    GUIDE TO SAFETY
           AT
   SPORTS GROUNDS




London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office
© Crown copyright 1986
  First published 1973
  New Edition 1986
  Third Impression 1989

This booklet is a guide to measures for improving spectator
safety at existing sports grounds




ISBN 0 11 340840 4
CONTENTS
                                Chapter Paragraph
                                  no.      no.

INTRODUCTION                      1        1
 Scope and Status                         1
 Background                               2
 Historical Context                       3
 General Principles                       4
 Using the Guide                          11
 The Problems                             14
 Overcoming the Problems                  19

MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY         2        23

GENERAL FABRIC AND STRUCTURAL
 MATTERS                          3        30

INSPECTIONS AND TESTS             4        36

INGRESS                           5        44

EGRESS                            6        48
 Egress Time                              56
 Signposting                              57
 Exit Routes                              58
 Exit Doors                               62

STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS               7        68
 Disposition                              69
 Construction                             70
 Access                                   79
 Discharge                                85
 Fire Protection                          86
 Ramps                                    87
                                           Chapter Paragraph
                                             no.      no.

TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES                  8        89
 Terrace Steps                                       92
 Gangways                                            96
 Division of Spectator Accommodation                 101
 Crush Barriers                                      104
 Viewing Slopes                                      105
 Terrace to Touchline Distance                       108

CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS                 9        110
  Dimensions and Design                              110
  Spacing of                                         112
  Strength of                                        118

ROOFED STANDS WITH SEATED
 ACCOMMODATION                               10       120
  Balustrading                                       128
  Temporary Stands and Other
   Temporary Structures                              129

FIRE SAFETY                                  11       147
  Minimising Fire Risk                               149
  Prevention or Retardation of
   Fire Growth/Spread                                156
  Fire Warning Systems                               162
  Emergency Lighting                                 166
  Fire-fighting Equipment                            170
  Emergency Procedures and Staff
   Training                                          176
  Means of Escape                                    178
  Fire Protection for Stairways/Passages             180
  Emergency Evacuation Time                          183
  Access for Emergency Vehicles                      189

COMMUNICATIONS                               12       192


                                2
                                          Chapter Paragraph
                                            no.      no.

STEWARDING                                   13      195

CROWD CONTROL                                14      202
 Policing                                            204
 Crowd Movement                                      206
 Detention and Removal of Troublemakers              210
 Refreshments                                        212

PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL                   15      214

ESTIMATION OF SAFE GROUND
 CAPACITY                                    16      212
 Terraces and Viewing Slopes                         221
 Exit Systems                                        229

RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES                       17      233

ANNEXES
 A. GLOSSARY OF TERMS
 B. STEWARDING
 C. TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS
4
1. INTRODUCTION

Scope and status o f the Guide
1.   This booklet provides guidance to ground management, local
authorities and technical specialists such as engineers on
measures for improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds. It is a voluntary code and has no legal force.

Background to the Guide
2.     Guidelines on measures for improving the safety of
spectators at sports grounds first became available on a more or
less comprehensive scale when the Wheatley Report on Crowd
Safety at Sports Grounds was published in 1972. The recommen­
dations in the appendix to that Report were extended to include
fire precautions and means of escape from an emergency situation
such as a fire, and then formed the basis of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (which became known as the "Green Guide"). The
application of those guidelines to football grounds over the few
years which followed revealed a need for the advice to be
amended in certain respects. Furthermore, since the safety of
spectators can be affected when crowds are disturbed by hooligan
elements, the recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd
 Behaviour were incorporated in a new version, published in 1976,
which was aimed specifically at football grounds. Following the
fire at Bradford City FC ground in 1985 in which 56 people died, a
working party, established under the aegis of Mr Justice
 Popplewell's Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
 Grounds, reviewed the Guide and produced a series of recommen­
dations which have been taken into account together with
comments from others in producing this revised and expanded
version.

H istorical context
3.    Serious accidents at sports grounds involving injuries on a
large scale to spectators are fortunately few. But as demonstrated
by those at Ibrox and Valley Parade, and before that at Burnden
Park, the potential scale of death and injury at a crowded sporting
event is such that it is essential for ground management to take


                                 5
such steps as are necessary to ensure reasonable safety at their
grounds. This applies to all sports grounds irrespective of whether
or not they are the subject of a safety certificate.


General principles o f the Guide
4.     The problem of crowd safety at sports grounds is complex
gnd cannot be solved simply by ensuring that each component of a
ground, such as stairways, passages or sections of terracing, is
satisfactory in itself. The inter-relation of these and the other
components is essential: none of them can be considered in
isolation without consideration of its effect on the others, and they
should all be compatible and combine to form a balanced unit.


5.    The Guide is intended to cover grounds where sporting
events of all kinds are held and where the gathering of large
crowds is likely to present a safety problem. However, much of the
guidance has particular application to football stadia and this
should be borne in mind when applying the Guide to grounds used
for other sports and modifications may prove necessary, because
the measures to meet problems of stadia used for association
football may not always be necessary at other grounds used for
other types of sports. For example, if a ground has no terraced or
sloped viewing areas, crush barrier requirements are unlikely to
be of concern. Indications are given throughout to those sections
of the Guide which are particularly relevant to football grounds or
stadia and to those where close compliance with the guidelines is
desirable irrespective of the sport concerned.

6.     Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without
necessarily detracting from the overall safety of the ground. The
variety of type, function and layout of sports grounds and the inter­
relationship of the different parts of them means that a flexible
approach should be maintained to take account of the particular
circumstances at individual grounds. For these reasons the Guide
does not attempt to set a minimum standard which would be
acceptable for a large well-attended stadium but excessive for a
smaller, sparsely-attended ground; or which would be an
appropriate standard for the latter but insufficient for the former.
7.    The Guide is aimed primarily at advising on safety for
spectators in existing sports grounds and as such it attempts to
take account of the constraints and difficulties which are present
within these grounds. Although it is not a design brief for new
construction work or reconstruction at sports grounds the
principles may wed still be applicable. Such work should not be to
a standard lower than that set out here and the scope offered by
new design work should lead to better standards than can be
achieved at grounds already built.

8.    It should be borne in mind that, when using the Guide to
assess whether existing circumstances provide adequately for the
safety of spectators, the criterion to be aimed for is that of a
reasonable degree of safety. It would be unreasonable, even if it
were practical, to seek the absolute safety of everyone attending
a ground.

9.    The Guide is not specifically aimed at risks to spectators
from the sport itself, but clearly management have a duty to take
all necessary precautions to safeguard spectators against the
effects of accidents in, or originating from, the activity on the
playing area. Particular care is needed when the sport entails use
and storage of flammable fuels.

10 . The advice given in this Guide is without prejudice to the
operation of the Building Regulations, the Health and Safety at
Work etc Act 1974 and any other relevant legislation.

Using the Guide
11 . The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should
be kept in mind by both ground management and, where
applicable, by the local authority when applying the Guide to an
individual ground. The Guide is an aid to, not a substitute for,
professional judgement and common sense.

12 . Although some of the safety standards are likely to apply to
all sports grounds, however many spectators are present, it is
nonetheless important to relate the Guide to the needs of the
individual ground. It should be borne in mind that in most circum­


                                7
stances, the required safety standard to be attained will often
relate to the maximum number of spectators,who are liable to be
admitted to the ground (or parts of it). For example, a large football
stadium with a maximum spectator capacity of tens of thousands
is liable to pose significant crowd pressure risks. To accommodate
safely a maximum crowd at such a ground might entail substantial
remedial work; alternatively, consideration might be given to
accepting a much smaller number of spectators who, properly
dispersed, could be accommodated safely without having to incur
costly repairs or alterations. The first step, therefore, is to assess,
using the Guide's criteria, how many people can be safely
accommodated in the different sections of the ground given the
existing condition of the ground (ie determine a safe spectator
capacity). This should be done with a proper, detailed plan,
preferably drawn to scale (1:200) of the ground (see Chapter 16).

13. It follows that in general in a ground where it is proposed to
retain a high spectator capacity, the measures needed to be taken
to accommodate safely such large crowds are potentially more
extensive.

The problem s
14 . There are essentially four types of safety problem to be
considered within a ground and in its immediate surroundings, all
of which are linked in some way.

15. The first concerns hazards affecting individuals which cause
tripping, slipping and falling, which in themselves can have
serious consequences for the individuals concerned, but can also
lead to a serious incident involving others. This type of problem
can be remedied by proper care and maintenance, and attention to
the general constructional features of the ground.

16 . The second type is far more important and involves crowd
pressures. When large crowds are present and densities are high,
pressures build up within the crowd either through motion or
swaying which make it difficult, or even impossible, for individuals
to control their own movements. Under these conditions crowd
pressures can escalate to a dangerous level and if a person


                                   8
stumbles or Tails the crowd cannot adapt to avoid him or to stop to
help. Since this type of danger arises from crowd pressures its
remedy lies in their removal or restraint within safe limits. These
dangers arise in particular on terraces and in exit routes, and so
careful attention must be paid to restraining surges and similar
pressures on the terraces and to ensuring free movement
throughout the exit systems. Such free movement is dependent
upon the capacity of all the various sections of the exit systems
and interactions between them.

17. The third type of safety problem cannot be divorced from the
second and in some ways is an extreme version of it. The danger
arises from emergency situations which can develop following, for
example, an outbreak of fire or hooliganism. The orderly
evacuation of large crowds may under emergency conditions
become a very serious problem.

18 . The fourth problem is the risk from fire itself, particularly
where there is a large crowd in a confined area of an elevated
covered stand where spectators are in the upper tiers of a
building, the materials and construction of which might in
themselves constitute a fire risk. Measures should be taken which
as far as possible w ill prevent the outbreak and contain the spread
of fire; systems should be introduced to detect such an outbreak
early on; and provision must be made for means of escape and for
staff to be trained in emergency procedures.

Overcom ing th e problem s
19 . The importance of good ground management cannot be
emphasised too strongly (see Chapter 2). Much of the safety
advice contained in this Guide can and should form part of the
general upkeep and maintenance of a sports ground. If these
guidelines are applied they should reduce or eliminate risks to
spectators and in the long term prove cost effective by preventing
serious defects. A well-maintained and well-run venue may also
attract more events and a greater number of spectators.

2 0 . As mentioned in paragraph 7 above, the scope in new
design work can give an opportunity to enhance spectator safety.


                                 9
                                                          I




which should be given a high priority when deciding upon the
design, layout, materials and loading of new buildings, or
alterations in a ground. Close attention should be paid to new and
existing exits and exit routes, slip-resistant surfaces, lighting and
ease of maintenance. All parts of viewing areas should always
have a clear unobstructed view of the playing area and designs
should take account of the need for effective stewarding, which
can play an important role in controlling crowd movement (see
Chapter 13).

21 . Although controlling crowd numbers may serve to reduce
some risks to an acceptable level, remedial work is likely to be
necessary to overcome others. Obvious defects such as trip
hazards (especially at the head of stairs or steps), loose or weak
handrails on stairs, and obstructed exits or exit routes, should be
rectified as part of the general care and maintenance of a ground.
Structures should be sound (see Chapter 3) and inspected by
suitably qualified persons (see Chapter 4). Design, layout and
signposting of exits and exit routes require particular attention to
ensure that they can safely cope with the number of spectators
who w ill use them at the end of an event or in an emergency (see
Chapter 6). Similarly, the condition of terraces or viewing slopes
(see Chapter 8) and presence or otherwise of crush barriers,
correctly sited and meeting the strength tests of this Guide (see
Chapter 9), are important factors. Broken, uneven terracing causes
stumbling. Barriers not only serve to break up crowd pressures but
also assist in controlling movement off the terraces by regulating
the rate of arrival at exits to suit their capacity, and encouraging
the formation of queues so that spectators arrive at exits in an
orderly fashion.

2 2 . Proper precautions against the risk of fire are vital (see
Chapter 11). Good ground management is crucial in reducing or
eliminating the risk. Accumulation of litter is a prime potential
source of fire but can be eliminated by regular and frequent
inspections, good housekeeping, ground maintenance and by
taking particular care over the storage of flammable materials. The
nature and type of materials used in the construction of covered
areas and stands w ill strongly influence the safety measures


                                  10
required in them; for example, in some circumstances consideration
may have to be given to restricting the number of spectators
and/or to the provision of additional exits from the building if it is
to continue in use.
2. M A N A G EM EN T RESPONSIBILITY

Effective ground management is an important factor in
achieving proper safety and management should constantly
look to improve safety standards wherever possible.


23. The safety of the public inside the ground is the
responsibility of those who stage the event and administer the
ground in which it is held, ie the "management". This responsibility
applies in both normal and emergency situations. Local authority
safety officers, fire and police officers w ill help management to
discharge this responsibility and in certain circumstances may
require measures to be taken in order to achieve reasonable safety
standards, but the management is not thereby absolved of its
responsibility for the safety of its customers.

24. Management should draw up a programme of checks,
inspections, tests, personnel training and remedial work pro­
grammes so as to eliminate or reduce risks to spectators.
Management is responsible for ensuring that such inspections are
carried out on structures and installations so that they are safe for
the purpose for which they were intended. The results of any
remedial action, as and when taken, should be recorded. Where
restrictions on crowd numbers to parts of the ground are required
for safety reasons they must be imposed and enforced. Similarly, if
a part of the ground is required to be closed because it is
potentially unsafe for spectators this must be done, and it must
not be opened up as a result of an "attractive" fixture or event,
unless measures have been taken beforehand to remove the
dangers which led to its closure in the first place.

25. The ground management should ensure that structural fire
protection of buildings is adequate, and that fire warning systems
are correctly installed and properly maintained in accordance with
manufacturers' instructions or British Standards. Similarly,
suitable fire-fighting equipment must be provided and maintained
to the standards specified in this Guide (see Chapter 11).


                                 12
                                                                         --------   1



26 . Staff training, particularly for stewards, in carrying out both
their normal duties and ensuring that they are aware of their role
in an emergency situation, should be given high priority.
Management should not only inform all staff in writing what their
duties are, how to effect them and from whom to seek advice if in
doubt, but also carry out active supervision and organise
emergency drills to maintain standards (see Chapter 13).

27 . General repair and maintenance should be undertaken with
spectator safety in mind; litter should not be allowed to
accumulate and management should see that minor repairs are
quickly and properly carried out.

2 8 . There should be an appointed safety officer who should be
of sufficient status and authority effectively to take responsibility
for safety at the ground and to be able to authorise and supervise
safety measures. He or an appointed deputy should be in
attendance at a central control point when an event takes place.
All staff should know the location of this control point and who is
in charge of safety on the day in question.

29 . A summary of management responsibilities is contained
below.

      i.     To appoint a safety officer.
      ii.    To ensure compliance with the terms and conditions
             of a safety certificate or other notice covering the
             safety of spectators.
      iii.   To draw up and keep up to date records and plans of
             the ground; to maintain the general fabric of the
             ground, and arrange an annual detailed inspection of
             the ground and regular testing of a representative
             sample of any barriers or rails, keeping a record of
             their location and results of the tests.
      iv.    To maintain and test all electrical installations and, in
             accordance with the relevant^British Standards, the
             svstems for emeraencv liahtina. communications and
    V.      To draw up in consultation with the emergency services
            contingency plans, including arrangements with police
            for stopping an event, for:
            a. various emergency situations including fire;
            b. possible crowd trouble;
            c. coping with exceptionally large numbers of
               spectators arriving at the ground; and
            d. the failure of any detection, warning, lighting or
               communications system.
    vi.     To devise a clear system of communications within
            the ground.
    vii.    To take necessary fire prevention and precautions
            measures.
    viii.   To consult the fire authority about emergency
            evacuation time; fire risk in stands; fire-fighting
            equipment; and access for emergency vehicles.
    ix.     To store safely and away from public areas any
            hazardous and flammable materials, combustible
            items, and any accumulations of combustible waste
            which cannot be cleared from the ground before the
            next event.
    x.      To provide first aid facilities and first aid staff.
    xi.     To consult with the police to arrange adequate policing
            and police facilities.
    xii.    To recruit, train and deploy stewards and to organise
            and carry out emergency evacuation drills using those
            staff.
    xiii.   To man any locked exit gates at all times when the
            public are in the ground, to ensure they can be opened
            immediately from inside by anyone in an emergency.
    xiv.    To ensure that all gangways and exit routes are
            unobstructed and capable of being used to their full
            capacity at all times when the public are in the ground.


                                  14



m
XV.    To provide directional flow, exit and emergency exit
       signs.
xvi.   Before each event:
       a. to test exit doors and gates, and their locks if they
           are to be locked;
       b. to test lighting, communications and fire w arning/
           detection systems; and
       c. to check the ground for any accumulations of
           combustible litter, especially below stands and in
           exit routes; and for any source of potential missiles.
xvii. After each event:
      a. to carry out a general visual inspection for signs of
          damage; and
      b. to liaise with police so as to gain full benefit from
          any debriefing about crowd control.
xviii. To keep records of:
       a. attendance figures; and
       b. all inspections and tests, any defects noted and
           the remedial/other action taken.




                            15
3. GENERAL FABRIC A N D
STRUCTURAL MATTERS

To meet safety requirements, all components, installations and
structures, eg terraces, stands, stairs, barriers and pylons,
should have the strength and durability, and be maintained in
such condition and arranged in such a manner as to perform
safely their required functions.

30. The design and construction of buildings and installations
should be in accordance with good engineering and building
practice, especially as set out in all relevant British Standard
specifications and codes of practice. They should be properly
maintained and repaired by appropriately qualified persons.
Specialist advice from an appropriately qualified engineer
belonging to a recognised Institution should be sought to assess
the safety and strength of load-bearing elements in buildings and
installations such as crush barriers (see Chapter 9) and brick/block
walls (see Chapter 8, paragraph 103).

31. When walls, including perimeter walls, and fences are to
withstand crowd pressures, they should be designed to withstand
such pressures safely and allowance should be made for forces
simultaneously and independently induced by other factors eg
wind forces or attached installations.

32. All parts of the ground used by the general public, and
especially the exit routes, should have minimum headroom of not
less than 2 metres. Exit routes should wherever possible have a
headroom of 2.4 metres.

33. Precautions should be taken to prevent people from climbing
on to roofs, pylons, hoardings and other structures. Where
possible such structures should be fitted with unclimbable
devices eg stout barriers or close-boarded enclosures. Spikes,
barbed wire etc should only be installed above the minimum
headroom specified in paragraph 32 above and preferably at a
minimum height of 2.4 metres from the base.

                                 16
3 4 . All electrical installations should comply with the current
edition of the Regulations of the Institution of Electrical Engineers,
or have been awarded a certificate of satisfaction from a chartered
electrical engineer. Emergency lighting equipment should conform
to BS 5266: Part 1.

35 . Where the natural lighting in any section of the ground
accessible to the public is deficient, adequate artificial lighting
should be provided. If the ground is to be used after dark, all parts
accessible to the public should be provided with means for lighting
adequate to enable them to see their way into, within and out of
the ground. These provisions are particularly important in relation
to exit routes and stairways used by the public. Advice on
emergency lighting is offered in Chapter 11, paragraphs 166-169.
                                                        i




4. INSPECTIONS A N D TESTS

Inspections and tests should be carried out by suitably qualified
persons on behalf of management to ensure that the safety
standards of the Guide are maintained.

36. A detailed inspection of the ground, including all components
and installations, should be arranged annually by the management.
It should be carried out by a person with a relevant and recognised
professional qualification, and experience of inspecting existing
structures.

37. Engineers commissioned to assess structural safety of
buildings may find the appraisal techniques recommended by the
Institution of Structural Engineers (ISE) in the "Appraisal of
Existing Structures", published in 1980, of assistance. Hard and
fast rules on the extent to which a structural appraisal is
necessary for individual buildings are difficult to lay down: much
w ill depend upon the type of installation, its size, condition,
materials used in construction and standard of maintenance. A full
appraisal is however unlikely to be necessary unless defects are
identified or in evidence from the analysis of information on the
structure and visual inspection.

38. Testing of crush barriers (see also Chapter 9) should be
carried out in accordance with Annex C of this Guide. When the
guidelines are first applied to a particular ground, a representative
sample of barriers of all types from all areas of the ground should
be selected for testing. Thereafter testing of barriers should take
place every 4 years unless from visual inspection doubts are
raised as to their strength/integrity, in which case they should be
retested. Testing should be carried out by or under the supervision
of a suitably qualified engineer, ie a structural or civil engineer.

39. Following each event, a general visual inspection of the
ground should be made for signs of damage which might create a
potential danger to the public. Particular attention should be paid
to the condition of terraces, viewing slopes and stairways. Crush


                                 18
barriers and balustrades should be examined for deformation or
any other overt signs of weakness. The fire precautions measures
should also be inspected for damage, and alarm and other
electrical installations should be checked to ensure compliance
with the relevant British Standards.

4 0 . Warning, detection, lighting and public address systems are
vulnerable to vandalism, and this should be borne in mind when
installing them. All automatic fire detection and fire warning,
emergency lighting and public address systems should be tested
24 hours before an event, in accordance with the methods laid
down in BS 5839: Part 1 and BS 5266: Part 1 respectively. There
is currently no British Standard for public address systems. In case
any of these systems is not operating properly and cannot be fixed
before the event, contingency plans should be formulated, in
consultation with the emergency services, for the use of acceptable
substitute measures or (if necessary) the closure of any areas of
spectator accommodation until the fault is remedied.

4 1 . Before an event, and at major soccer grounds in particular,
steps should be taken to ensure that the ground does not contain
any accessible items which could be used as missiles (eg piles of
bricks, stones etc).

4 2 . The ground should be inspected before and after each event
to ensure there are no accumulations of combustible waste and
that any hazardous materials (if essential to be stored) are safely
stored well away from public areas.

4 3 . Records should be kept and maintained of all inspections
and tests together with a record of remedial actions taken.
5. INGRESS

Spectators should be admitted at a rate which is compatible
with the dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground.

44 . Where admission to a ground or parts of it is controlled by
turnstiles, these, by their number and location, control not only the
rate of admission but, to a large extent, the dispersal of spectators
within a ground to their particular sections. Turnstiles should be of
such numbers as to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly
large crowds are kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster
rate than the arrangements for distributing spectators within the
ground permit.

45 . Dangerous overcrowding can be caused if spectators are
able to force their way into a ground already full to capacity by
scaling or breaking through boundary walls or fences or the gates
in them. To avoid this danger such walls, fences and gates should
be of appropriate height and strength, and hand- or foot-holds
which might assist climbing should be avoided. They should be
regularly inspected.

46 . Contingency plans should be made to deal with situations
where the available entrances at a ground have proved insufficient
to stop unduly large crowds from gathering outside. This may, for
example, include opening additional entrances, but local knowledge
of the ground, crowd patterns and advice from the police should be
taken into account in drawing up contingency plans. Larger
grounds should have intercommunication systems and metering
systems at turnstiles (see Chapter 12), and installation of a
centralised computer monitoring system may be of assistance to
management in quickly identifying particular areas of difficulty.

47 . The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass
through turnstiles w ill depend upon a variety of factors; for
example, the design and age of the equipment, the ability of the
operator and the ticketing arrangements. The admission rate will
therefore depend greatly upon local circumstances but in general.
based on observation and experience, it is unlikely that the
maximum notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 persons
per hour.
6. EGRESS

There should be a smooth and unimpeded passage through an
exit route and a free flow of people from one element to the
next until they reach the boundary of the ground.

4 8 . It is generally recognised that a period of great risk to crowd
safety is at the time of leaving. Pressures can be set up within a
departing crowd by impatient people; such incipient pressures can
and must be contained and controlled by careful attention to the
detailed design of barriers, stairways, gangways and exits.
4 9 . Recommendations relating particularly to egress from stands
are given in Chapter 10. Advice on the calculation of the capacity
of exit systems is contained in Chapter 16.
5 0 . A smooth free flow through an exit route to the outside is
best achieved by controlling the crowd flow at the entrance to the
exit route, so that departing spectators are held back in a relatively
safe place eg on the terrace and gain access to the exit route at a
calculated rate. That is to say, the first part of the exit route
leading from the terrace (or other enclosure) should have a lower
capacity than any subsequent element. The exit route w ill then be
able to discharge people at a rate compatible with that at which
they enter into the route.

5 1 . Where the system is not free flowing, the width of any
restricting element should be increased and/or the width of the
exit from the stand or terrace reduced to regulate the flow.
52 . Where deviations in design or construction from the
recommended guidelines are such as to create a manifest danger,
that section of the exit system should be closed until remedial
action has been taken, and a reduction made accordingly in the
spectator capacity of the section of the ground it serves, ie the exit
route should be excluded from the capacity calculations.
5 3 . Care should be taken in the planning of exit systems to
ensure that in the event of an emergency which blocks the usual
exit route spectators w ill be able to use an alternative exit route
(including, where appropriate, forward evacuation on to the pitch:
see Chapter 11, paragraph 186).

54. There should be no "funnelling" effect causing people to
converge on a narrower means of access or egress. This w ill slow
down the rate at which people can pass through the entire exit
system and pack them more closely together. However, a
narrowing in the exit route is acceptable when it is preceded by an
open space or "reservoir area" where the holding capacity is
sufficient to contain safely the spectators held up because of the
difference in the flow rate into and out of the reservoir area. The
capacity of reservoir areas should be calculated using the
appropriate flow rate given in Chapter 17 and the recommended
exit time given in paragraph 56 below; a packing density of 54
persons per 10 square metres of the area available for standing
within the reservoir area is the maximum for safety. Arrangements
should be such as to prevent this being exceeded.

55. Reservoir areas should be avoided wherever possible and
should not be permitted within 45 metres of any combustible
building w ithin the ground eg a timber stand, or within 15 metres
of any non-combustible building within the ground.

Egress tim e
56. Some research has indicated that when it takes more than
about 7 minutes to vacate an area of terraced spectator
accommodation, the crowd flow tends to become turbulent. In
these conditions the rate of flow may be reduced and individuals
can lose control over their own movements; there is thus higher
potential for accidents. Exits from each area of spectator
accommodation should be so designed that all spectators can
leave that area and if desired pass into a free flowing exit route
system in 8 minutes or less. The capacity of an exit route is the
number of people who could pass through restricting parts of it as
calculated in Chapter 16, paragraphs 229-232.

 Note: This time is not necessarily the same as emergency
 evacuation time, which is dealt with in Chapter 11, paragraphs
 183-188, and which involves other considerations.


                                23
                                                          (



Signposting
57 . A comprehensive system of signposting which clearly
indicates routes to the various parts of the ground, and to the exits
from the ground, should be provided. Signs relating to fire safety
should be in accordance with BS 5499: Part 1: 1984, and other
safety signs (eg first aid facilities) should be in accordance with BS
5378: Part 1: 1980. Exit gates themselves should be clearly
signposted, preferably using illuminated signs in accordance
with BS 2560 or BS 4218. Directional signs should be provided to
encourage crowds in any particular section to flow in one direction
when leaving the ground.

E xit routes
5 8 . Exit routes should be kept clear of obstructions. In particular,
no catering, sales or toilet facility should be situated in such a way
that it, or any queue it attracts, obstructs an exit route.

5 9 . The minimum width for any section of an exit route should
be 1.1 metres. However, the required width for any particular
section is dependent on the crowd flow it will be required to carry.
(For capacities of exit routes, see Chapter 16, paragraphs 229-232).

60 . Where there is a simple exit route, ie a direct passage from
the accommodation area to the exit gate from the ground, every
part of that route should be able to accommodate the flow from
the terrace or stand exit.

6 1 . For a more complex exit system which combines a number
of exit routes and/or offers a choice of alternative routes to exits,
the system should be analysed in the form of a network in order to
check that the capacity of the exit from the terrace or the stand is
sufficient to ensure a free flow of spectators to the various exits
from the ground. Where branching of routes gives spectators a
choice of paths, the proportion of the crowd likely to use each path
should be derived from local knowledge, eg the exit closest to a
railway or bus station may be likely to attract a higher proportion
of spectators.




                                  24
E xit doors
6 2 . All doors on an exit route should always be capable of
opening outwards so that crowds can escape in an emergency.
This is particularly important for doors within covered stands and
at the foot of stairways.

6 3 . All doors on an exit route should be secured in the fully open
position before the end of play. When open, no door should
obstruct any gangway passage, stairway or landing.

6 4 . All exit gates from the ground should also open outwards.
Where this is impracticable for existing doors, eg because it would
cause an obstruction on a public highway, the gates should be
resited (ie put further back) within the exit route they serve, or
provision made for two-way opening. Where practicable exit gates
should be sited adjacent to entrances. There should be no
obstructions eg no changes in level etc at exit doors.

6 5 . Sliding or roller-shutter gates should not be used because
they are incapable of being opened when pressure is exerted in
the direction of crowd flow and have mechanisms or runways
which are vulnerable to jamming.

66. Where exit gates have to be secured against outside intruders
they should be fitted with panic-type bolts, but all exit gates,
unless secured in an open position, should be manned at all times
while the ground is used by the public and be capable of being
opened immediately from inside by anyone in an emergency.

67 . Facilities should be provided to enable people to leave the
ground at any time. For this purpose a number of reversible turn­
stiles or, preferably, pass doors, so operated as to limit the opening
to the passage to one person at a time, should be considered.
However, reversible turnstiles are not acceptable as a means of
escape from a ground and should not form any part of, or be
installed into, the normal or emergency exit system of the ground.
7. STAIRWAYS A N D RAMPS

The disposition and construction of stairways and ramps should be
such as to help provide smooth and unimpeded ingress and egress
for spectators under all conditions set out in Chapters 5 and 6.

68. The aim should be to provide stairways which minimise
hazards by such features as uniform going and rise, secure
footing, not too steep a gradient, and a width sufficient to allow
free movement but narrow enough to provide everyone with
access to a handrail. The head of the stairway should be so
designed that flow is uniform across its width and crowd
pressures cannot easily be generated. In addition flights should
not provide long, unrestricted paths down which crowd pressures
and surges can be created. Adequate separation should be
provided between channels and multi-channel stairway arrange­
ments so that there is no overspill from one channel to another.


Disposition o f stairw ays
69. Stairways should be carefully positioned to take advantage
of natural light and ventilation. Where the natural lighting is
deficient the stairway should be adequately lit by artificial light
(see Chapter 3, paragraph 35).


Construction o f stairw ays
70. The width, rise and going of the steps should be uniform
within each stairway, and should ideally be uniform throughout
the entire exit system.

71. Stair treads should be provided with slip-resistant surfaces
and durable edgings. Adequate drainage should be provided.

72.   Open risers should not be used.

73. On any stairway the preferred going of treads should be
305 mm but not less than 280 mm; and preferred height of risers
should be 150 mm but not more than 190 mm.


                                26
74.   Stairways should:
      i.     be without winders;
      ii.    be in flights of not more than 16 or fewer than 3
             steps; and
      iii.   not have more than 2 successive flights without a
             turn, and, if there are more than 12 steps in a flight,
              should have not more than one flight without a turn.

7 5 . The going of the landing between flights should not be less
than the width of the section or channel of the flight.

7 6 . Every person on a stairway should have access to a handrail.
Accordingly the minimum width of a stairway should be 1.1 metres,
stairways wider than 1.8 metres being divided as far as possible
into channels having a width of between 1.1 metres and 1.8
metres. The strength of the handrails (including supports) used to
divide a stairway into channels should be as described in Chapter 9.

7 7 . Handrails projecting not more than 100 mm should be
provided on both sides of all stairways, steps and landings at a
height of not less than 840 mm (measured vertically from the
centre of the step, or the surface of the landing).

7 8 . Protection should be provided on both sides of all stairs and
landings. Where next to open wells, or spaces, such protection
should be enclosed and should be not less than 1.1 metres in
height (measured vertically from the centre of the step, or the
surface of the landing). The protection should have a strength
equivalent to that of the crush barriers of the weaker type,
described in Chapter 9.


Access to stairw ays
7 9 . Access to the head of the stairways should be controlled
along the following lines to ensure a free flow c>f spectators.

8 0 . Where a stairway is divided into channels the access should
be designed to secure a uniform flow down each channel.


                                   27
81. The approach to the head of the stairs should be level and
should be so arranged that the spectators converge on the
stairway from the front and/or the sides only. There should be no
approach from behind, involving movement around the ends of the
balustrades or side walls of the stairway, except where this
approach is already controlled by physical means such as by the
gangways in the seated areas of the stand.

82. The extent of the approach in the direction of the stairway
should not be less than 1.1 metres and preferably not more than
3 metres.




                              J B a m e r^ s ^




                                         .Handrails




                                  down



           T he w id th o f A and B t o be n o t less than 1.1m
      T he a g g r e g a te w idth o f A + B to be n o t m ore th a n 3m
                                  2(A+B) = % C
The capacity o f this stairw ay w o u ld b e calculated from th e w id th C

Figure 1     Example of an approach to the head of a staircase


                                    28
83. Where restrictive elements such as barriers or gateways are
installed in the approach to a stairway in order to meet the
foregoing provisions, the total width of the passage formed by
these elements should not be more than two-thirds the minimum
width of the stairway. This is to accommodate the slower flow rate
down a staircase as compared with the flow rate on flat areas and
through portals (see Chapter 17).

84. For an application of these principles to a multiple stairway
leading direct from a terrace, see Figures 1 and 2 .




                                DOWN




 Figure 2   Exits attracting spectators from higher up the
            terrace should be protected by barriers so that
            spectators are forced to pass around them and
            approach from the side.
Discharge fro m stairw ays
85.   All exit stairways should discharge either:
      i.     at ground level and lead directly to a place of safety* in
             the open air; or
      ii.    on to walkways or concourses of adequate dimensions
             at any level provided these also lead directly to a place
             of safety in the open air.
*'place of safety' is a defined term in the Scottish Building
  Regulations.


                                  29
Fire p ro te c tio n
86. This is dealt with in Chapter 11, paragraphs 180-182.

Ramps
87. The gradient should preferably be constant and not broken
by steps.

88. The maximum gradient acceptable will depend on the
particular ramp's length, purpose and usage but a ramp subject to
heavy crowd flow should preferably not exceed a gradient of
1 in 10.
8. TERRACES A N D VIEW ING
   SLOPES

Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide ease of
access and egress; to control and facilitate movement,
particularly if a local emergency should arise during the event;
and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
proportions. The provisions set out here will assist in achieving
these conditions.

8 9 . In addition to the incidental dangers of standing for long
periods on steep terraced slopes, crowds are subject to excessive
pressures generated by spectators straining to see the event, by
excitement, or by surging deliberately induced by a certain type
of spectator.

9 0 . Failure to provide spectators with an unobstructed view
invites them to stretch and strain, and so generates dangerous
pressures within the crowd.

9 1 . Terraces are recognised as presenting a special safety
problem especially at football grounds. The following guidance is
therefore aimed mainly at football stadia but can be applied to any
ground where standing terraces or viewing slopes are used for
accommodating spectators.



Terrace steps
9 2 . A terrace step should not be less than 280 mm or more than
380 mm wide. The preferred dimension is between 355 mm and
380 mm.

9 3 . The height of risers should be between 75 mm and 180 mm.
75 mm is related to the minimum width of 280 mm. If the riser
height is greater than 180 mm, a crush barrier should be provided
at the top of the riser.


                                31
9 4 . Excessive variations in the gradient of a terrace should be
avoided. Gradients steeper than 1 in 2 could be dangerous.

9 5 . The surface of terrace steps should be even and of a slip-
resistant material. Adequate drainage should be provided to
prevent rainwater causing deterioration.


Gangways (see Annex A)
9 6 . The aim should be to ensure that every spectator on the
terraces is within 12 metres of a gangway or exit, so that
spectators can move quickly on to exit routes at the end of an
event or in the event of emergency. This may be achieved by a
pattern of gangways (not less than 1.1 metres wide) linked to the
exit system.

9 7 . Spectators should be discouraged from standing in lateral
gangways because this disrupts free movement about the ground
(or within sections of it). Also, spectators on the terrace steps
behind the gangway may have their view obstructed, which w ill
cause them to stretch and strain, and so generate dangerous
pressures within the crowd. Spectators would be discouraged
from standing in these gangways if they were sunk from 100 mm
to 200 mm and if crush barriers were provided behind but not
immediately in front of them.

98 . Similarly, spectators should be discouraged from standing in
radial gangways. These are relatively long and uncontrolled
downward paths through terraces, and are difficult to keep clear,
especially when sited in popular viewing areas, eg behind the goal
area at a football ground. It is helpful to sink them 150 mm to
200 mm and to interrupt an otherwise continuously descending
gangway by turns along, say, lateral gangways.

99 . Where sinking gangways, lateral or radial, is not thought to
be practical, their boundaries should be highlighted with paint and
spectators advised by signs not to stand there. Stewards may be
needed to enforce this instruction.
100 . As with other forms of stairways, the going in radial
gangways should be uniform, the step dimension as defined in
paragraph 92 and the surfaces slip-resistant.

Division o f spectator accom m odation
101 . A ground should be divided into sections to prevent
potentially hazardous migrations by spectators. Each section of a
ground has its own lim it of safe capacity (see Chapter 16), and a
major migration can cause dangerous overcrowding. Each section
of the ground, for example, each end or side, should be self
contained with its own entrances, exits and toilet/refreshment
facilities. For soccer grounds in particular there should be no
access from one such major section to another except in an
emergency. At other sporting events such as greyhound racing
spectators may need to move freely between different parts of the
ground and this should be borne in mind when considering access
to and from the sections of the ground and when considering the
need for subdivisions of sections in paragraph 103 below.

102 . Each of the major sections should be subdivided by such
means as gangways and crush barriers, arranged so as to
minimise the sway and surge of spectators.

103 . Railings, fences etc dividing sections of the ground should
be of the strength of the crush barriers, as should handrails
dividing stairways into channels as appropriate, described in table
2 of Chapter 9. Brick/block and similar solid structures lacking
sufficient mass or tensile strength are poorly suited to withstand
horizontal pressures, and where used to divide spectator accommo­
dation, should be subject to regular structural appraisal by
appropriately qualified persons (see Chapter 3).

Crush barriers
104 . Detailed advice on crush barriers is given in Chapter 9.

V iew in g slopes (ie non-stepped sloping areas providing
standing accom m odation fo r spectators)
105 . The surface of this form of terrace should be covered with a
slip-resistant material, eg packed ash, and should be even and
properly drained.


                                33
                                                          i




106 . The desirable maximum gradient for a viewing slope is 1 in
6 (ie 9.5°). {Note: this is different to the stepped terrace gradient
quoted in paragraph 94). Viewing slopes with any steeper gradient
should have continuous crush barriers between gangways.

107 . The spacing of crush barriers should be the same as for
those on normal terracing (see Chapter 9).

Terrace to touchline distance
108 . To prevent undue crowd pressures generated by spectators
stretching and straining for an unobstructed view, it is desirable to
provide a minimum distance between the front of the terrace and
the playing area of the pitch.

109 . The minimum recommended distance between the two is 3
metres where the terrace gradient is 30° or steeper. Where the
gradient is shallower than this, it may be advisable to increase this
distance so as to enable spectators to obtain a clear view.




                                 34
9. CRUSH BARRIERS A N D
   H A ND R A ILS

Many of the hazards arising from crowd pressure on terraces
can be eliminated by provision of well constructed, correctly
positioned and properly mounted crush barriers.



Dim ensions and design features
110 . In order to locate the top rail against that part of the body
most able to tolerate pressure the height of crush barriers should
be between 1.02 metres and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the
step immediately behind the barrier, with a preferred height of
1.1 metres.

111. Crush barriers should be designed so that there are no sharp
projections or edges. Although a barrier with a top rail of 50 mm
internal diameter tube has been favoured at many sports grounds,
research has shown that there would be advantage in the use of a
flat rail of 100 mm vertical depth.



Spacing o f crush barriers
112 . The maximum spacing of crush barriers w ill be dependent
on the gradient of the terrace or viewing slope. Paragraphs
113-119 below give recommendations for the spacing and
strength of crush barriers.

113 . Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the full
width of a terrace, with gaps only at the radial gangways.

114. Where barriers are not continuous between radial gangways,
the alignment of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace
should form an angle of less than 60° to the barriers. There should
be no more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps. (See
Figure 3 overleaf).


                                35
             \ 4\                 L Barriers -                      /
                    \                       Jf                  *
                    *                        1   —             4-
                         \                                 /
                             \                            i
                        60°   A
                              \
                                                 A       60° max




                                         _
                                                 f
                                                     /                  T*■ Barriers
                                                                                .    -i
                                                 /
                               u -          ____________ I
Figure 3   Arrangement of gaps between crush barriers

115. Where there are gaps in the line of crush barriers these
should be at least 1.1 metres and not more than 1.4 metres
in width.

116. Column A in Table 1 opposite provides the maximum
distances between barriers conforming to the greater strength
requirements of crush barriers as described above; column B
provides the maximum distances between barriers conforming to
the lesser strength requirements. Interpolation may be made
between these figures.

117. A distinction is made between barrier intervals required in
"peak" viewing areas. The term "peak" viewing areas describes
the most popular parts of the terraces where there is a tendency
for spectators to crowd together and become so emotionally
involved in the occasion that their reactions can cause additional
pressures to be set up in those sections of the ground. The peak
viewing areas are particularly associated with football grounds and
are typically behind the goal areas, although other parts of the
terraces known locally may come within this category.




                                           36
TABLE 1

                                                Maximum horizontal distance
                                                between barriers

Terrace Gradient                                Peak Viewing      Other Areas

                   Step ris e r:   Step width   A       B         A       B

                                                        3.3m      8.4m    5.6m
 CJI




             ie       1      in       11.4      5.0m
  o
o




10°                   1      in        5.7      4.3m    2.9m      6.7m    4.5m

15°                    1     in        3.7      3.8m    2.6m      5.6m    3.7m

20°                    1     in        27       3.4m    2.3m      4.8m    3.2m

25°                    1     in        2.1      3.1m    2.1m      4.2m    2.8m

30°                    1      in       1.7      2.9m    1.9m      3.8m    2.5m




S trength o f crush barriers and handrails
118. Existing crush barriers and handrails should be capable of
resisting the forces indicated in the existing test load columns of
Table 2 overleaf when applied in a test as described in Annex C.
Where existing crush barriers and handrails fail to meet these test
conditions, they should be replaced or strengthened in such a way
as to do so. Barriers and handrails so strengthened should be
retested in accordance with Annex C.

119. New crush barriers or handrails should be designed to resist
safely a horizontal force as indicated in the "new design force"
column in Table 2 applied as a static load acting on the top rail of
the barrier or handrail at right angles to the longitudinal axis. The
foundations of new barriers or handrails should be designed to
resist the overturning movements and sliding forces, induced by
the forces described in the "new design force" column overleaf,
with a factor of safety of 2.
                                                                      t




TABLE 2
     Table of strengths fo r crush barriers and handrails

                                   New Design Force         Existing Test Load

Crush barriers spaced in           5.0 KN/metre width       6.0 KN/metre width
accordance with the distances      (340 lbs f/foot width)   (400 lbs f/foot width)
in column A of Table 1

Crush barriers spaced in           3.4 KN/metre width       4.3 KN/metre width
accordance with the distances      (230 lbs f/foot width)   (290 lbs f/foot width)
in column B of Table 1

Handrails at right angles to the   3.4 KN/metre width       4.3 KN/metre width
direction of flow                  (230 lbs f/foot width)   (290 lbs f/foot width)

Handrails parallel to the          2.189 KN/metre width     2.74 KN/metre width
direction of flow                  (150 lbs f/foot width)   (188 lbs f/foot width)




                                         38
                                    X




10. ROOFED STANDS W ITH
    SEATED ACCO M M O DATIO N

The general safety considerations for stands are similar to those
for other parts of the ground but with the additional need to
safeguard spectators against the risk of fire (see Chapter 11).

120 . Stands may consist of seated accommodation only or may
contain a mixture of both seated and standing areas. The following
advice can be applied to all sports grounds where spectators are
so accommodated.

121 . There is generally a less hurried departure from the seated
accommodation in stands at the end of an event. Moreover,
spectators are induced by the layout of the seats to form orderly
queues. Even so, attention should be paid to the points below as well
as the other structural considerations in respect of stairways, exits,
egress and, where appropriate, density levels and crush barriers.

122 . Fire safety is particularly important and is dealt with in
Chapter 11. Every stand should be provided with sufficient exits to
allow for the orderly evacuation of all the spectators to be
accommodated. Evacuation time will depend to a large extent on
the fire hazard present in the stand (see Chapter 11, paragraphs
183-188). Egress time (see Chapter 6, paragraph 56) should be no
longer than 8 minutes using the calculations in Chapter 16, but
the emergency evacuation time is an overriding criterion when
calculating the allowable capacity of a stand (see Chapter 11,
paragraph 183).

123 . Seats and gangways should be so positioned as to provide
ready access to exits. No person in any part of a stand should have
to travel more than 30 metres to the nearest exit from a stand.

124 . All seats should be securely fixed in position. The use of
tip-up seats allows more circulation space, the automatic type
being preferable.


                                  39
                                                         t




125 . The minimum area allotted to each seated person should be
460 mm wide and 610 mm deep; but for comfort these
measurements should be 550 mm and 760 mm respectively. To
enable people to move freely between rows of seats, there should
be at least 305 mm between perpendiculars from the foremost
projection of one seat and the back of the seat in front of it. (The
minimum of 305 mm is included in the 610 mm or 760 mm depth
measurement of the seating area.)

126 . The number of seats in a row should not normally exceed:
      a.    14 seats where there is a gangway at one end only; and
      b.    28 seats where there is a gangway at both ends.

127 . Gangways should be of sufficient width for the seats served,
but in no case less than 1.1 metres wide (ie 2 unit widths) without
projections.

Balustrading
128 . Those sections of balustrading at the foot of stairways or
gangways within stands should be as strong as crush barriers of
the stronger type (see Chapter 9).

Tem porary stands and other tem porary structures
129 . The nature of temporary stands and other temporary
structures, whether or not covered, used to accommodate
spectators at a sports ground is likely to vary considerably as will
the materials used in their construction. Some may be erected for
a single event only. Even so there is no justification for accepting a
lower standard of safety in such structures than elsewhere within
the sports ground, and the design and construction of temporary
structures should be in accordance with good engineering and
building practice, should pay particular regard to public safety and
should satisfy all relevant British Standards.

130 . The principles of this Guide are applicable to temporary
stands and structures and particular attention is drawn to:
      Chapter 3 - General Fabric and Structural Matters
      Chapter 6 - Egress


                                 40
      Chapter 4 - Stairways and Ramps
      Chapter 11 - Fire Safety
      Chapter 1 7 - Recommended Flow Rates

131 . All temporary stands should be capable of withstanding any
load or force to which they may be subjected and account should
be taken of any external factors such as wind forces. Failure of any
one support member or connection should not render the
structure unstable. As far as practicable the area around supporting
frames should be secured to prevent unauthorised access, and
frames should be so designed that they are firmly locked into
position and cannot be tampered with by unauthorised persons.

132 . Consultation with the local authority and building authority
(if different) should take place at an early stage prior to the erection
of any temporary stand.

133 . Siting. Choice of location may be limited but factors which
need to be considered include: load-bearing capability of the
ground, its slope or unevenness, drainage, availability of mains
services, access/egress for spectators and for emergency vehicles,
overhead power lines, and the proximity of surrounding buildings
in relation to the risk of fire. The condition of the site should be
regularly checked to ensure its load-bearing capabilities have not
deteriorated; settlement of ground may cause instability and so
require repacking and re-levelling. The site should be prepared and
maintained so as to provide an even surface for those parts to
which the public have access.

134 . Assembly/dismantling. The assembly and dismantling of
stands should be carried out by or under the supervision of
persons experienced and trained in the proper performance of
such work and in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions
whenever available, or in accordance with drawings and plans
made by a competent engineer.

135 . Work should be carried out only where lighting is sufficient
to allow it to be safely and properly performed and checked. No
assembly or dismantling work should be carried out to the danger
of members of the public in the vicinity.

                                   41
136 . The work should be carried out in a proper manner, using
correct parts, and tools of a proper size and design. Care should be
taken with the handling of components to avoid damage or distortion.

137 . All components should be closely examined during assembly
and dismantling for signs of wear, deformation or other damage,
and where necessary replaced by sound components of matching
material properties and dimensions. Temporary repairs using
makeshift components should be avoided.

138 . Care should also be given to ensure all components are
correctly aligned; they should not be bent, distorted or otherwise
altered to force a fit.

139 . On completion, assembly work should be checked with
particular attention given to fastenings and connections.

140 . Tents/marquees and other such structures. These types of
structures can present special fire safety problems and guidance
w ill be contained in the Home Office/Scottish Office publication
"Guide to Fire Precautions in Existing Places of Entertainment"*.

141 . All tents should be capable of withstanding any forces,
particularly wind (including uplift so caused) and those caused by
the build up of snow or heavy rain, to which they may be subjected.
Emergency arrangements should be made for the dismantling,
either partial or total, of a tent should conditions arise that could
lead to any collapse or distortion. Where such work in any way
affects the stability of the tent or the safety of members of the
public, the work should not commence until the immediate area
has been cleared of all but essential staff.

142 . Supporting poles, guy ropes and stays should be used as
necessary and correctly formed, and secure anchorages made to
the ground to ensure that the tent is stable and maintains its
correct shape.


 *Expected to be available in 1987.


                                 42
            143 . The stability of the main tent poles and supporting structure
            should be independent of the sheeting fabric, ie any tearing or
            defect occurring in the fabric should not result in the collapse of all
            or any part of the main structure.

            144 . Particular attention should be paid to the main supporting
            poles and top braces of large tents where they have to be raised to a
            considerable height. Damage or distortion to these members could
            considerably weaken the structure. Where such damage does
            occur, the members should be replaced or repairs or modifications
            carried out so as to bring them up to full working strength.

            145 . Where solid frames or units, eg doors, are linked to a tent
            structure they should be rigidly formed and adequately braced, and
            care should be taken that they do not overstress local areas of
            the tent.

            146 . Foundations to poles or frames should be properly prepared
            and subjected to regular checks as should wire bracing or guys,
            the tension of which should be re-adjusted as necessary.




                                               43




W   B a —   Bfe
                                                              (



11. FIRE SAFETY

Safety from fire is achieved by measures which will restrict
initiation, rate of early growth and later spread of fire; provide
and protect escape routes; segregate higher fire risk areas;
provide warning (and where necessary detection) of fire; and
assist fire-fighting operations.

147 . The type of accommodation which represents the greatest
hazard in the event of fire is the covered stand where spectators
sit or stand. New structures will conform to Building Regulations
requiring them to have a reasonable degree of structural fire
protection. Existing structures will vary considerably in age and
materials used in construction. The qualities of combustibility and
ability to propagate and spread fire of the materials used in
construction have an important effect on the standard of fire
precautions required to ensure reasonable safety. It may be
difficult in some cases to improve the fire resistance of an existing
structure to any significant extent but it should be done wherever
practicable even though in some cases substantial alterations may
be needed to provide reasonable protection from fire.

148 . With new stands there is much more opportunity to
incorporate from the start comprehensive measures for fire safety,
considering properly the impact of each measure on the others.
Design features for new stands should include the following: .
      a.   internal finishes which have low flammability;
      b.   seating, partitioning and any other fixed or removable
            contents including seat cushions which possess low
           flammability characteristics and fire risk potential and
            are limited in amount;
      c.   contents which are not capable of being                easily
            dismantled;
      d.   no inaccessible places where litter can collect;
      e.   adequate structural resistance to fire;


                                44
     f.    fire resisting separation from any spaces below or
           communicating with the stand;
     g.     as far as possible, no storerooms or other spaces
            communicating with the stand. Where this is unavoid­
            able, storerooms or other spaces communicating with
            the stand should be provided with fixed fire extinguish­
            ing systems appropriate to the fire risk posed by the
            materials to be stored or contained;
      h.    escape routes which are planned to keep people well
            clear of the smoky gases produced by a fire (which in
            general means that initial movement of people should
            be downwards);
      i.    later stages of escape routes which are incapable of
            being significantly threatened by continuing fire;
      j.    the provision of alternative, widely separated escape
             routes; and
      k.    a roof geometry which should restrict smoke and
            flame travel along the underside of the roof.



M inim ising fire risk
149. One potential cause of fire arises from the accumulation of
waste paper, programmes, food and drink cartons etc dropped by
spectators. Such waste can be easily set alight by smokers'
materials and the resulting fire may then spread to the structure,
especially the ones that are constructed of more combustible
materials. Every effort should be made to reduce this hazard.
Accumulations of litter, for example near catering facilities, should
be cleared from the ground as quickly as possible or kept in a safe,
fire resistant container or room pending clearance.

150. All parts of buildings should be inspected before and after an
event (see also Chapter 4, paragraph 42) and any accumulation of
litter cleared away as described above. It is particularly important
to ensure that litter does not accumulate in escape routes or
under stands.


                                 45
151. Smoking should be discouraged in stands containing
combustible or flammable products, either loose (eg cushions) or
fixed (eg seating), or in the fabric of the building.

152. A common feature in construction of stands which is a fire
risk is the existence of voids under the seating and under the
flooring itself. These voids can become a resting place for paper,
cartons and other combustible materials which can be ignited,
unnoticed, by carelessly discarded cigarette ends etc. Seating
arrangements should, wherever possible, be such that floor
surfaces are accessible for the removal of litter. Where voids
below flooring exist they should if practicable be excluded; for
example, where a stand is built into a natural slope the
underneath area can be filled in with concrete. Where this is not
practicable they should be completely sealed off to stop litter
accumulating in them, or be entirely open to allow easy access for
inspection and removal of combustible waste.

153. Other items, such as cushions filled with cellular foams or
other synthetic materials are a fire risk because they are
combustible, and when set alight can give off large quantities of
smoke and fumes. Also, the use of large quantities of plastics in
seating should be reviewed carefully, particularly where cellular
polymers may be proposed. The fire authority should be consulted
about the fire risk in stands.

154. Cushions and other flammable materials represent in bulk a
risk of a swiftly developing fire. They should be stored in a fire-
resistant container or room well away from spectator accommodation
as should paper items such as programmes. Similarly, hazardous
materials, for example fuels (whether in containers or within fuel
tanks and machinery) fertilizers, weed killers and paints should be
kept (if at all) well away from public areas and stored in a room
which has fire resistance of at least 1 hour. Other high fire risk
areas, eg enclosed or underground car parks situated under stands,
should also have fire resistance of at least 1 hour.

155. Where catering facilities are provided, special care should be
taken to ensure that any fuel or power supply used for cooking, for


                                46
example LPG cylinders, is safely stored and used, in accordance
with the advice of the authority responsible for enforcement of the
Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. Useful guidance is given in
Health and Safety Executive Guidance Notes CS4, 'The Keeping of
LPG in Cylinders and Similar Containers" and CS8, "Small Scale
Storage and Display of LPG at Retail Premises".

Prevention or retardation o f fire g ro w th /s p rea d
156 . Where, despite all precautions, a fire has started, it is vital to
ensure that the rate of growth in its early stages is restricted to
proportions which will not overwhelm the arrangements provided
for safe escape. This is best achieved by controlling the amount and
nature of the materials (especially the combustibles) in a stand,
both in terms of the contents (loose and fixed) and in those parts of
the fabric of the stand to which a fire would have access (especially
internal linings). An important additional line of defence is prompt
action by ground staff using the fire-fighting equipment available at
the ground to tackle the fire and keep it in check ("first-aid" fire­
fighting) until the fire brigade arrives. These measures are crucial
because the quicker a fire develops, the less time there is available
to escape from it. A fire should not be able to develop unnoticed
anywhere underneath or adjacent to the spectator area of the
stand, so that its spread would be likely to break through into the
spectator accommodation.

157 . The spectator area in the stand should be separated from any
other adjacent circulation space or void by a construction having
fire resistance of not less than half an hour.

158 . Walls and ceiling linings within stands and ceiling linings
beneath the stand seats should have a flame spread classification
of not less than Class 1 when tested in accordance with BS 476:
Part 7.

159 . Restricting the extent and speed of the spread of fire in its
later stages is also important in order to reduce the possibility of
escape time being further threatened. Most measures which
reduce the rate of fire growth in the early stages will also serve to
restrict the fire spread in the later stages. The following measures


                                  47
                                                          !




would mainly affect the later spread. For some roof configurations
venting systems may offer a means of reducing the spread of fire
(including movement of flames along the roof) and hot smoky
gases. The science of fire and smoke venting is however complex
and advice from the fire authority should be sought on whether
this would be advantageous in a particular case.

160 . Where the roofs of buildings are so connected that smoke
and flame could travel essentially two or more sides of the playing
area, a wide break in the roof should be made of sufficient width to
prevent spread from one side to the other, unless the flame travel
could be eliminated by the prevention measures mentioned above.

161 . Use of flammable roof materials should be avoided. Where
they do exist they should be replaced where practicable by non­
combustible materials or should be underdrawn with non­
combustible board.



Fire w arning systems
162 . All buildings in the ground (including stands) to which public
or staff have access should be provided with an electrical fire
warning system to alert staff. An indication of the warning and its
location should be given to a central control point (see Chapter 12,
paragraph 193). The system should conform with BS 5839: Part 1
 in terms of its components, installation and maintenance. The
central control point and, where necessary, other selected
positions in the ground should have facilities to call the fire
brigade and other emergency services. Stewards and other
officials should be trained in what they should do if they discover a
fire (see paragraphs 176-177).

163 . The area underneath the spectator accommodation should
have a system for detecting a developing fire. In order to give an
early warning in an unoccupied area an automatic fire detection
(AFD) system should be considered, conforming to BS 5839: Part 1
in terms of its components, installation and maintenance. It should
be connected so that any alarm will be communicated to the
central control point.


                                 48
164 . Any fire detection equipment should be tested regularly in
accordance with the advice given in the British Standard
specification.

165. Where areas of high fire risk such as large storerooms and
enclosed or underground car parks are situated under stands,
consideration should be given to the installation of an automatic
fire extinguishing system, eg sprinklers, instead of an AFD system.
Here again any such system should be connected so that warning
of fire is communicated to the central control point.

Em ergency lighting
166 . Emergency lighting, for use in the event of failure of the
general lighting, should be provided in all parts of the premises
accessible to the public and along all exit routes, with exit signs
clearly illuminated. Installation should be in accordance with
BS 5266: Part 1. The system should be completely separate from
the general lighting system, although a one-circuit system
incorporating staggered sub-circuits would be an acceptable
alternative. Unless exceptionally two entirely independent supplies
can be obtained from outside sources, the emergency circuit
should be connected to a source of power located on the premises,
for example storage batteries or a diesel generator, with a delay of
not more than 5 seconds.

167 . The system should be capable of maintaining the necessary
level of illumination for a period of 3 hours from the time of failure
of the normal supply.

168 . The emergency lighting should operate automatically on the
failure of the main lighting.

169 . Emergency lighting systems should be tested regularly in
accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.

Fire-fighting equipm ent
170 . Advice should be sought from the local fire authority on the
type, the amount and siting of fire-fighting equipment. The
succeeding paragraphs give general guidelines.


                                 49
171 . In major grounds it may be necessary to provide a suitable
water supply for fire fighting in the form of hydrants.

172 . For "first aid" fire fighting by members of the staff, hydraulic ^
hose-reels should be provided to BS 5306: Part 1. These should be
sufficient to provide adequate protection to the whole floor area,
and should be installed in a suitable position by entrances, exits
and stairways.

173 . Where hose-reels are not provided, portable fire extinguishers
should be installed in sufficient numbers to give adequate cover.
The number and type w ill depend upon the size, layout, fire
separation and risk in each structure. Fire extinguishers should
conform to BS 5423 and be sited and maintained according to
BS 5306: Part 3.

174 . Fire blankets and fire extinguishers of a type appropriate to
the cooking facilities used should be kept in all catering facilities.

175 . It should be borne in mind when considering location of fire­
fighting equipment that it may need to be sited so that it cannot be
vandalised but yet is readily accessible to staff in the event of fire.


Em ergency procedures and s ta ff training
176 . It is essential that plans should be made for dealing with
emergencies, including fire. The onus to do this lies with ground
management. Joint consultation between management, pblice,
fire, ambulance and other emergency services should take place in
order to produce agreed plans of action for all foreseeable types of
emergency. While the public are in the ground the number of staff
on duty should be sufficient to cover entrances, exits and other
strategic points and to fulfil other essential duties (see Chapter 13).

177 . All such staff should be trained in the use of the fire-fighting
equipment provided, and in the action they should take in the
event of fire. This is management's responsibility but the local fire
authority's advice should be sought on whether the content of the
proposed training programme is adequate.
Means o f escape
178 . "Means of escape" is the structural means whereby a safe
route is provided for people to travel from any point in a structure
to a place of safety without outside assistance. In a sports ground,
the means of escape in the event of an emergency w ill usually be
the same as the normal egress routes plus any additional "route"
of forward escape on to the playing area. The kind of emergency
most likely to occur at a sports ground is fire but other types of
emergency, such as bomb threat, may arise which might
necessitate the evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
spectator accommodation. It is the management's responsibility to
ensure that all exit routes for use in an emergency are capable of
being safely and effectively used at all times when the ground
is occupied.

179 . It is vital that the emergency exit routes are sited so that
people using them w ill be least affected by the fire or its products,
for example smoke, toxic gases, heat etc. Initial travel should if
possible be downwards. This is because in the event of fire, its
dangerous products w ill travel upwards and accumulate densely at
the highest points. Further stages of the exit routes should be so
arranged as to take people progressively further away from the
fire, along a route where they cannot be significantly affected by
the fire or its products. There should be more than one emergency
exit route from a stand or a terrace in case one becomes blocked.
The emergency exits within any one structure should be as widely
separated as practical planning considerations w ill allow, to
minimise the risk of them all being blocked by the same cause.

Fire pro tection fo r stairw ays and passages
180 . Where a stairway, passage or any other part of an
emergency exit route passes up, down or through a stand or other
building used by spectators, it should be in a fire resistant
enclosure separated from the remainder of the stand by a
structure having fire resistance of not less than one hour. Such
exit routes should discharge to a place of safety in the open air
(which may be inside or outside the ground).

181. The surface finish of walls and ceilings of all emergency exit


                                 51
                                                               i




stairways should be of a standard corresponding to Class 0 (as
defined in the guidance issued in connection with the Building
Regulations 1985 for England and Wales and the Building
Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1981-84).

182 . Any door forming part of the enclosure to a stairway should
be self closing and have a fire resistance of not less than half an hour.

Em ergency evacuation tim e
183 . The emergency evacuation time is the notional time it would
take spectators to leave their viewing positions and reach a place of
safety in the open air or a protected stairway or emergency exit
route with fire resistance in accordance with paragraph 180. It is
calculated from the spectator capacity of the accommodation (see
Chapter 16) and the flow rate (see Chapter 17) through restricting
parts of the exit system used for evacuation purposes.

184 . The emergency evacuation time should not be confused with
the egress time of 8 minutes (referred to in Chapter 6, paragraph 56)
which is the maximum time it should take spectators to enter into
the normal exit system from their viewing positions at the end
of play.

185 . The emergency evacuation time w ill depend largely on the
fire hazard present in the accommodation in question. Any stand
which has a potential for rapid fire spread because of its interior
use and contents and/or the nature of its internal surfaces which
would be exposed to fire should have an emergency evacuation
time of no more than 2% minutes. An increase in this time may
however be acceptable where the interior use and contents, and
the nature of the internal linings, are such as to eliminate the
possibility of rapid fire spread, and the emergency exit routes are
not vulnerable to a fire occurring within the accommodation. In
setting an emergency evacuation time longer than 2y2 minutes the
advice of the fire authority should be sought.

186 . Where the playing area or perimeter track is accessible to
spectators and is considered suitable as a place of safety,
evacuation onto it can be taken into account in calculating the


                                   52
emergency evacuation time. Where there is a pitch perimeter
fence or wall it should have access points in accordance with
Chapter 15, paragraph 215 which can serve as exits and which
can be taken into account in the calculation of the emergency
evacuation time.

187 . Where the playing surface of a pitch is made of synthetic
materials, advice from the fire authority should be sought to
establish if it can be properly considered a place of safety in a fire.
This is because it is possible that some forms of artificial turf
might in themselves constitute a hazard in the event of fire
because of flamespread and fumes etc caused by decomposition of
the material as a result of heat radiation.

188 . The playing area may not be a place of safety, eg if it is
wholly surrounded by covered accommodation with no breaks in
the roofing (see paragraph 160) and the advice of the fire authority
should be sought in such circumstances.

Access fo r em ergency vehicles
189 . Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such as fire
appliances and ambulances should be provided so that speedy and
direct access can be obtained to all buildings within the ground;
wherever possible these access routes should be separate from
those used by spectators entering and leaving the ground.

190 . The local fire authority should be consulted about the width,
clearance, height and supporting strength required of these access
roads. Wherever possible access roads should provide for the
parking of emergency vehicles so that exit routes used by crowds
are not seriously obstructed.

191 . Wherever practicable and where necessary roads within %
of a mile of the ground should be kept entirely free of parked
vehicles so as not to delay or obstruct the access of emergency
vehicles.




                                  53
12. C O M M U N IC A TIO N S

There should be a communications system capable of clearly
relaying essential messages to all parts of the ground in both
normal circumstances and in an emergency.

192 . Precise requirements for communications w ill depend on the
sort of ground and the numbers of people that attend there. In
general the communications system should be determined after
consultation with the police and emergency services. It should be
available for use and capable of coping with all emergencies.

193 . A central control point, preferably a room, should be set
aside for the use of the supervising police officer and the ground
safety officer.


194 . At larger grounds the following arrangements are likely to
be needed:
      i.    There should be inter-communication between the
            central control and all turnstiles or banks of turnstiles
            and all entry and exit gates used by the public.
     ii.    Metering systems to record all admissions should be
            installed at turnstiles and, to ensure that ground
            capacities are not exceeded in any section, arrange­
            ments should be made for central control to be
            informed immediately a predetermined number of
            spectators has been admitted through each turnstile.
     iii.   Public address equipment should be installed so that
            broadcast messages can be heard under reasonable
            conditions (including emergencies) by all persons of
            normal hearing in any part of the ground to which the
            public has access. The system should be capable of
            being controlled from the central control point and
            should ideally be capable of addressing messages to
            each major section of the ground. The power supply to
            the system should be such as to enable it to continue
      to operate in an emergency such as fire or a failure of
      the mains supply.
iv.   Loud hailers should be available for the use of
      stewards and police in directing or instructing
      spectators.
v.    Any police radio facilities available for the maintenance
      of law and order should augment and not supersede
      the ground communications system.
vi.   Installation of closed circuit television is considered
      likely to be of significant value in assisting emergency
      evacuation.
13. STEWARDING

Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in sections
of the ground, reduce the likelihood and incidence of disorder,
help disperse spectators in such a way as to reduce crowd
pressure and provide the means to investigate, report and take
early action in an emergency.

195 . Manning levels and stewarding requirements w ill vary
depending upon the size and configuration of the ground, the
nature of the event and crowd levels, but there are five basic
duties which stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:
      a.    controlling or directing members of the public who are
            entering or leaving the ground, to help achieve an even
            flow of people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal
            of spectators on the terraces or viewing slopes.
      b.    patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies eg
            raising alarms or extinguishing fires;
      c.    manning entrances, exits and other strategic points,
            especially exit doors and gates which are not
            continuously open whilst the ground is in use;
      d.    assisting police as appropriate or as requested with
            crowd control; and
      e.    undertaking specific duties in an emergency.

196 . A more detailed check list of the kind of duties which
stewards are liable to undertake is at Annex B. It should be borne
in mind that this is only an example and not necessarily an
exhaustive list of duties.

197 . Stewards should be fully capable of carrying out the duties
allocated to them. Every steward should be fully appraised in
writing of his duties and responsibilities and should carry on him a
general check list of them. Where a ground such as one used by
an association football league club has a high police presence.


                                56
duties and responsibilities of stewards should be agreed with the
police. Stewards should attend pre-match briefing and should be
made aware as necessary of the arrangements and any
contingency plans to deal with the arrival of away supporters.

198 . Effective training and supervision should be provided by man­
agement so that all stewards, whether regular or casual, know not
only what their duties are but how to carry them out and why. This
is especially important in emergencies when it is essential that
stewards and their supervisors are fully aware of and practised in
the part they are to play in the plans drawn up with the emergency
services (see Chapter 11, paragraph 176).

199 . Exercises should be carried out so as to ensure that
emergency procedures operate smoothly, and a record kept of the
duration of the exercise, detailsofthe instruction given and by whom.

200 . Management should appoint a chief steward responsible for
coordinating responsibilities of all stewards. Control of stewards
should be from a central point with an efficient means to
communicate with the stewards (see also Chapter 12).

201 . All stewards should be readily identifiable eg by the wearing
of distinctive clothing (including armbands).
14. CROWD CONTROL

Where there is a disorderly element among the crowd intent on
violence, additional safety measures are needed to contain and
minimise the potential disruption, to isolate quickly, identify
and remove the offenders and to prevent their re-entry on
future occasions.

202 . Although the problem of crowd disorder at sporting events is
one which affects primarily professional association football, other
sports are not immune from it. Therefore, whilst the following
advice is directed mainly at those grounds where professional
association football is played, the general principles should also be
borne in mind by management at other grounds where major
spectator sports are played.

2 03 . The 'European Convention on Spectator Violence and Mis­
behaviour at Sporting Events and in particular at Football Matches'
(HMSO, Cmnd 9649), which came into force on 1 November 1985,
sets out in general terms the measures to be taken to prevent and
control violence by spectators. Additionally, some sports' governing
bodies have issued their own guidance on crowd control. For
example, the Football Association has issued a 'Memorandum to
Football League Clubs On Crowd Management' which sets out the
measures that must be taken at all League grounds, and UEFA has
issued binding instructions in their document 'Order and Security
in the Stadia' (Third Edition, 1985) which apply to matches in'their
competitions. The following paragraphs cover some of the main
areas that require the attention of ground management. The
advice they contain is not comprehensive and is intended to
supplement rather than replace existing instructions, codes of
practice etc.

Policing
2 0 4 . As in other areas of safety, management is responsible for
the crowd control arrangements and ground conditions. They
should ensure that spectators are safe bearing in mind that a game



                                 58




                                                   __________a
can lead to a build-up of tension or excitement. The safety
measures described elsewhere in this Guide w ill help to achieve
reasonable spectator safety, but for management to discharge its
responsibility properly a special police presence inside the ground
may be necessary to deal with any problem of disorder which may
arise, as well as to provide support and leadership in an emergency.
The number and disposition of the police must be determined by
Chief Constables who have the sole responsibility for the direction
of police operations. To aid the police in their duties, a police control
room should be provided within the ground.

2 05 . Proper advance planning with the police is essential to
counter potential crowd disorder. There must be an effective
liaison between club and police for this purpose to including not
just the arrangements inside the ground but also the escort of
visiting supporters, their likely numbers, their separate entry to the
ground and their departure at the end of the match. There should
be debriefing meetings as necessary to evaluate existing
arrangements and provide the flexibility necessary to deal with
different circumstances.
Crow d m ovem ent
2 06 . Crowd movement on terraces should be strictly controlled in
order to give the police the fullest opportunity for crowd control.
Less problems occur when terraces are subdivided as far as
possible into sections by use of both radial and lateral barriers or
railings which should comply with the strength requirements set
out in Chapter 9. Each section should ideally be self contained and
should be serviced by its own entrance/exits, refreshment facilities
and toilets (in keeping with the principles of general ground
division described in Chapter 8, paragraph 101). Special care is
needed to ensure that sections and subdivisions are provided with
sufficient exits for use in an emergency.

2 07 . Home and visiting supporters at professional soccer matches
should normally be segregated but segregation is not advocated
for other sports where crowd disorder is not a problem. This
should be borne in mind when considering barriers at grounds
used for other sports as well as association football.
                                                             {




2 08 . Where possible a neutral or sterile zone should be provided
within a ground so that home and visiting supporters are not
physically close to each other. The arrangements for admitting
spectators into the ground, whether by tickets purchased in
advance or through payment at the turnstiles, should be drawn up
in consultation with the police, and must be carefully controlled to
ensure as far as possible that segregation is effective and known
troublemakers are excluded.



 2 09 . Access to the pitch must be made as difficult as possible in
 normal circumstances while at the same time ensuring that the
 police have effective access to the terraces for the purpose of crowd
 control and enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the
 event of serious emergency (see also Chapter 11, paragraph 186).
Where a pitch perimeter barrier fence is installed to keep spectators
 off the pitch, care is needed to ensure that it does not impair the
visibility of the playing area from the terraces. If spikes or barbed
wire are installed they should if possible be at a height of no less
than 2.4 metres (see Chapter 3, paragraph 33). One alternative to
fencing is the construction around the pitch of a wall with a smooth
surface which should not be less than 1.22 metres in height on the
terrace side. This boundary wall should have gates or access points
to the pitch which could be manned by the police or stewards. A
walkway between the boundary wall and the terraces, which would
be solely occupied by the police, first aid and official club personnel,
has been found to be effective as regards safety and security. In
order to achieve this it might be necessary to remove one or two
rows of terracing and to protect the walkway from the terrace by a
continuous line of barriers, so designed as to discourage access to
the walkway except at authorised points. The access points from
terrace to walkway should be directly linked with the access points
from the walkway to the pitch. Where a walkway system is in use,
sliding gates may be installed at the access points from the
walkway to the pitch, ie where there can be no crowd pressure
against them (see Chapter 6, paragraph 65 regarding the use of
sliding gates elsewhere). A barrier to the pitch is usually
unnecessary where seating extends to the level of the playing area.



                                  60
D etention and rem oval o f trouble m akers
210. At larger soccer grounds, particularly where there has been
a record of frequent crowd trouble, secure detention rooms may be
necessary for use by the police.

211. There should be adequate vehicular access for the
unobtrusive removal of detainees (see also Chapter 11, paragraphs
189-191 on access for emergency vehicles).

Refreshm ents
212. Hard containers such as glasses, bottles or cans can make
dangerous missiles and should not be used for the sale of refresh­
ments. All refreshments should be served in soft containers.

213. Alcohol should not be on sale for consumption on the
terraces or in the stands.
Note: The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985
applies to any ground in England and Wales used for an inter­
national association football match or a match involving a football
league club. In Scotland the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980
applies to grounds used by clubs in the Scottish Football League,
Highland League and to the international stadia used for
association football and Rugby Union.




                                61
                                                               !




15. PITCH PERIMETER
    FENCE/W ALL

A pitch perimeter fence/w all may not only delineate the playing
area from the spectator accommodation but may have to serve
as a crush barrier, or in some situations as a barrier to discourage
or prevent access to the playing area except in an emergency.

214 . The type, strength and height of a pitch perimeter fence or
wall w ill vary according to its location and required function. At one
extreme, at a certain type of ground or small stadium used by very
few spectators, there may be no need for a perimeter fence or wall
at all; or if such a wall or fence exists it may need to consist of little
more than a rail to mark the playing area. At the other extreme, at
some major soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd movement
forms a necessary part of the safety measures, it may be necessary
to have a fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 14, paragraph 209) but allows for
access in emergency. Even at these grounds however specification
of the pitch fence may vary for different parts of the ground.

 215 . For most major stadia, whether used for association football
or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence w ill be required either to
prevent access to the pitch as mentioned above, or at least to
discourage attempts by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates
or other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres) sh.ould
nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency and, at those
grounds where a perimeter track is used as part of the exit system,
for the departure of spectators at the end of an event. Provision of
such gates or access points is particularly important to allow full
access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a
place of safety in an emergency. Such gates or access points should
be properly stewarded and clearly marked so that immediate access
to the playing area or perimeter track can be ensured.

216 . If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence it should be
deemed a crush barrier and fulfil the conditions of height and


                                   62
strength specified in Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
construction its height may be more than 1.12 metres. This is
because the pressures acting on a person forced against such a
fence are distributed over a large area of the body, unlike the
situation with a normal crush barrier, where the pressures
are localized.




                               63
                                                           (




16. ESTIMATION OF SAFE
    GROUND CAPACITY

To assess the number of spectators which can be safely
accommodated account should be taken of the features of the
individual ground, its configuration, general condition, use and
any deviations from the Guide's provisions.

217. The previous sections of the Guide give guidelines and
safety considerations for individual features of a ground. This
section suggests a method of calculating the number of people
that can be safely accommodated when taking into account
interactions between these individual features and where there
are deviations from the guidelines. The following paragraphs
contain as of necessity generalised guidelines in view of the wide
variety of types, sizes, configurations of sports grounds, their use
and general condition.


218. To facilitate the calculations a plan of the ground should be
available with such details as exits, stands, terraces, stairways,
passages, kiosks, seats and barriers. A scale of 1:200 is
appropriate for this purpose.


219. The method assesses:
      a.   the holding capacity of a terrace or viewing slope’(that
           of a seated area generally being determined by the
           number of seats when it conforms to guidelines); and
      b.   the capacity of a given exit route from a terrace or stand.

220. The number of people that can be safely accommodated on a
terrace or in a stand (or other covered accommodation) is either its
holding capacity, or the capacity of the exit system to be used in
normal circumstances at the end of an event (assessed in
accordance with paragraphs 229-232 below) or the emergency
exit system whichever is the smallest.


                                 64
Terraces and view ing slopes
221. Where crush barriers meet the strength and spacing guide­
lines of Chapter 9 the capacity of a terrace or viewing slope should
be assessed from the area available for standing by allowing a
packing density of between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square
metres depending upon the condition of the terrace or slope. Only
those parts of the terrace or viewing slope from which the whole
of the playing area can be seen, excluding gangways, should be
included in this calculation.


222. The extreme allowances for packing density are as follows:
      a.   54 persons per 10 square metres when the terrace or
           viewing slope is in good condition (as set out in Chapter 8);
           and
      b.   27 persons per 10 square metres when it materially
           deviates from the recommended guidelines, so as to
           constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely packed.


223. It may be necessary to interpolate between these figures
where conditions fall between the two extremes. When the
positioning and width of gangways do not meet with the
recommendations of Chapter 8, paragraphs 96-100, an appropri­
ate reduction should be made in the area available for standing.


224. Even distribution of spectators on the terrace may be difficult
to overcome notwithstanding the measures in this guide because
spectators may prefer to gather in a certain part or parts of a
terrace. Ground management should therefore take such factors
into account when assessing safe capacity levels.

225. The capacity of the terrace is calculated by multiplying the
area available for standing by the appropriate packing density. The
following formula may be used:
     Capacity (Number of persons) _A^x (27 to 54)
                                      10
where 'A' is the area available for standing in square metres.


                                  65
Example A
Peak Viewing Terrace
Barriers and pitch perimeter wall conform to Guide's recommen­
dations on both strength and spacing.
Area for standing 700m2 (100 m x 7 m) (excluding designated
gangways)
Condition and drainage of terraces good.
Dimensions: steps 375 mm (Guide recommends 280 mm-375 mm,
            see Chapter 8, paragraph 92)
            risers 70 mm* (Guide recommends 75 mm-180mm,
            see Chapter 8, paragraph 93)

•Correction not possible without major reconstruction so accepted
in view of only minor deviation of 5 mm and good condition of
the terrace.

Capacity: 700 x 54= 3780
               10

226 . When the strength of crush barriers conforms with the
guidelines but the spacing of such barriers does not, the capacity
is calculated from the provision of crush barriers in the area
available for standing (as defined in paragraph 221) as follows:
     a.   Where a terrace contains either "peak viewing areas"
          only or "other viewing areas" by multiplying the total
          length of the crush barriers by the appropriate distance
          between barriers (as given in Chapter 9, paragraphs
          116-117) or the existing distance, whichever is less,
          and multiplying by the appropriate packing density.

Example B
Peak Viewing Terrace.
Barriers and pitch perimeter wall comply with greater strength
requirements (see Chapter 9, paragraph 119, Table 2) but not the
spacing requirements of the Guide.
Area available for standing 700m2 (100 m x 7 m) (excluding
designated gangways).
Terrace condition and drainage good: dimensions conform to
Guide's recommendations in Chapter 8.
Gradient 10%: therefore maximum appropriate distance 4.3 m (see
Chapter 9, paragraph 117, Table 1).
Number of barriers: 6 at 5 m = 30 metres
Perimeter wall (see Chapter 15, paragraph 216): 100 metres

                Total = 130 metres

Capacity: 130 x 4.3 x 54      = 3019
                      10
      b.   Where a terrace contains both "peak viewing areas"
           and "other viewing areas", by multiplying the total
           length of barriers by the appropriate distance between
           barriers in a "peak viewing area" or the existing
           distance, whichever is less, and multiplying them by the
           appropriate packing density.

Example C
Viewing Terrace with "peak" and other viewing areas: or terrace
w ith other areas only. Barriers and pitch perimeter wall comply
with strength requirements but not spacing requirements of the
Guide.
Terrace details as in Example B.
Calculations as in Example B.




227. Crush barriers which do not meet the guidelines on the
strength set out in Chapter 9 should in general be discounted for
calculation purposes, although where crush barriers are well
constructed consideration may be given to allowing a lower
packing density figure for the purpose of the calculation.
2 28 . Note: In small grounds attracting few spectators and low
density crowds, and where a terrace contains no crush barriers or
where most or all of those installed have to be discounted for
calculation purposes the restrictions on the crowd capacity may be
unrealistic. A more flexible approach may be appropriate taking
account of the recommendations of the Guide to assess the
terrace holding capacity. In such cases the permissible packing
density is however likely to be much lower than the 27 persons
 per 10 square metres referred to in paragraph 222 and the overall
 terrace capacity w ill be severely limited.

Example D
Peak or other Viewing Terrace. Perimeter wall and crush barriers
do not comply with strength or spacing requirements of the Guide.
Area available for standing 700 m2 (100 m x 7 m) (excluding
designated gangways).
Terrace condition and drainage good: dimensions as recommended
in Chapter 8.
Gradient 10%: maximum appropriate distance 4.3 m
              Barriers: 6 at 5 m = 30 m
              Perimeter wall:     100 m
                                   130m

Appropriate test load 6KN/metre width (Chapter 9, paragraph 119,
Table 2).
Condition of 2 barriers poor and discounted. Remaining 4 barriers
sound but found to have safe working load (established by test) of
4.5 KN/metre width.
Pitch wall sound but found to have safe working load (established
by test) of 4.0 KN/metre width.

Capacity: Barriers 4 x 5 x 4J5 x 4.3 x 54 = 348
                           6            10

Pitch wall: 100 x 4 x 4.3 x 54 = 1548             Total 1896
                  6         10                          -------


                                 68
E xit system s
2 2 9 . General considerations to be taken into account when
assessing the adequacy of exit systems are set out in Chapter 6.

2 3 0 . The capacity of an exit system can be calculated by
assessing for each element in the system (ie each gangway,
doorway, stairway, exit etc) the number of persons who can pass
in 8 minutes (ie egress time, see Chapter 6, paragraph 56) or, the
emergency evacuation time appropriate to the accommodation
(see Chapter 11, paragraphs 183-185), whichever is the shorter
time. This calculation is made by multiplying the width of the
element by the appropriate flow rate in Chapter 17.

2 3 1 . Where an element in the exit system is less than 1 metre
wide that element should be omitted from the calculation.

2 3 2 . Flow restricting elements of the kind described in Chapter 6
should be ignored for the purpose of these calculations.
17. RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES

233. From stands and stairways a flow rate of 40 persons per
minute per unit of exit width (ie 550 mm) should be used.

234. From terraces (including covered terraces) and the ground
generally a flow rate of 60 persons per minute per unit of exit
width should be used.
Annex A

GLOSSARY OF TERM S

Lateral     Channel for the passage of spectators through a
gangway:    terrace running across the slope.

Radial      Channel for the passage of spectators through a
gangway:    terrace running with the slope.

Stairway:   Part of a building comprising one or more flights of
            steps and including landings at head and foot of the
            stairway, and any intermediate landings between
            flights.

Fire       Consisting of a construction of a type which, if tested
resistant: under the prescribed conditions of test appropriate to
           such construction, in accordance with BS 476: Part 1:
            1953 or Part 8: 1972 would satisfy the criteria relating
           to stability, integrity and (where appropriate) insulation
           for not less than 30 minutes or for such longer period
           as may be required in the case of that construction.




                                 71
                                                           !




Annex B

S TEW ARDING

1.   All stewards should be capable of carrying out their duties
and should be properly trained to do so (see Chapter 13).

2.    Stewards must be informed in writing of all that they are
expected to know and do. The following list gives examples of
typical tasks and duties which stewards should be expected to
carry out and for which they should be prepared. Stewards should:
      i.     Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in
             various parts of the ground are complied with.
      ii.    Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing
             fences and other structures eg floodlight pylons, and
             from standing on seats. Where by virtue of the scale of
             the incident stewards are unable to prevent this, they
             should immediately report the matter to the nearest
             police officer or, if no police officer is present, to the
             chief steward or the safety officer.
      iii.   Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.
      iv.    Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence
              among spectators, reporting their findings to the police
              or to management.
     v.      Know the location of and be able to operate effectively
             the fire-firefighting equipment at the ground.
     vi.     Know the location of the first aid room and any first
             aid equipment kept elsewhere.
     vii.    Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used
             to alert staff that an emergency has arisen.
     viii.   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and
             suspect packages, reporting such findings immediately
             to the nearest police officer or, if no police officer is in
             the immediate vicinity, the chief steward or the safety


                                   72
      officer.
ix.   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an
      emergency by a police officer, the chief steward or the
      safety officer.
x.    Remain at their allocated posts as instructed unless
      authorised or ordered to do otherwise by a police
      officer, the chief steward or the safety officer.
xi.   Report to the safety officer any damage or defect
      which is likely to pose a threat to spectator safety eg a
      damaged crush barrier.




                           73
                                                           (




Annex C

TE S TIN G OF CRUSH BARRIERS A N D H A N D R A ILS

1.    For crush barriers the test is to consist of the application of
an evenly distributed force of either 6.0 KN/metre width
(400 lbs f/fo o t width) or 4.3 KN/metre width (290 lbs f/fo o t width)
of barrier as mentioned in Chapter 9.

2.   For handrails the test is to consist of the application of an
evenly distributed force of either 4.3 KN/metre width (290 lbs f /
foot width) or 2.74 KN/metre width (188 lbs f/fo o t width) of
handrail as mentioned in Chapter 9.

3.    The force is to be in the form of a static load acting on the
top rail of the barrier or handrail at right angles to the longitudinal
axis and applied in about ten equal increments.

4.    The force to be applied for three consecutive periods, the full
force being maintained for 5 minutes each period. The interval
between applications to be as short as possible, ie to enable
complete unloading and reloading only. A record should be kept of
any deformation during the loading periods, during the periods of
maintained loading, or during the recovery period.

5.    If on the removal of the force for the third time the recovery
of deformation is at least 75% the barrier or handrail may be
deemed to have satisfied the loading requirements.
If this requirement is not met but the recovery is more than 50%
then the test should be repeated and if on retest the recovery is at
least 75% the barrier or handrail may be deemed to have satisfied
the loading requirements.
If the recovery is less than 50% on the first test or less than 75%
on the retest, the barrier or handrail shall be deemed to have
failed to meet the loading requirements.




                                  74
6.     If during any test, even though the barrier or handrail
satisfies the above loading requirements, doubt should arise for
any reason (including such matters as cracking of the terracing or
distortion of connections) as to the safety of the barrier or handrail,
a detailed investigation should be carried out. Unless the results of
this investigation remove the doubt as to the safety of the barrier
or handrail, the barrier or handrail, as the case may be, should be
deemed to have failed the test.

7.    A record should be kept of all the barriers and handrails
tested and of their performances during the tests.




               P rinted in th e U nited Kingdom for H er M ajesty's S tationery Office
                           (3181/89) Dd290096 11/89 C15 G3390 10170




                                               75
This booklet provides voluntary guidance to ground
management, local authorities and technical specialists on
measures for improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds. It can be applied to all types of sports grounds
where spectators are likely to be present.




HMSO
BOOKS
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London, SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 01-873 9090
General enquiries 01-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holborn/London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (Counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181
HMSO's Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)

And through good booksellers



£2.95 net



                                                         ISBN 0 - 1 1 - 3 4 0 8 4 0 - 4




ISBN 011 340840 4


                                                      9 78C 113 4 08405
