                                                          jkL,
                                                          V   1




                                   West Yorkshire Senior
                                   Attendance Centre,
                                     Priesthorpe School,
                                       Priesthorpe Lane,
                                         PUDSEY,
                                           West Yorkshire.
                                       7th March, 1990.
Your ref. CHN/90/401/11/3

Dear yadam,

              Attendance Centre - Inquiry into
              the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster


I refer to your letter of the 7th February, 1990 regarding
the extract from the Rt. Hon.      Lord Justice Taylor's
report   on   this  matter   and submit    the   following
observations.

1. I consider that the use of Attendance Centres to punish
football hooligans would be an advantage to be attached to
an exclusion order and if my memory serves me correctly I
recall that originally some Attendance Centres were set up
with this type of criminal in mind.
Whilst a person is attending an Attendance Centre, I agree
that this would effectively keep him away from football
grounds, but if he absents himself from the Centre and
there is no legitimate excuse then breach proceedings would
be taken against him.       This   precludes him from the
Attendance Centre and a notice is served on him to that
effect.   It may be some       weeks before the    offender
re-appears in Court and of course during the meantime he is
free to do as he pleases on Saturday afternoons.

2.    The West Yorkshire Senior Attendance Centre, situated
at Pudsey, is geographically placed between two Second
Division football clubs, namely Leeds United and Bradford
City and whilst it can be said in football terms that Leeds
are doing well in the league, Bradford have slipped into
the relegation zone. It may be that the next       football
season will see a First Division side at Leeds and a Third
Division side at Bradford. As it stands at the moment,
with both clubs being in the Second Division, when Leeds
United are at home then Bradford City are away and vice
versa. If there are the Division changes mentioned then it
may be that both Clubs could be at home on the same
Saturdays. This is something I will have to look at on the
conclusion of the current football season so that I can
arrange openings of the Centre to coincide with the home
matches. At present it is immaterial because of the status
of both Clubs, and whichever Saturday is chosen then one of
them will be playing at home.
There are also two other clubs within my catchment area,
namely Huddersfield Town and Halifax Town.     Huddersfield
are presently seventh in Division Three of the Football
League and Halifax seventh from the bottom of Division
Four.    Whilst it is possible that Huddersfield may be
promoted    to Division Two I don't      consider   Halifax
contenders for Division Three. If Huddersfield were to be
promoted then this could create minor difficulties but at
the moment there are very few persons from the Huddersfield
area on the West Yorkshire Senior Attendance Centre books.
The majority are sentenced to attend at the Dewsbury
Centre.    Present percentage figures of residences of all
persons currently on the books are as shown on Schedule
One.
3.   To have the West Yorkshire Senior Attendance Centre
open every Saturday afternoon during the football season
would mean, during the season (third week in August to
first week in May) there would be thirty-eight openings
leaving just fourteen more Saturdays in the year. If the
Centre were to continue on its usual fortnightly opening
cycle then that would take seven Saturdays giving a total
of forty-five openings per year as set against the present
total of twenty-six. This would increase expenditure by
73%.   At this stage it might be pertinent to refer to
Schedule Two showing the list of offences for which
offenders have been sentenced at the Centre.

From this it will be seen at present the offences of public
order represent only 5.6% of the total whereas theft
represents 28.8% with taking vehicles at 21.1%.

If the recommendation that football hooligans should attend
every Saturday afternoon for a period of two hours,
presumably 3.00pm.    to 5.00pm. then under the current
legislation the maximum number of hours he could be
sentenced to is thirty-six, then it means in effect that
his total attendances would amount to eighteen, which is
only 40% of the football season. I appreciate that Lord
Justice Taylor recommends that in such cases the offender
could receive seventy-two hours but this would mean a
change in legislation and would still mean he would only be
required to attend on thirty-six occasions, some 80% of the
football season.

4.   So far as staffing is concerned, if it is proposed to
have Attendance Centres open every Saturday afternoon for
football hooligans only and every other Saturday for other
offenders there would not be a problem. I would suggest
that on current statistics available a small staff of three
or four could run the "football hooligan" days with the
usual ratios on other days.        I would suggest     that
activities within the two hours should include rigorous
physical exercise and counselling in relation to drink,
damage and public order offences.
5.   Looking now     at the degree of crime, it would  seem
unbalanced if thesentencing recommendation of Lord Justice
Taylor was adopted if say the following occurred :

(a ) a young person entered an old person's bungalow in the
early hours of the morning with the intention of stealing
but was disturbed by the elderly occupant who was very
frightened as a result of which he suffers a heart attack.
The young intruder could be sentenced to the minimum of
twelve hours, whereas
(b) the football hooligan has only to threaten another
person (probably     a fit young man like himself)     with
violence and he      would receive seventy-two hours at the
Attendance Centre in order to prevent him from attending
future football matches.

In context this would hardly seem fair, but I have seen
twelve hour sentences being passed by Crown Court Judges
for burglaries.
6.   Identification of offences.    At the present time
Magistrates' Clerks send copy orders to officers in charge
of Attendance Centres and whilst the order specifies the
offence for which the offender appeared before the Court,
it does not identify specifically where it was committed.
For example, a public order offence could be committed
anywhere and at any time. If officers in charge included
all   public order offences in the football       hooligan
category, this would be defeating the object of the
exercise. Magistrates' Clerks would need to identify where
the offence was committed and whether it was on the
occasion of a football match.

The above observations are submitted for your information
and reference when any decisions are taken regarding the
use of Attendance Centres.
                          Yours faithfully



                          Officer in Charge,
               West Yorkshire Senior Attendance Centre




Mrs. M. Sadler,
Cl Division,
Room 324,
Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON
SW1H 9AT
                                                                          SCHEDULE ONE

                    WEST YORKSHIRE SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRE
                    STATISTICS OF RESIDENCY OF OFFENDERS



LEEDS & DISTRICT    BRADFORD & DISTRICT     HUDDERSFIELD      HALIFAX &         OTHERS
                    (INCLUDING KEIGHLEY     & DISTRICT        DISTRICT        (LEFT AREA
                       AND DISTRICT)                                           AND WANTED
                                                                               ON WARRANT)



                          59. 16%                               10. 0%
   27.5%




    Representative of the 104 offenders currently on the books at the above
    Attendance Centre
                              SCHEDULE OF OFFENCES FOR WHICH OFFENDERS HAVE BEEN SENTENCED TO                                SCHEDULE TWO
                              ATTEND AT THE WEST YORKSHIRE SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRE, PUDSEY
                              ---------------------- 15 AT iTTBBtitMY. 1350




                                    PUBLIC   ASSAULTS    GOING   OFFENSIV     DECEP­   DRUGS    MAKING    FINE     RESISTBK DISQ. BREACH
 THEFT   BURGLARY TAKING CRIMINAL
                                    ORDER               EQUIPPED WEAPONS      TION               OFF     DEFAULT    ARREST DRIVING   OF
  inc.     inc.   VEHICLES DAMAGE
                                                          FOR                                                                      PROBAT­
ATTEMPTEI ATT.    WITHOUT
                                                         THEFT                                                                       ION
 THEFT   BURGLARY CONSENT
                    inc.
                   RIDING



                                                 12        6         5          5        2         1        1         4        2        1
  56       30       41      17        11



                                     5.6%      6.1%                 2.5%       2.5%     1.03%    0.51%     0.51%     2.06%    1.03%    0.51%
 28.8%   15.4.%   21.1%    8.7%                           3.9%




           These offences represent those committed by the 104 offenders presently on the books at the above Attendance Centre.
