R.                  •%, iW oao/i
 22-7.JS


 From:        J L Goddard                    cc HMCIC        )w/o
              F8 Division                       Mr Boys Smith)ends
              Ext 3314                          Mr Turney    )
                                                Mr Addison
              9 July 1990                       Miss A Edwards
                                                Mrs Catto
                                                Mr Cane
                                                Miss Goose
                                                Mr Cogbill
                                                Mr Bolton




 Miss Nicholson


 LORD FERRERS' MEETING WITH MR ANDERTON: TUESDAY 10 JULY


 I attach briefing for Lord Ferrers' use at his meeting with Mr
 Anderton tomorrow, at 11 am to discuss the policing issues
 arising from the final Taylor report.       Officials will attend a
 pre-briefing meeting at 10.30 am.


 2.      The meeting was suggested by Lord Ferrers so that he
 could have a fifst hand report on the progress which ACPO have
 made in implementing the recommendations in Lord Justice
 Taylor's final report.     Mr Anderton, as the relevant ACPO
 representative, has already provided a written progress report
 which is attached at the back of these papers.      We suggest
 that the meeting follows the order of his report.        Briefing
 notes are attached in that order.


         A.   Offences and penalties
         B    CCTV and public safety
         C.   Review of police charges for policing matches
         D.   Training of police officers stewards
         E.   Review of arrest procedures
         F.   Written statements of intent
         G.   Ground Commander Training
         H.   All ticket matches
     I.      Football Supporters Club
     J.      Police reserve
     K.      Green Guide


3.   Also attached are notes covering matters raised by the
final Taylor report but not dealt with in ACPO's written
report.


     L.      Communications
     M.      Coordination of emergency services


4.   At some stage during the meeting Lord Ferrers may care to
mention the worth of the presence of Mr Malcolm George (ACC
Greater Manchester) at the World Cup and thank Mr Anderton for
sparing him for so long away from home.       (Lord Ferrers will
recall meeting Mr George, and other English police officers,
in Cagliari.)


General comments


5.   Lord Ferrers may wish to make some general comments,
perhaps after the discussion of the detailed topics at A-M
above.     He might £ay:-


     (i)     ACPO made a positive and prompt response to Taylor's
             interim report.    It appears that there has been an
             equally encouraging response to the final report.


     (ii) Much of the work in hand will bear fruit over a
             longer period - the new training required is an
             obvious example:   there needs to be a sustained
             impetus behind the developments now in hand.


     (Ill) Much of the work ACPO have in hand requires close
             liaison and understanding with other agencies:
             local authorities (safety certificate issues,
             charging for policing services); clubs (possible
             training of stewards, written statements of intent,
    CCTV);   and other emergency services.   Important
    that the mood of co-operation generated by the
    common response to the Hillsborough stadium disaster
    is sustained and developed.


(iv) Grateful for most constructive relationship between
    ACPO and Home Office in the response to Taylor's
    reports.




                             J L GODDARD
22-7.JS                                                        A


OFFENCES AND PENALTIES




Line to take



Grateful for ACPO's response to the Home Office about Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendations for offences and penalties.
These will be most helpful to us in reaching conclusions on
whether to legislate in the way proposed.   We hope to reach
conclusions shortly.


Background


Lord Justice Taylor recommended that there should be four new
criminal offences; ticket touting on the day of a football
match; and, at designated grounds offences of throwing a
missile, chanting obscene or racialist abuse, and going onto
the pitch without reasonable excuse.   In their letter of 14
June ACPO came .out in favour of all these offences.


Taylor also recommended greater use of attendance centres for
people convicted of football-related offences and greater use
of electronic tagging.   ACPO have said that they support both
these recommendations but have expressed reservations about
their efficacy.


Later this week officials will put forward a submission to
Ministers making recommendations on what the Government's
response to the Taylor recommendations should be.
       ) CIRCUIT TELEVISION   (CCTV)
      to take

      Commend ACPO on their initiative in producing this guide.

       Acknowledge that it should result in an improvement in the
     idards of CCTV coverage.

       Stress the    importance of paragraph 2 of the guidance
    .sessing   the    risk   and  establishing the  operational
    luirement).

I    Remind ACPO that the provision of CCTV equipment is only one
   the demands on the funds of the Football Trust which are still
 imited despite the funds made available by the reduction in
 ools Betting Tax. We would not wish to see money wasted on CCTV
iquipment for sparsely attended football grounds if it is not
abso       necessary.

5.   We shall be taking steps ourselves to circulate the guidance
booklet to local authorities responsible for safety certificates
and to the local authorities associations.




Background Note
Mr Anderton's letter provides a comprehensive description of the
work which has gone into the production of the booklet which has
now been published by the Police Scientific Development Branch
of the Home Office -on the procurement of closed circuit
television for public’safety at football grounds. A copy of the
document is annexed for the Minister's information.

Recommendation 35 of the Taylor final report was that closed
circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd
densities outside the ground within concourse areas and in pens
and other standing areas to be monitored before throughout and
the end of a match. Recommendation 51 included that there should
be available in the police control room the results of all closed
Circuit television monitoring outside and inside the ground.

It will not be necessary to discuss the content of the document
which is well produced but it may be prudent to express concern
if police forces were to require all football clubs to install
CCTV regardless of need. The object of giving more money to the
Football Trust was to permit clubs to increase the level of
comfort and amenity for spectators. We would not wish to see a
disproportionate amount of those funds diverted to the provision
of CCTV, particularly in some of the sparsely attended grounds
outside the football league, if it is not absolutely necessary.
                                                                       c~




  REVIEW OP POLICE CHARGES TO CLUBS FOR COSTS OF POLICING MATCHES


Line to take


     Welcome action by ACPO to examine charging structures with
     a view to recommending a new, largely uniform approach


     Home Office consulting ACPO and others       on a draft Home
     Office Circular on charging.


     Look forward to receiving ACPO's comments.


Background


    Mr Anderton,   Chief   Constable   of   Greater Manchester   and
     Chairman of ACPO General Purposes Committee Sub Committee
     on Hooliganism at Sporting Events wrote to FI Division on
     14 June 1990 setting out proposals for uniform scale of
    charges (subject to local discretion as recommended by the
    Taylor Report).


    This arriv.ed' as Home Office about to consult Staff and Local
    Authority Associations plus     Football Authorities    on   a
    draft Home Office Circular      (HOC)   on charging principles
    (copy attached).


    Consultations on HOC are going ahead.


    ACPO invited to include in their comments confirmation that
    their recommended charging structure would recuperate 100
    per cent of the cost in appropriate cases and to say what
    arrangements they propose for consulting Local Authority
    Associations/Police Authorities on their proposals.
 PO L / S S 404/2/9




 The Clerk to the Police Authority

The Chief Constable




Dear Sir

HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO            /1990

CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL HATCHES


1.      Lord    Justice    Taylor's      report   on    his    inquiry into    the

Hillsborough stadium disaster recommended                     (Recommendation 53)
that:

        "Police Authorities should review the charges they make to

        clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so as to

        ensure that, realistic charges are made.                 The Home Office

        should    take     steps   to    ensure   consistency       of practice,

        subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to
        local circumstances."



2.      The    reasoning    behind      this   recommendation      was given    in
paragraph 210 of the report:



      "The temptation to the clubs to leave it all to the police

      is stronger        if they are not required to make realistic

     payment      for     police   services.       No    charge     is made    for

     officers outside the ground since maintaining law and order
     in the streets is a normal public function of the police.

     At the present time, the practice as to recovering costs of

     policing inside the grounds from clubs varies greatly from

     place to place,       different formulae being used.            In some

     areas, the charge made is the actual cost of the officers

     attending    in the    ground.       At   others,    it   is made   on    a

     sliding scale, dependent on whether the match is category

     A (high risk), B or C.        At others, it is dependent on the

     size of the crowd attending.              At some,   it appears to be

     entirely arbitrary and at one ground it is said to be nil.

     In mv    view     a mors   consistent     and businesslike      approach

     should be made to such charges.             If clubs were to find it

     more    economical    to   recruit    efficient      stewards   than     to

     delegate duties to the police, there could be a significant

     reduction    in    the number    of police deployed at          football

     grounds, to the benefit of the community at large."



The statutory*position

3.   Section    15(1)    of the Police Act 1964 provides that "the

chief officer of police of any police force may provide, at the

request of any person, special police services at any premises

or in any locality in the police area for which the force is

maintained,    subject to the payment to the police authority of

charges on such scales as may be determined by that authority".



4.   The expression "special police services" is not defined in

section 15 and must be given its natural meaning.               This is that

special services are services which would not, in the absence of
arrangements under section 15, be provided in pursuance of the

general duties of the police to preserve law and order.



5.      Safety certificates are required for stadia designated by

the Secretary of State under section 1(1) of the Safety of Sports

Grounds Act     1975.         They are issued by local       authorities    and

contain such rules and conditions as the local authority consider

necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety at the ground.

Where     certificates        require   the   holder   to   arrange   for   the

attendance of an adequate number of police officers within the

ground,    the extent of the provision of police services must,

under section 2 of the 1975 Act as amended, be reserved for the

determination of the chief officer of police- of the force in

question.



The view of central Government

6.      It has been .the view of successive Governments since 1968

that the costs of special services should be paid in full by

those using the service and that no part of these costs should

be allowed to add to the general level of police expenditure and

thus to the burdens of taxpayers or ratepayers.                Charges should

be reviewed and adjusted as necessary - at least annually.                  The

aim in principle should be to recover the full cost of those

police     officers     who    are deployed    at   football matches    solely

within the ground.



Charging and deployment policies

7.      If the full cost is to be recovered, there must be a direct
link between deployment and charges: the mere officers the force

finds it necessary to deploy solely for duty within the ground,

the more the club should have to pay.                     Under present charging

policies this is not always the case.



8.     One reason for this may be that a force charges only for the

number of officers mentioned in an agreement made with the club.

However, if the chief officer of police considers it necessary,

because of the nature of the match or the reputation of the

visiting supporters, to deploy inside the ground more officers

than such an agreement provides for, no extra charge is made.

This   practice       should       be   reviewed    and   any    agreements   should

specifically provide for special circumstances calling for the
                                                            %
deployment of more officers than usual.



9.     Other    forces determine           charges    on the basis      of a fixed

formula.       Where the same formula is used for both charging and

deployment,         the       .economic cost   is   recovered.      But where    the
                *         »

charging formula bears no relation to deployment (e.g. because

deployment is based on the chief officer's assessment of the

need whereas charges are based on 2 constables - with supervising

officers pro rata - per 1000 of actual attendance), charges are

likely to fall some way short of recovering -the full economic

costs.



Local considerations

10.    As Lord Justice Taylor acknowledged,                     local circumstances

cannot be ignored and charging policies must leave scope for

local discretion.               In particular -
       a. The nature and          location of the ground and the standard

               of   physical      aids    to    crowd       control        are     major

               considerations in determining the number of officers

               to be deployed inside the ground.               Facilities are^often

               poorest at the grounds of clubs who are least able to

               pay the full economic cost of policing.



       b.      The financial plight of many clubs cannot be lightly

               dismissed.      Asking clubs to pay unrealistically high

               charges   for    policing       could     lead    to   problems      with

               recovering dept and even to bankruptcy.



11.   There are, however, steps which the poorer clubs could take

to help themselves.         In particular, more,            and better trained,

stewards would help to reduce the policing requirement.                          Hanning

gates,      directing    spectators       to    the      correct      areas,     keeping
                     ♦

gangways clear and monitoring the density of packing in pens and

enclosures are all mentioned by Lord Justice Taylor as examples

of    duties    which    could be    carried       out    by    suitable,        properly

trained stewards.



Recommendation

12.    Police       authorities     and    chief       officers       of   police     are

therefore advised that:

       a.      The aim in principle should be to recover the full

               costs of all police officers deployed to duties solely

               within the ground at football matches.
      b.     Charging policies should be reviewed to ensure that

             there is a direct link between deployment and charges.



      c.     In cases   where   it   would   clearly be   unrealistic to

             require a club to       meet the full costs of policing

             inside the ground, local discretion may be exercised

             to reduce the scale     of charges.



      d.     It should, however,     be made.clear in such cases that

             the club will be expected to take active steps (eg the

             provision of more effective stewarding arrangements)

             to reduce the levels of policing needed          inside the

             ground.



13.   An additional      copy of this circular is enclosed for the

Treasurer.



                                                Yours faithfully




                                                M J ADDISON
TRAINING OF POLICE OFFICERS/STEWARDS


Line to take


Our s t a r t i n g point here is the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s of the
T a y l o r R e p o r t that clubs should         be en co u r a g e d   to provide
mor e and be tt er stewarding.               It is vital      that the b a la nc e of
r e s p o n s i b i l i t y bet we en   clubs and the pol ice should be
i n i t i a l l y set out in the s t at eme nt        of intent.         Those ■
responsible         for e n s u r i n g crowd    safety - w h e t h e r p o l i c e or
st ew ar ds - should r e c e i v e a d e q u a t e    training.




Background


1.      Recommendations 16 and 42 of the Final Report of Lord
Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough stadium
disaster call for a significant change in the recruitment,
training and eventual quality of stewarding.                             There would be
obvious advantages to the police in reducing police presence
and to the clubs in reducing costs.                      But it will be to
nobody's benefit to continue to deploy the existing,
inadequate volunteers and feeble club managements can not be
relied upon' to recruit and organise this type of skilled
workforce.


2.      We know that ACPO General Purposes Committee has asked
the Public Order Forward Planning Unit to consider the scope
for making greater use of stewards.                      From the training angle,
much will depend on the view reached by the Forward Planning
Unit and by ACPO; we will not be able to define training needs
until we know what the functions of police and stewards at
football matches will be.


3.      For stewards. training will primarily be the
responsibility of the clubs or the agents contracted to
provide stewarding services.                    However, it would be helpful to
obtain an agreement in principle from ACPO that the police
service would, wherever practicable, offer help to those
providing training to ensure that the service's wealth of
experience is passed on.


4.   Training for police officers at matches will have to
include elements of public order, crowd safety and first aid
amongst other topics.   Some of this, for example first aid, is
already covered in initial recruit training and in other
courses not tied specifically to football.   An ACPO working
party is developing a course for ground commanders, and is
also developing training packages for other ranks - a training
package for distribution by the Forward Planning Unit,
including videos, is being assembled.
REVIEW OF ARREST PROCEDURES

Line to Take


Welcome ACPO's study of the proposal.    Objectives here are (i)
to make arrests where necessary; and (ii) to do so in a way
which takes the arresting officer away from his post for the
minimum period.


Background Note


2.   The Taylor Committee recommended that the police should
consider streamlining arrest procedures at grounds.     It noted
a tendency to eject offenders without arrest on the grounds
that taking the offender to a police room and going through
the arrest procedures reduces the police team for a
significant period.    The present system has another
disadvantage in terms of police manpower:    arrests create work
for the custody officer at the police station.    In principle,
therefore, we are in favour of a proposal that would keep the
police active in full numbers policing at the football ground.
               •


3.   The Taylor proposal requires careful handling if it is
not to lead to the football equivalent of the stop and search
power on the streets which enables the police to detain
suspected offenders without the need to arrest them.     If they
are free of suspicion, they may go without further ado.     The
aim of the PACE provisions is to prevent the unnecessary use
of powers of arrest.    In the case of football grounds, the
point would be more to prevent the waste of police time but it
is just as justifiable on those grounds.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF INTENT

Line to take


Pleased to note that the police and clubs have had no
difficulty in co-operating on this matter now that the format
and legal status of the 'statement of intent' has been
resolved.


Background note


Lord Justice Taylor recognised that there were many aspects of
crowd control which could be carried out by the police or by
stewards, on behalf of the club.    The precise division of
functions is a matter for local decision, based on individual
circumstances, and will be in the last resort for the Police
Commander to determine.    Whatever the decision, it is of
paramount importance that all concerned should fully
understand their role to avoid any misunderstanding over the
allocation of functions.   Lord Justice Taylor recommended in
his interim report that the respective functions of the police
and club for cr,owd safety and control should be set out in a
written document..   Although the spirit of the recommendation
was clearly appreciated by all, there was initially some
anxiety that what was required was a binding legal contract.
Home Office legal advice was that a simple 'statement of
intent' would be appropriate, subject to alteration without
breach of contract should circumstances so require.     After
discussing the matter with Mr Anderton, Lord Justice Taylor
confirmed in his final report that he considered that such a
document would adequately meet his purposes.    We are unaware
of any remaining difficulties.
GROUND COMMANDER TRAINING
OTHER TRAINING FOR SENIOR POLICE OFFICERS


Line to take


With the support of both the Home Office and ACPO, a Ground
Commander Training Course, as put forward in paragraph 215 and
recommendation 52 of the Taylor Report, is now well advanced.
A working party convened by ACPO (and chaired by Mr Culley,
ACC Nottinghamshire), has drawn up a proposal for a 3-phase
Football Commanders Course, and pilot courses for match
commanders are being run in Kent and Greater Manchester
Police.     The Police Training Council will be interested in the
outcome, and it is to be hoped that a national programme of
training will quickly come on stream.



Background


1.   Paragraph 215 and recommendation 52 of the Taylor Report
calls for a specific training course for senior officers,
including training in the basic strategy of policing football
matches.     ACPO•General Purposes Committee has been taking
forward this recommendation in consultation with the ACPO
Personnel and Training Committee, to ensure that all aspects
of the Taylor Report which bear on matters of police training
are dealt with.     Both committees are therefore represented on
the working party referred to in the opening paragraph.


2.   A proposed 3-phase Football Commanders Course has now
been drawn up and pilot courses are being run by Kent (2 days)
and Greater Manchester (5 days).     These entail a variety of
pre-reading, theory, classroom exercises, practical (i.e. a
visit to a match) and post-course follow-up work.     It has yet
to be decided where the course will be held (whether
regionally, centrally or at two or more designated regional
centres).     The course in its final form may last 3-4 days.
3.   Alongside these initiatives it should also be noted that
the Police Staff College, Bramshill, has included two courses
in its 1990 programme on the "Management of Disaster and Civil
Emergency".   These courses have been set up in response to
recent major disasters, Hillsborough amongst them.      One course
is for officers of ACPO rank, and the other for senior
officers likely to have responsibility for the co-ordination
and management of major incidents, particularly as incident
officer, senior investigating officer, incident control post
co-ordinator, or major incident control room co-ordinator.
Both courses were held in June 1990.   In addition, it is hoped
to hold a number of conferences at the College during 1990,
one of which will have as its theme the   operational
management of football matches.
ALL TICKET MATCHES




Line to take


Pleased to note that ACPO had already taken Taylor's important
recommendations on this matter on board.


Background note


'All ticket' designation can be a useful means of achieving at
matches with a potential for disorder.     However, difficulties
have arisen in the past when certain matches have been
designated 'all ticket' by clubs and on the day there being
spare capacity in the ground, fans arriving without tickets
have been permitted to purchase them on the day.     This is not
an unnatural reaction, for commercial reasons by the club, and
to avoid the possibility of disorder outside the ground
following a 'lockout' by the police.     However the practice has
inherent dangers, creating a level of expectation on the part
of travelling fans that they will always be admitted whether
or not they have'purchased a ticket in advance.     Lord Justice
Taylor recognised the danger and recommended that clubs
confine the practise of 'all-ticket' designation to those
matches at which a capacity or near-capacity crowd is expected
(Rec.40) and that police planning should provide that
ticketless fans should not be allowed in the ground except in
an emergency.     Mr Anderton had already written to chief
officers to urge action on precisely these points.
FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' CLUBS


Line to take

Pleased to note that ACPO have opened up avenues of discussion
with the Football Supporters' Association and the National
Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs.




Background Note

Lord Ferrers will recall that when he met representatives of the
Football Supporters' Association and the National Federation of
Football Supporters' Clubs, some of the points that were raised
with him concerned the police. They included unjustified police
action to deal with enthusiastic behaviour by fans which did not
amount to misbehaviour or hooliganism; reluctance by local police
to agree to the removal of perimeter fences where there was no
realistic risk of crowd invasion of the pitch (eg in front of all
seated areas occupied by season ticket holders); and the danger
that high profile policing itself caused an anti-police feeling
amongst spectators which was more likely to cause trouble than
to avoid it.

It seems very desirable to encourage ACPO to provide an avenue
for these organisations to be able to express their worries and
concerns to the police direct. They may not see eye to eye with
ACPO on a number of issues but in our experience they are as
anxious as we ,&re to see improvements in crowd behaviour and
improvements in conditions at football grounds.
POLICE RESERVE


Line to take


Pleased to note that the police have taken this on board.
Hope that the question of charging can be resolved sensibly
and uniformly.


Background note


Lord Justice Taylor recommended that the Operational Order for
each match should provide for sufficient reserves to enable
the rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point
inside or outside the ground to deal with any unforeseen
eventuality.   Mr Anderton has advised all Chief Constables,
via the ACPO General Purposes Committee, that the provision of
a reserve should be decided by the Police Commander in his
operational planning for each fixture.


This raises the question of police forces charging for reserve
officers.   There must be common practice if clubs are not to
feel that they are the victims of discriminatory action and
there seems to be .no case for requiring clubs to pay for
reserves used to 'deal with trouble outside the grou|nd.
THE GREEN GUIDE


Line to take

1.   Say that we have now received ACPO's comments on the Green
Guide and that these will be taken into account during the course
of the current review.

2.   Say that the technical working group which has been set up
to review the Green Guide had its first meeting last week
(2 July) which was attended by Commander Speed.

3.   We are very grateful to ACPo for their co-operation.




Background Note

The ACPO note ^indicates that the Home Office are currently
revising the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide)
and that the views of ACPO have been sought.    ACPO's comments
have in fact now been received.     The technical working group
which the Home Office has set up to review the Green Guide has
already had its first meeting.         Commander Speed of the
Metropolitan Police attended to represent ACPO and we are
grateful to ACPO for their co-operation.
Rec 55: There should always be a command channel reserved solely
for the Police Commander to communicate with his senior officers
round the ground.


LINE TO TAKE

Additional Channels

1.      The Home Office Radio Frequency and Communications Planning
        Unit made available on 1 January 1990 eight new channels for
        use at pre-planned events.

2.      The channels are not geographically assigned by the Home
        Office and must be co-ordinated by users to minimize
        interference between operations. They may be used for
        command purposes at football matches.

Noise

3.      At the request of ACPO the Home Office Police Requirements
        Support Unit has set up a working party to improve the use of
        radios in a noisy environment.

4.      The working party will consider

        a)   what equipment is available to attach to existing radios

and     b)   the development of special equipment.
                                                                  M

CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES


Background note


The Final Report made 5 recommendations (Nos 59-63, page 81>
on the co-ordination of emergency services.   These concerned:-



     (a)   regular liaison between senior nominated officers of
           police, fire and ambulance services;


     (b)   advance circulation of full details of events to all
           3 services, including anticipated or potential
           difficulties, and availability of such details in
           emergency service control rooms;


     (c)   lines of communication from police control room to
           local HQ's to be maintained at all times;


     (d)   contingency plans for arrival of emergency service
           vehicles to be reviewed; and
                  •

     (e)   briefing on contingency arrangements for police
           officers positioned at ground entrances.


Enquiries made of the fire authorities and local authorities
last September following the Interim Report indicated that the
emergency services had already implemented these
recommendations, or that plans to do so were well advanced.


Line to take


Understand that action on these recommendations was quickly
taken following the Interim Report.   Ask Mr Anderton whether
he can confirm that the recommended arrangements have become
standard practice and whether he regards them as satisfactory.
                                                I.L   JUI1
»                                                               sSJS
                                            C James Anderton CBE, QPM, DL
                                            Chief Constable

                                            Chief Constable's Office
                                            P 0 Box 22 (S.West PDO)
                                            Chester House
                                            Boyer Street
                                            Manchester M 16 ORE
                                            Telephone 061 872 5050




    CC/MJPH/MCJ                                         20th June, 1990




                   Lord Justice Taylor*s Final Report

    In your letter of 10th April, 1990, you sought to arrange a
    meeting between representatives of the Home Office and Lord
    Ferrers with me as a representative of the ACPO, to consider the
    progress by the Police Service in the implementation of the
    recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report.

    I am pleased to accede to such a request. To assist you in your
    preparations, as you suggested, I have had a written account
    prepared of the ACPO response to the Final Report, which
    accompanies   this  letter.   By   necessity,  the   account  is
    comprehensive, reflecting the depth and quality of consideration
    given by the Police Service to the Report's content.

    The ACPO response to the proposed offences and penalties,
    contained in Recommendations 70-73, has been addressed by the
    Sub-Committee.   That response has been routed via the ACPO
    General Purposes Committee.

    The date of the proposed meeting can be arranged with my Staff
    Officer, Superintendent Peter Madeley.




    J.L. Goddard Esq.,
    F.8 Division,
    Home Office,
    Queen Anne's Gate,
    LONDON.
    SW1H 9AT




                              D R^NG THEDREAM
                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT S
                       CONSULTATION WITH THE A.C.P.O.


Offences and Penalties (Rees. 70-73)


       In correspondence,           dated 16th February,            1990, Mr.       Stephen
BOYS   SMITH,       sought   the     views    of     the    A.C.P.O.       regarding      the
enforceability and resource implications for the police in the
implementation of these offences. That copy correspondence was
circulated       to    all     forces,        England        and     Wales,       and     the
Superintendents Association,                accompanied by a          letter from the
Chairman of the Sub-Committee in which comment was invited upon
the proposals.


       The     resultant       correspondence              was     collated        by     the
Sub-Committee and a synopsis of those views was forwarded to Mr.
John EVANS, Secretary of the A.C.P.O. General Purposes Committee
for    further      attention       as    deemed     necessary.           That    composite
response      has    since    been       endorsed    and    forwarded       to    the    Home
Office on 14th June, 1990.


C.C.T.V. and Public Safety (Rees. 35-511


       In May,      1989,    the Sub-Committee correctly anticipated the
recommendations of Lord Justice TAYLOR, when it identified the
need   to    review    the    use    of    closed     circuit       television,         paying
particular attention to the contribution which could be made to
public       safety.    A     Working        Party     was       formed,         under     the
Chairmanship of Mr.           Malcolm GEORGE,          Assistant Chief            Constable
(Operations)        of the Greater Manchester Police and Secretary to
the    Sub-Committee.         The    Working        Party    took    as    its    terms     of
reference Recommendations 35 and 51.


       The membership of the Working Party comprised senior police
officers with considerable skill and experience in the command
    c   of policing football fixtures. They were assisted by scientific
        technicians of the Police Scientific Development Branch.


                The Football Trust 1990, had agreed to provide funding, at
        least in part, to meet the provisions of the Taylor Report, to a
        maximum      of   some   £2m.   To   that   end    it   was    agreed    that    the
        A.C.P.O.     Working Party would provide technical                  advice to    the
        Football Trust to assist its members in their consideration of
        all applications for such funding. An additional member of the
        Working Party represented the Trust.


               During the period of its existence,              the Working Party has
        met on a regular basis, visited football stadia and established
^^minimum standards of performance of C.C.T.V. That research has
C       since been completed and is encapsulated in a Technical Report.
        This document forms a set of guidance notes for the procurement
        of C.C.T.V. installations.


               The guidance proffered concerns technical matters so as to
        help to ensure that the requirements made by the Advisory Group
        for a proposed C.C.T.V. installation at football stadia is fully
        analysed and cleanly stated.           It covers the assessment of stadia
        for risk, establishing the operational requirement, performance
        of     the    C.C.T.V.     system,     tendering    for       and    selecting     a
        contractor,       commissioning and hand over of the system and the
        maintenance of the finished product.


               The    document    has   been    approved    by    the       Sub-Committee,
        circulated to all forces, and commended to the A.C.P.O. General
        Purposes Committee and A.C.P.O. Council for immediate adoption.
             Copies will be circulated to the Clerks of Police Authorities
        for use by the Advisory Groups.             The Football Trust,          in their
        own right as contributors, will receive copies of the document
        and ensure it is forwarded to all League Clubs for guidance.




                                               - 2 -
Review of Police Charges (Rec. 53)


        The review of the system of charges was commenced early in
1989 but the tragic events of Hillsborough and the Inquiry by
Lord Justice Taylor which followed in its wake precluded further
consideration. Nevertheless, the Sub-Committee remained mindful
of criticism that had been raised by the press and some football
clubs over apparent disparity in the charging practices of some
forces.     Where      such disparities had been highlighted,                         it had
often    been presented          in a    league table         format of per           capita
policing     costs        which       ignored        geographic      and      demographic
considerations between grounds and variations between fixtures.


        This Sub-Committee correctly anticipated the tenor of the
Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor when, in November, 1989,                                 it
compiled     a     list    of     current     police       charging      practices          and
undertook    a     reassessment         of   same     with    a   view   to    suggesting
national    guidelines          for    future police         practices     and    charges.
This    endeavour has been endorsed in the Final Report when                                 in
paragraph 210 it s t a t e s ......"At the present time, the practice
as to recovering costs of policing inside the grounds from clubs
varies    greatly      from place        to place,        different      formulae      being
used     ........ In my         view    a more       consistent      and   businesslike
approach should be made to such charges."


        This statement was encapsulated in Recommendation 53 of the
Report     which      stated,     "Police       Authorities       should      review        the
charges they made to clubs for the cost of policing inside the
grounds    so as to ensure that realistic charges are made.                                 The
Home Office should take steps to ensure consistency of practice,
subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to local
fiTT-miiBRtances."


     In its deliberations the Committee considered the need for j
                                                                I
the Ground/Divisional Commander's discretion in the numbers and j
deployment       of   police      officers      at    a   football    match      to    be    of
paramount importance.           It also acknowledge that each ground had
peculiarities     of      demography          and    geography      which    compounded
policing    problems      and    precluded any notion            of    a    recommended
ratio of the number of           officers : the number of spectators.


     It did, however, concur with the need for a uniformity of
police practice to offset criticisms of disparity.


     Accordingly,         the    Committee recommended              that    charges      be
levied for ALL police            officers deployed inside the                  ground for
the full duration of the match, up to, but excluding, the Ground
Commander (who acts as representative of the Chief Constable).


     The Committee also recommended that consideration be given
to the formulation and adoption of two national hourly rates for
all federated ranks, one to be levied normally and an enhanced
rate to be levied on the occasion of a public holiday.                            This was
circulated to all Chief Constables on 20th February,                              1990 and
the proposals were commended for immediate adoption.


     A    comprehensive         account of          the reviewed      system has        been
forwarded to Mr.     «
                         ADDISON,       FI Division of the Home Office,                   in
correspondence dated 14th June, 1990.


Training of Police Officer/Stewards (Rec.16)
Review of Arrest Procedures fRee.48)


     The    two   aspects       of    research,       listed above,        were    readily
identified    from       the    Final    Report.         At   its     meeting      on    5th
February,    1990, the Committee considered these matters in more
detail.


     In     paragraphs          210     and     211      of    the     Final       Report,
consideration is given to the replacement of Police Officers by
Stewards,    for the performance of certain functions at football
fixtures.    These        functions       allude        to    the     responsibilities
V



        C
            identified        in paragraph       195 of     the Green Guide to              Safety     at
            Sports Grounds.       Moreover the Judge acknowledged the assistance
            given by the police in the training of stewards in matters of
            crowd control and management.


                    It was also identified in paragraph 261, that the use of
                                                                                                                   tL
            ejection      from   a ground        rather than        arrest    for     a    substantive
                                                                                                            (cov^Y>)
            offence was based on apparent grounds of expediency.                               If that
            observation was accurate,             it was recommended that consideration
            be given to streamlining arrest procedures to encourage the use
            of same without diverting the arresting officer from his post
            for other than a minimum amount of time.


                    The Committee considered that both these matters warranted
    (       speedy development and commended them to the Forward Planning
            Unit for assessment.          The response is awaited.


            Written Statements of Intent fRec. 11)


                    Originally termed "Written Agreements" in Recommendation 4
            of the       Interim Report by         Lord Justice Taylor,              the matter        of
            Written      Statements' of     Intent had generated much dialogue                        and
            correspondence        between        forces,      the    Home         Office     and    this
            Committee.


                    In   an   effort   to    resolve       confusion         on    this     and     other
            matters,      the    Chairman        met   with     Lord    Justice           Taylor.     The
            discussion proved to be most informative. The clear intention of
            the Judge emerged, simply that the football clubs and the police
            should be aware of their individual responsibilities to avoid
            areas of duplicity and to ensure that there were no omissions of
            responsibility.        The Judge absorbed the detail and the resultant
            Final    Recommendation         11    clearly      resolved      the     confusion,        as
            evinced in the Final Report.




        f



                                                       - 5 -
    c         At     the        instigation            of     Lord         Justice     Taylor,        the
        Sub-Committee undertook further areas of research and passed on
        the detail he required.                 There were three areas of research:


              1.     The effect of the removal or partial removal
                     of fencing at football clubs where this had
                     occurred after the tragedy.


              2.     Detail        of      full        and    partial         membership
                     schemes at football league clubs.


              3.     The use of attendance centres for offenders
                     excluded           from        visiting        football        grounds
                     under        Part         11    of      the     (then)        Football
i                    Spectators Bill.


              That    research          was     duly      completed        and     forwarded    to    Lord
        Justice Taylor.


        Ground Commander Training fRec.52)


              The    Committee*noted                the    suggestion       in paragraph        215    and
        Recommendation          52 . of    the      Final     Report,       that    consideration       be
        given to the provision of a specific Ground Commander's Training
        Course and commended the merits of the proposal.


              Liaison had been maintained with David Graham, Chairman of
        the A.C.P.O.       Personnel and Training Committee,                          to ensure that         Cv
        any   aspects      of    the      Final      Report        which    bore    implications       for
        future training needs, were dealt with.


              As a result of that close liaison, a Working Party has been
        convened     in     which         both       Committees        were        represented.        The
        Chairman     is     Mr.         J.F.        CULLEY,        Assistant        Chief     Constable,
        Nottinghamshire          and      this        Committee        is     represented       by     the
        Secretary Malcolm GEORGE.




                                                          - 6 -
        A number of forces have prepared or are in the process of
preparing training courses and due cognizance will be taken of
the   merits         of    each.       Early       indications         favour     a    three-phase
approach of pre-reading of material by students, followed by the
course itself and finishing with hands-on experience in the home
force. It has yet to be decided whether the courses will be held
regionally,          centrally         or   at     two    or    more    designated           regional
centres;       the    content and duration                 of the course              is    currently
being assessed.


All Ticket Matches (Rees. 40 & 47)


        Once    again,          this       Committee,          correctly        anticipated         the
[recommendation of the Final Report. On 22nd September, 1989, the
Chairman wrote to all Chief Constables,                            England and Wales,               and
highlighted problems identified with all-ticket fixtures.


        It was stressed that not only must ground capacities not be
exceeded       but        in   the   case     of    all    ticket       matches,           any   excess
number of fans without tickets much not be accommodated even if
there     is    space          in    the     stadium       to     do    so.       Moreover,         the
nationwide support for some of the largest clubs suggested that
in the absence of compelling reasons, viz. no ticket - no entry,
people     will       continue         to    arrive       without      bothering           to    obtain
tickets before hand.                 The Ground Commanders were encouraged,                          in
their liaison with the football clubs, to seek that they refrain
from selling tickets on the day.


Football Supporters Club (Rec.31)


        At its meeting in May,                   1989, the Sub-Committee resolved to
meet with representatives of the National Federation of Football
Supporters        Clubs         following        their     request         to    meet       with    the
A.C.P.O.        The        Committee        also     initiated         a    meeting         with    the
Football Supporters Association.
      Though       Lord       Justice Taylor                did not specifically                   advocate
such liaison between the A.C.P.O.                               and the Supporters Clubs, the
desirability of regular contact is implicit in paragraph 152 and
rec. 31 of the Final Report.                          The views of the Associations are
relayed      to     forces          via       the     regional            representatives           on    the
Committee.         They       are    also           keen    to       maintain       the     dialogue;       a
further meeting is scheduled for Friday, 20th July, 1990.


Hand Signals


      This matter was suggested in the Interim Report but after
consultation with the Chairman of this Committee,                                           the proposal
was rejected because of its impracticability.

t
Police Reserve fRec.461


      The requirement for a police reserve immediately available
for   rapid       deployment             in    emergencies,               was     first    intimated       in
Recommendation            28        of        the     Interim             Report.         The     Committee
originally         considered            that       such        a    requirement          could    best    be
provided      by    an    "uncommitted                reserve"            on     stand-by       within    the
Ground.      This ha,d inherent implications for football clubs and
the   reimbursement, made                     for     the       police          presence    at     football
fixtures.


      During a meeting of the Committee                                    in February this year,
the   interpretation                of    Clause           46       was    reassessed       against       the
backcloth of the previous discussions with Lord Justice Taylor
and the contents of the Final Report.                                     It was resolved that the
interpretation           of    an    "uncommitted                   reserve"      was   too      inflexible
and   in   the      spirit      of        the       Report          it    was    concluded       that    this
provision of a reserve for public safety was best decided by the
Ground Commander in his operational planning for the fixture.


      This    suggestion was                   communicated               to the A.C.P.O.           General
Purposes Committee, for the information of all Chief Constables.
c   Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds fRec.74)
    (Green Guide!


         Consequent upon the recommendation of Lord Justice Taylor,
    the Home   Office are currently        revising the above guide.               The
    views of the A.C.P.O. have been sought via the Sub-Committee.


         All   Chief     Constables     have     been     circulated    and    their
    responses will be collated. A synopsis of those responses will
    be forwarded to the Home Office as soon as possible.


         The   Working   Party,   to    enquire    into    the   revision     of   the
    Guide, has been formed.       This Sub-Committee will be represented
^^by   Commander Tony SPEED,      Public Order Department,             Metropolitan
^   Police.




                                       Inspector




    18th June, 1990




                                         - 9 -
                                                    cc   Mr Chilcot
                                                         Mr Boys Smith
                                                         Mr Wasserman
                                                         Mr Turney
                                                         HMCIC


Mr Goddard
F8 Division



TAYLOR REPORTS POLICE ISSUES

Your note of 26 June asked for contributions to the briefing for
Lord Ferrers for his meeting with Mr Anderton. A 'line to take'
on radio communications is attached.

As the Taylor recommendation on radios was for the Home Office and
iias been met there is no need for me to attend the meeting -
although I would be happy to do so if required.




                                        M M
                                     f f J W CANE
                                        5 July 1990

F7 Division
Rec 55: There should always be a command channel reserved solely
for the Police Commander to communicate with his senior officers
round the ground.


LINE TO TAKE

Additional Channels

1.      The Home Office Radio Frequency and Communications Planning
        Unit made available on 1 January 1990 eight new channels for
        use at pre-planned events.

2.      The channels are not geographically assigned by the Home
        Office and must be co-ordinated by users to minimize
        interference between operations. They may be used for
        command purposes at football matches.

Noise

3.    At the request of ACPO  the Home Office Police Requirements
       Support Unit has set up a working party to improve the use of
       radios in a noisy environment.

4.    The    working party will consider

        a)   what equipment is available to attach      to existing radios

and   b)the development of special         equipment.
R.                                                     W<- tevc       Vstrfd
                                                                                   .




 46-6. JS
                                              C ik m d : ^ b * J & * ■


 From:          J L Goddard                                                    ■


                F8 Division                                       %
                Ext. 3314                                                      HMCIC

                26 June 1990




 Mr Addism
 Miss A Edwards
 Mrs Catto


      Cogbill
 Mr Bolton




 » X H M RERKP : H H C E T-COTTER


 Lord Ferrers indicated in April that he wished to have a meeting with Mr toderton
 so that he could receive a report on ACPO's progress in responding to the final
 Taylor report.      %   letter of 10 April canmissianed a progress report for this
 purpose,       I attach a copy of ACPO's written response and Mr Anderton's covering
 letter.


 2.      A meeting with lord Ferrers has now teen arranged to take place at 11.00 am
 cm 10 July.       The purposes of this minute are:-


         (i)    to ask for your contributions to the briefing for lord Ferrers' meeting;
         and


         (ii)    to ask whether you or someone else from your Division would wish to
         attend.    A full attendance from Divisions concerned might be necessary for
         any oral briefing Lord Ferrers might require.


 3.      As to (i), I suggest that you should provide a short line to take cm
 topic covering the likely adequacy of the ACPO response and its likely timing, if
 not already in place and the timing and content of any Hate Office response already
made car still outstanding. A short background note may also be needed.


4.    May I look to the lead Division identified below far contributions on the
following topics set out in the ACPO response


                 TOPIC                                                      LEAP DIVISION


1.    Offences and penalties.                                       My note of 22 June invited
                                                                    comments on, and
                                                                    contributions to, a draft
                                                                    submission. It may be that
                                                                    no further briefing is
                                                                    required far Lord Ferrers'
                                                                    meeting: if so, please let me
                                                                    know.

%     CCTV and public safety.                                                   G2

3.    Review of police charges.                                                F1

4.    Training of police officers/stewards.                                    F5

5.    Review of arrest procedures.                                             F2

6.    Written statements of intent.                                            F8
7.    Ground Commander Training.                                               F5

8.    All ticket matches.                                                      F8

9.    Football Supporters dub.                                               F8/G2

10.   Police Reserve.                                                          F8

11.   Green Guide.                                                              G2



and on the following topics not covered in ACPO's response but which arise from
Taylor's reccmnendations-




ITi   ffsmi—liuLilicnsj'   1   ...........nr,   ........ ........              ¥lm
13.   Co-ordination of the emergency services.                                 G2



If I have mis-allocated any of these responsibilities please let me and whoever is
correctly concerned know straight away.
5.   lord Ferrers' meeting with Mr Andertcn could, I suggest, be regarded as
overtaking the arrangement, signalled in Mr Boys Smith's letter of 16 February, for
officials to meet ACPO with a view to reporting later to Ministers on ACPO's
response to the final Taylor report.


6.   May I ask for your response to this note by 4 July.




                                   J L GODDARD
                                         C James Anderton CBE, QPM, DL
                                         Chief Constable

                                         Chief Constable's Office
                                         P 0 Box 22 (S.West PDO)
                                         Chester House
                                         Boyer Street
                                         Manchester M 16 ORE
                                         Telephone 061 872 5050




CC/MJPH/MCJ                                        20th June, 1990




               Lord Justice Tavlor's Final Report

In your letter of 10th April, 1990, you sought to arrange a
meeting between representatives of the Home Office and Lord
Ferrers with me as a representative of the ACPO, to consider the
progress by the Police Service in the implementation of the
recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report.

4 ^ a m pleased to accede to such a request. To assist you in your
 preparations, as you suggested, I have had a written account
 prepared of the ACPO response to the Final Report, which
 accompanies    this   letter.   By   necessity, the   account  is
 comprehensive, reflecting the depth and quality of consideration
 given by the Police Service to the Report's content.

The ACPO response to the proposed offences and penalties,
contained in Recommendations 70-73, has been addressed by the
Sub-Committee.   That response has been routed via the ACPO
General Purposes Committee.

The date of the proposed meeting can be arranged with my Staff
Officer, Superintendent Peter Madeley.




J.L. Goddard Esq.,
F.8 Division,
Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON.
SW1H 9AT




                           DRI^/VG THEDREAM
                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
                        CONSULTATION WITH THE A.C.P.O.


Offences and Penalties (Rees. 70-73)


       In correspondence,            dated 16th February,            1990, Mr.       Stephen
BOYS   SMITH,       sought    the     views    of     the    A.C.P.O.       regarding       the
enforceability and resource implications for the police in the
implementation of these offences. That copy correspondence was
circulated       to     all     forces,        England        and     Wales,       and      the
Superintendents Association,                 accompanied by a          letter from          the
Chairman of the Sub-Committee in which comment was invited upon
the proposals.


       The     resultant        correspondence              was     collated        by      the
Sub-Committee and a synopsis of those views was forwarded to Mr.
John EVANS, Secretary of the A.C.P.O. General Purposes Committee
for    further      attention        as    deemed     necessary.           That    composite
response      has     since    been       endorsed    and    forwarded       to    the    Home
Office on 14th June, 1990.


C.C.T.V. and Public Safety (Rees. 35-51)


       In May,      1989,     the Sub-Committee correctly anticipated the
recommendations of Lord Justice TAYLOR, when it identified the
need   to    review     the    use    of    closed     circuit       television,         paying
particular attention to the contribution which could be made to
public       safety.     A     Working        Party     was       formed,         under     the
Chairmanship        of Mr.     Malcolm GEORGE,          Assistant Chief            Constable
(Operations)        of the Greater Manchester Police and Secretary to
the    Sub-Committee.          The    Working        Party    took    as    its     terms    of
reference Recommendations 35 and 51.


       The membership of the Working Party comprised senior police
officers with considerable skill and experience in the command




                                             - 1 -
of policing football fixtures. They were assisted by scientific
technicians of the Police Scientific Development Branch.


       The Football Trust 1990, had agreed to provide funding, at
least in part, to meet the provisions of the Taylor Report, to a
maximum      of   some   £2m.    To   that   end    it    was    agreed    that      the
A.C.P.O.     Working     Party would     provide technical            advice    to   the
Football Trust to assist its members in their consideration of
all applications for such funding. An additional member of the
Working Party represented the Trust.


       During the period of its existence,                the Working Party has
met on a regular basis, visited football stadia and established
^^nimum standards of performance of C.C.T.V.                    That research has
since been completed and is encapsulated in a Technical Report.
This document forms a set of guidance notes for the procurement
of C.C.T.V. installations.


       The guidance proffered concerns technical matters so as to
help to ensure that the requirements made by the Advisory Group
for a proposed C.C.T.V. installation at football stadia is fully
analysed and clearly stated.            It covers the assessment of stadia
for risk, establishing the operational requirement, performance
of     the    C.C.T.V.     system,      tendering        for    and    selecting       a
contractor,       commissioning and hand over of the system and the
maintenance of the finished product.


       The    document     has   been    approved        by    the    Sub-Committee,
circulated to all forces, and commended to the A.C.P.O. General
Purposes Committee and A.C.P.O. Council for immediate adoption.
     Copies will be circulated to the Clerks of Police Authorities
for use by the Advisory Groups.              The Football Trust,               in their
own right as contributors, will receive copies of the document
and ensure it is forwarded to all League Clubs for guidance.




                                        - 2 -
Reviev of Police Charges (Rec. 53)


        The review of the system of charges was commenced early in
1989 but the tragic events of Hillsborough and the Inquiry by
Lord Justice Taylor which followed in its wake precluded further
consideration. Nevertheless,                     the Sub-Committee remained mindful
of criticism that had been raised by the press and some football
clubs over apparent disparity in the charging practices of some
forces.     Where         such disparities           had been highlighted,                it had
often    been       presented        in a    league table         format of per           capita
policing        costs         which       ignored        geographic      and      demographic
considerations between grounds and variations between fixtures.


        This Sub-Committee correctly anticipated the tenor of the
^inal Report of Lord Justice Taylor when, in November, 1989,                                     it
compiled     a       list      of     current       police     charging      practices          and
undertook       a    reassessment           of    same    with    a view     to    suggesting
national    guidelines              for    future    police      practices     and   charges.
This endeavour has been endorsed                         in the Final Report when                in
paragraph 210 it s t a t e s ......"At the present time, the practice
as to recovering costs of policing inside the grounds from clubs
varies    greatly         from place         to place,        different    formulae        being
used     .......         In   my    view    a more        consistent     and   businesslike
approach should be made to such charges."


        This statement was encapsulated in Recommendation 53 of the
Report     which         stated,      "Police       Authorities       should      review        the
charges they made to clubs for the cost of policing inside the
grounds    so as to ensure that realistic charges are made.                                     The
Home Office should take steps to ensure consistency of practice,
subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to local
cH T-mraistances."

        In its deliberations the Committee considered the need for
the Ground/Divisional Commander's discretion in the numbers and
deployment          of   police       officers      at    a   football    match      to    be    of




                                                  - 3 -
paramount importance.         It also acknowledge that each ground had
peculiarities      of   demography      and     geography          which      compounded
policing    problems    and    precluded      any    notion        of    a   recommended
ratio of the number of officers : the number of spectators.


     It did, however, concur with the need for a uniformity of
police practice to offset criticisms of disparity.


     Accordingly,       the    Committee      recommended          that       charges      be
levied for ALL police officers deployed inside the ground for
the full duration of the match, up to, but excluding, the Ground
Commander (who acts as representative of the Chief Constable).


     The Committee also recommended that consideration be given
to the formulation and adoption of two national hourly rates for
all federated ranks, one to be levied normally and an enhanced
rate to be levied on the occasion of a public holiday.                              This was
circulated to all Chief Constables on 20th February,                              1990 and
the proposals were commended for immediate adoption.


     A     comprehensive      account   of    the    reviewed       system has            been
forwarded to Mr.        ADDISON,     FI Division of the Home Office,                        in
correspondence dated 14th June, 1990.


Training of Police Officer/Stewards (Rec.161
Review of Arrest Procedures fRec.48)


     The     two   aspects    of    research,       listed    above,         were    readily
identified     from     the   Final     Report.       At     its        meeting      on    5th
February,     1990, the Committee considered these matters in more
detail.

     In      paragraphs       210     and     211     of      the        Final       Report,
consideration is given to the replacement of Police Officers by
Stewards,     for the performance of certain functions at football
fixtures.      These     functions      allude        to     the        responsibilities




                                        - 4 -
identified        in paragraph         195 of     the Green Guide           to    Safety   at
Sports Grounds.       Moreover the Judge acknowledged the assistance
given by the police in the training of stewards in matters of
crowd control and management.


     It was also identified in paragraph 261,                            that the use of
ejection      from   a ground          rather    than     arrest    for    a     substantive
offence was based on apparent grounds of expediency.                                If that
observation was accurate,               it was recommended that consideration
be given to streamlining arrest procedures to encourage the use
of same without diverting the arresting officer from his post
for other than a minimum amount of time.


^    The Committee considered that both these matters warranted
speedy development          and commended them to the Forward Planning
Unit for assessment.             The response is awaited.


Written Statements of Intent (Rec. 11)


        Originally termed "Written Agreements” in Recommendation 4
of the       Interim Report by           Lord Justice Taylor,              the matter       of
Written      Statements     of    Intent        had generated much             dialogue    and
correspondence        between          forces,      the    Home         Office    and     this
Committee.


        In   an    effort   to     resolve        confusion        on    this     and    other
matters,       the   Chairman          met   with       Lord   Justice         Taylor.     The
discussion proved to be most informative. The clear intention of
the Judge emerged, simply that the football clubs and the police
should be aware of their individual responsibilities to avoid
areas of duplicity and to ensure that there were no omissions of
responsibility.        The Judge absorbed the detail and the resultant
Final     Recommendation          11    clearly      resolved      the      confusion,      as
evinced in the Final Report.




                                             - 5 -
      At     the        instigation            of         Lord      Justice      Taylor,        the
Sub-Committee undertook further areas of research and passed on
the detail he required.                  There were three areas of research:


      1.     The effect of the removal or partial removal
             of fencing at football clubs where this had
             occurred after the tragedy.


      2.     Detail          of     full        and       partial      membership
             schemes at football league clubs.


      3.     The use of attendance centres for offenders
             excluded             from       visiting        football        grounds
             under        Part          11    of      the     (then)         Football
             Spectators Bill.


      That    research            was    duly       completed       and    forwarded     to     Lord
Justice Taylor.


Ground Commander Training (Rec.52)


      The    Committee            noted      the    suggestion        in paragraph        215    and
Recommendation          52    of    the      Final        Report,     that    consideration       be
given to the provision of a specific Ground Commander's Training
Course and commended the merits of the proposal.


      Liaison had been maintained with David Graham,                                 Chairman of
the A.C.P.O.       Personnel             and Training Committee,                to ensure that
any   aspects      of    the       Final      Report        which     bore    implications       for
future training needs, were dealt with.


      As a result of that close liaison, a Working Party has been
convened      in    which          both       Committees         were        represented.        The
Chairman      is     Mr.          J.F.       CULLEY,        Assistant        Chief      constable,
Nottinghamshire           and       this       Committee         is       represented     by     the
Secretary Malcolm GEORGE.




                                                      6
      A number of forces have prepared or are in the process of
preparing training courses and due cognizance will be taken of
the   merits      of    each.        Early      indications           favour       a    three-phase
approach of pre-reading of material by students, followed by the
course itself and finishing with hands-on experience in the home
force. It has yet to be decided whether the courses will be held
regionally,          centrally       or    at     two    or    more     designated            regional
centres;       the    content      and duration           of the        course         is    currently
being assessed.


All Ticket Matches (Rees. 40 & 47)

      Once      again,        this        Committee,          correctly          anticipated         the
^^commendation of the Final Report. On 22nd September,                                       1989, the
Chairman wrote to all Chief Constables,                           England and Wales,                 and
highlighted problems identified with all-ticket fixtures.


        It was stressed that not only must ground capacities not be
exceeded       but     in    the   case      of    all    ticket        matches,            any   excess
number of fans without tickets much not be accommodated even if
there     is    space        in    the      stadium       to     do     so.        Moreover,         the
nationwide support for some of the largest clubs suggested that
in the absence of compelling reasons, viz. no ticket - no entry,
people     will       continue       to     arrive       without        bothering           to    obtain
tickets before hand.               The Ground Commanders were encouraged,                             in
their liaison with the football clubs, to seek that they refrain
from selling tickets on the day.


Football Supporters Club (Rec.31)


        At its meeting in May,                  1989, the Sub-Committee resolved to
meet with representatives of the National Federation of Football
Supporters           Clubs    following         their         request       to    meet        with   the
A.C.P.O.         The     Committee          also    initiated           a   meeting           with   the
Football Supporters Association.




                                                  - 7 -
      Though       Lord        Justice Taylor             did not specifically                   advocate
such liaison between the A.C.P.O.                             and the Supporters Clubs, the
desirability of regular contact is implicit in paragraph 152 and
rec. 31 of the Final Report.                        The views of the Associations are
relayed    to       forces       via        the     regional            representatives           on    the
Committee.         They    are       also         keen    to       maintain       the     dialogue;       a
further meeting is scheduled for Friday, 20th July, 1990.


Hand Signals


      This matter was suggested in the Interim Report but after
consultation with the Chairman of this Committee,                                         the proposal
was rejected because of its impracticability.


Police Reserve ( Rec.46)


      The requirement for a police reserve immediately available
for   rapid      deployment            in    emergencies,               was     first    intimated       in
Recommendation            28      of        the     Interim             Report.         The     Committee
originally         considered          that        such       a    requirement          could    best    be
provided      by    an     "uncommitted             reserve"            on     stand-by       within    the
Ground.      This had inherent implications for football clubs and
the   reimbursement             made        for     the       police          presence    at     football
f ixtures.


      During a meeting of the Committee                                  in February this year,
the   interpretation              of    Clause           46       was    reassessed       against       the
backcloth of the previous discussions with Lord Justice Taylor
and the contents of the Final Report.                                   It was resolved that the
interpretation            of    an     "uncommitted               reserve"      was     too    inflexible
and   in   the      spirit       of     the       Report          it    was    concluded        that    this
provision of a reserve for public safety was best decided by the
Ground Commander in his operational planning for the fixture.


      This      suggestion was               communicated               to the A.C.P.O.           General
Purposes Committee, for the information of all Chief Constables.
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds ( Rec.74)
(Green Guide)


     Consequent upon the recommendation of Lord Justice Taylor,
the Home   Office    are   currently   revising the above          guide.      The
views of the A.C.P.O. have been sought via the Sub-Committee.


     All   Chief     Constables     have   been       circulated    and     their
responses will be collated. A synopsis of those responses will
be forwarded to the Home Office as soon as possible.


     The   Working   Party,   to    enquire    into    the   revision     of   the
Guide, has been formed.       This Sub-Committee will be represented
   Commander Tony SPEED,       Public Order Department,            Metropolitan
Police.




                                   Inspector




18th June, 1990
