HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - CALLS FOR A FRESH INQUIRY O N THE
10™ ANNIVERSARY

Accusation

T he bereaved fam ilie s are still fighting for justice 1 0 years after the disaster. The
G overnm ent should order a fresh public inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

Facts

T he tenth anniversary o f the disaster in which 96 people died is being marked on 15
April with a service at Anfield, Liverpool FC’s ground and the place where many fans
laid tributes in the afterm ath o f the disaster.

T he Hillsborough Family Support G roup is pursuing a private prosecution against
form er Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and form er Superintendent Murray, the m ost
senior officers in charge at Hillsborough on the day o f the disaster.

T he fam ilie s continue to call for a new public inquiry into the disaster and for the original
inquest verdicts o f accidental death to be quashed. There has also been controversy
about the appointm ent o f N orm an Bettison, an officer in South Yorkshire Police at the
time o f Hillsborough, as Chief Constable o f Merseyside. Mr Bettison was n ot on duty at
Hillsborough and neither the Taylor Inquiry nor Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny
made any criticism o f him.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked by the H om e Secretary to carry out a scrutiny to
determine w hether there was significant new evidence n ot available to the original public
inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor into the disaster and the later inquests. His report,
published in February 1998, considered all the material allegations about missing or
concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness
statements and concerns about the use o f the 3.15pm cut-off time at the Inquest. His
conclusion was that the evidence submitted to him did n o t add anything significant to
the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor inquiry and the inquests.

Lines to take

U nderstand the abiding pain felt by those w ho lost loved ones as they mark the 10th
anniversary o f the Hillsborough disaster.

T he original Taylor Inquiry into the disaster was very thorough and was unequivocal in
identifying the main cause o f the disaster as a failure o f police control.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a thorough scrutiny at the H om e Secretary’s request
to determine w hether there was any significant new evidence n o t available to the original
inquiry and inquests. The conclusion, which the H om e Secretary accepted, was that there
were no grounds for a further inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered all the material evidence, including the alteration o f
statements and allegations about missing or concealed videotape evidence.




;:ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#90215#l
