                                             <rc \ Xw fe&Urvw,  *     «»

                                             HOME OFFICE
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                               Direct line: 01- 273^ ^
                                            Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:
                  AC/AC                     11 April 1990
Your reference:

    Alan Coppin Esg
    Managing Director
    Wembley Stadium Limited
    Empire Way
    Wembley
    HA9 ODW




    Thank you for your letter of 5 April, which I will show to Lord
    Justice Taylor. I am not sure, however, that he will be able to
    become personally involved. I am sending copies of the
    correspondence to Mr Bolton, in G2 Division in the Home Office, so
    that he can be aware of your concern.


                                                     JUxCfUl^


                                                  HlKVvUUu
                                            R M WHALLEY
1                         WEMBLEY
                          STADIUM LIMITED
EMPIRE WAY. WEMBLEY HA9 ODW
FAX NOs: THE STADIUM 01-900 1055 CONFERENCE CENTRE 01-903 3234 PERSONAL FAX N O :.




                    AC/AC


                     5 April 1990


                    The Lord Chief Justice Taylor
                    c/o Mr Bob Whalley
                    Room 112
                    Home Office
                    50 Queen Anne's Gate
                    London     SW1H 9AT


                     My Lord

                     I am writing to you following the publication of your final report to seek your
                     advice on the implementation of one particular recommendation which is the
                     subject of a difference of interpretation between Wembley and the local
                     authority. Let me give you the background.

                     At Wembley we have excellent links with the statutory authorities. These
                     links are of a formal and informal nature.

                     We consider we have an extremely important role to play in an individual but
                     also in a team sense along with the statutory authorities to ensure the
                     stadium is operated safely.

                     W e very much want the stadium team to be included on all relevant safety
                     committees. Not only do we feel this to be eminently sensible but, indeed,
                     that if we are not included it could lead to a dangerous situation arising.

                     The reasons we hold this view are two fold;

                                   If the stadium is excluded from the main relevant safety committee the
                                   excellent relationships we have worked hard to build up over the
                                   years may be prejudiced. In our view a them and us attitude is likely
                                   to develop which we consider would be counter productive to
                                   effective communication.

                                   The knowledge we have of our operation which unlike the statutory
                                   authorities is the only activity of concern to us is, clearly, far greater
                                   than any outside party. To discuss matters affecting the stadium
                                   without our detailed input is likely to lead, quite simply, to bad
                                   decisions.


TEL: 01-902 8833 (Admin.)
      : 01-900 1234 (Box Office)
            8811735
W em bley S tadiu m Lim ited (Registered in E n g la n d No. 223957) Registered Office: T h e W embley S tad ium HA9 ODW
W EMBLEY
VENUE OF LEG END S




    Lord Chief Justice Taylor ..../2                             5 April 1990



    There is one further point and that is Wembley is a multi purpose stadium
    and therefore the range and frequency of events are completely different
    from those staged at most football clubs as are the management systems we
    have developed. The knowledge and experience that our full time staff can
    bring on safety issues is all the more pertinent, particularly when we deal
    inevitably with changing faces at the statutory authorities whose main
    experience may be just league soccer.

    Recently, following publication of your report the local authority have
    informed us that Wembley will not be included on what is, effectively, a
    Safety Committee comprised of the statutory authorities to discuss safety at
    sports grounds in Brent. Since Wembley is the only significant such facility
    in the Borough it stands to reason that it will feature prominently on the
    agenda. We have for some time now argued that Wembley should be
    invited to attend these meetings or at least the part that Wembley is
    discussed. For reasons which are still unclear to me we have been turned
    down.

    Last week I raised the subjject again at a meeting with the local authority and
    the police. This time the local authority sited your report as the main reason
    for not including Wemble^ and said it would be foolish to go against your
    recommendations.

    I am writing to you now to ask you to consider the points I have made in this
    letter and advise me whether you consider Wembley should be excluded
    from relevant safety meeti rigs attended by the statutory agencies.

    I would, of course, respecft your decision but in the event of it not according
    with my view, would app rjeciate an explanation as to why Wembley should
    not be included in such vi al meetings.

    I look forward to hearing fi|om you

    Yours sincerely




    Alan Coppin
    Managing Director
