From:       R P Rhodes                 cc     Mr Boys Smith (o/r)
            F8 Division                       Mr Moorey
            Ext 2367                          Mrs Evans
            30 July 1990                      Mr Cogbill
                                              Mrs Lee
                                              Mr Goddard (o/r)



Mr Jones


TAYLOR OFFENCES

1.    You asked for notes today on the advantages and
     dvantages of the Taylor offences being enacted through
     ate Members' Bills.


2.   My first general observation is that I would have thought
that the Government would wish to take credit for implementing
the Taylor proposals.      This is less easy if Government
legislation cannot be introduced in session 1990/91 but that
need not prevent it making a commitment to legislate when
Parliamentary time allows.     None of the proposed offences is
so serious that immediate action is absolutely essential.           But
it is desirable from a Government point of view to show an
early and positive response to Taylor.


3.   The proposed offences break down into two lots.         The
first comprises the ticket touting offence which would make it
an offence to sell a ticket on the day of a match without the
authority of the home club to do so.        This proposal could be
taken on its own but it seems inevitable that in Parliament
there would be attempts to extend it to other events on the
grounds that touting generally is unethical.        The offence is
only acceptable to the Government if it applies to football
alone; the justification for the legislation is that outlawing
the activity at football matches will reduce the potential for
disorder.


4.    The second lot comprises three offences.       These are
missile throwing, chanting obscene or racialist abuse, and
invading the pitch without good reason.     These would I think
all need to be taken together.     Their proposed effect is to
reduce the potential for disorder inside grounds and it would
be curious to take on one and not the other two when the
purpose of each is the same.     The offence of chanting obscene
or racialist abuse at a football ground is very likely to be
seen by some as an opportunity for creating an offence to
apply to such chanting anywhere; and there    could be some
resistance to outlawing the practice of running onto thepitch
because the offence will undoubtedly catch    harmless as well    as
harmful examples of this activity.


     The offences may not be as immediately acceptable to
Parliament in their proposed form as they initially seem and
thus make themselves less suitable candidates for private
Members Bills.



                                            R. P. RHODES


                                          R P RHODES
