                               INTRODUCTION



The enclosed papers give an account of how a number of casualties, including
Philip Hammond, came to be treated at the Northern General Hospital.

This response is prompted by an article from Doctor Ed Walker in recent
publications, including the Liverpool Echo, a local newspaper published in that city.

The articles purport to establish that Doctor W alker has new evidence to shed light
on the time of death for a number of casualties, in particular Philip Hammond.

It must be said at the outset that Doctor Walker's evidence is not new. The article
published on Thursday 27 February in the Liverpool Echo quotes, "But he
(Doctor Walker) confirmed he has never been interviewed by the police." Enclosed
in this bundle of papers is a statement from Doctor Walker dated 20 July 1989 taken
by officers from the West Midlands Police. There is also a copy of an action
schedule warning Doctor W alker that he may be called to attend the inquest. In fact
Doctor Walker was approached on at least two occasions by the police following the
disaster.

There are other inconsistencies in the newspaper articles compared to his statement
given to the police in 1989 but that is quite understandable. Eight years later it is
not always possible to recall accurately events that took place, particularly in the
traumatic circumstances in which Doctor W alker found himself.

What his statement does confirm, however, are the findings of the doctors and the
Home Office pathologists giving evidence at the inquest into the tragedy.
Professor Usher, Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpert gave evidence to the effect that
all the casualties who died were dead before the 3.15 pm cut off time. In his
statement concerning treatment to Philip Hammond, Doctor W alker says that, "His
pupils were fixed and dilated throughout."

In addition, Mr Wardrope, Doctor Walker's supervisor, when giving evidence at the
inquest and in his statement, said, "No patient admitted in a state of cardiac arrest
survived."

In conclusion therefore, it is safe to say there is nothing new in what Doctor Walker
is now saying, although it does support the evidence given by Professor Usher,
Doctor Gumpert and Doctor Slater. That evidence led Doctor Popper, the coroner,
to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to call a clearly defined
cut off time.
