6    N O 1'     ’ 97   16:56        F P OM   S   YORKS   JOINT   SEC
                                                                                                          PAGE.00




    South YorkiM m Joint Secretariat
    P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
                South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
    Fax: B»m»ley (01228) 772899
    Vf.J. WHkJnwon, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk end Tmesuror
                                                                                         S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
    Our rtf:    lEG/POL/HIUS/FBA/SB
                                                                                                          P O L IC E
                                                                                                    A U T H O R IT Y
    Your ref:


    Date:      25 November 1997

    7Tir»~*«ner»»being dealt with by      Mr F B Alderman              Direct Line:   01226 772853




    Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

    RE:         HILLSBO RO UG H DISASTER

    I write with reference to your letter dated 23 October and th e ; ubsequent telephone
    conversation with Mr Bone.

    May I first apologise for the delay in providing you with the info rmation requested. This
    has been due to the need to consult with the Authority’s publi<p liability insurers at the time
    of the disaster

    I would advise you that in December of 1989 an agreement wa s entered into between the
    Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police and the Hillsboroui) h Steering Committee which
    provided for the payment of compensation by South Yorkshire Police to the claimants co-
    ordinated by the Committee. A copy of this agreement which is in the form of a letter from
    the solicitors representing the Chief Constable and the Autho ity’s insurers is enclosed,
    As will be seen, the agreement was entered into without adm ssion of liability and it is my
    understanding that liability has never been formally admitted >y South Yorkshire Police. In
    that the offer was extended to all claimants irrespective of whjs n the claims were notified
    (subject of course to the Statute of Limitations) it has never   come necessary for the
    courts to determine liability.




                                                                                                         /cont’d




    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    The Hillsborough Scrutiny
    Room 1106
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    LONDON S W 1 H 9 A T
6 ’NOU       ’ 97   16:57   F ROM   S   YORKS   JOINT   SEC                           PAGE.003




 -   2   -




 Contribution Proceedings were pursued against Sheffield W ed lesday Football Club and
 Messrs Eastwood and Partners, two of the four Defendants na Tied in the action brought
 by Mrs Rimmer, referred to in the agreement, and these were compromised during the
 course of the hearing on the Football Club and Messrs Ea&two:ads’ collectively agreeing to
 make a payment of £3 million to relieve them of any liabilities a irising from the disaster.
 With regard to the other Defendant named in the action, Sheffield City Council,
 contribution proceedings were not pursued against them in view of the fact that they were
 insured by the same company insuring the Chief Constable. Ir i the event a contribution of
 £1 million was made by Sheffield City Council to reflect their ai sumed liability. It was
    'Bed between the parties that the terms of settlement in rela tion to the contribution
 p.oceedings would remain confidential to the parties and would not be m ade public. In the
 circumstances I would ask that you respect that confidentiality.

 The majority of the claims falling within the scope of the agree ment between the Chief
 Constable and the Committee were settled by negotiations anil without recourse to
 proceedings. Those claims that were litigated were proceedec as separate actions and I
 enclose a sample of a fatal accident claim and a personal inju iy claim.

 Of the 95 fatalities, 37 claims were intimated which included Ic ss of dependency, O f
 these 36 have been settled. 53 of the fatal claims were restri cjted to damages for
 bereavement and/or funeral expenses. O f these 50 have beeji settled. In the remaining 3
 claims offers have been made but have not been accepted, Iri 5 cases claims have never
 been pursued.

 A total of 1,473 claims for personal injury were intimated. All claims included a psychiatric
 element. The vast majority were claims for psychological rath ?r than physical injury. O f
 these 1,035 have been settled and 19 remain outstanding. T Ne remaining 4 1 9 have been
 closed with a nil payment because of the claimants ineligibility or in some cases because,
 having intimated a claim, the claim was not then pursued.

 I trust that this information is sufficient for your purposes and <|>nce again please accept my
 apologies for the delay in letting you have this.

 Yours sincerely




 F B Alderman
 Legal Services

 Enc




 W P039227
          Z_S NOU            -37    16:58      f
 X    J L r v i T ju T iv x a         S Z ,             s ° f b /s   Jo i h t   se
                                                                                                                     P   h


                              s o l i c i t o r s

* > M t« C 7TK )U £r               frwcirw            AC HUO Sim S   C0MKA.T4JCTX:                p w a womt
OtTCvCMlM .                        o « « n m *w jo ts D%T3W* VMTTAOC *C G £R ftSLO O VC Sc        w weauxrr
M C vtfa.t«ob »                    #c*ewK x fo tn     j wu*cxwno«i   SROChOOHCA/’                 •wwwosmx*
g atiaD ei***                      s m x r s srai.    OWWWftS        W W W %MTXX
MO«aiMMO                           SfcCN* t*UN        U&HB.1 KN-Tf                                mx*HO»« fosr^ 7x»»
rr>9 M.                            now^o * wAce s^rx *O S M O O J.                                T£L£X S1720J
4 » « C H i# C « C H &             j o n a ttcxfTT         W.WUNO ■
iMM«mWmKKZ                         a N l*M G^ED**eLD  WUJJM* K 00"*$                              O X H 5. w j o
c mob. mutton. ■                   5T0»t®<<WJE        UXODWAOC                                    MJt        rs«4?
x M ^ K a m iiR                                       MCjnewKM^ouMi
Vt**SKJm»bA1M                      lOWD&CWWCE

QWICF.                                                                               cwi     35th Deceober, 1989


 •■ • ■■                                    V--- ~ ^   i.V •                                   iVr^X:'to             ..


                                           Hillsborough
            ChnpMin and R i m e r -v- Chief Conatable of South Yorkshire and Others

 Wo ara MTl.tlng on behalf of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and his
 insurer*;-

 It has bsen decided that, whatever the rights and wrongs of the Hillsborough
 s-Cndiua disaster, it is inappropriate for persons who vere Injured at the
 ground to be kept waiting for coapensation. Accordingly, vjlLthout a decision
 as to liability and subject to the ter*s below, all bona fi de claias for
 ccmpeoaatloo by those injured and tlft dependants of those wao died at the
 ground will be paid on a co— oo law bttais to be agreed if possible or, falling
 acrvcsieatV to be as&e&sed by the Court.
                 .
                 •
                     .   /                                                      *
 Coorpenaation will be paid for nervous shock cases, if they would be entitled
  to da*agtr» by lew. Our client® would include in this catejory. without
  further ado, the cases which fall into categories 1-4 and 35 put forward by
 yourselves, listed in Appendix ’A ’ to this letter. In all other categories
 cases will be defended on the basis of re»oteness, proof oJ‘ injury and quantua
'-^nly.

 This off«r applies to the deceased and those injured in, or escaping froa.
 pesa 3 a n d ‘4 at the ground. Our clients will also give cof:sideration to the
 eases of persons injured elsewhere within the precincts of Hillsborough
 stiadlua on receipt of details.

 The Chief Constable will pursue action against the other Dfe sfendants to the
 ■test actions, with a view to recovering suras expended purs j&nt to this offer.




                                                                                                      /,..contd
 Hillsborough Steering. Committee
     j.' & *hnil ' 97           6: 58
         ■•      <                             F ROM   s   YORKS   JOINT   SEC
                                                                                                page.   00S
    ■<’ .     ’ 'iO N D S U D D A R P S




      Our client* are willing to proceed upon the basis of an acceptance of this
      offer by the Hillsborough Steering Conalttee. The offei is made to all
      claimant* currently co-ordinated by the Comlttee* It will be the intention
      of our client* to aafce the saae offer to aay claimants i»t currently
      represented by the Cotalttee and also to claimants who liave not yet coae
      forward, but who do so within twelve tenths froa the d a * of this letter. Our
      clients would not rule out waking the aa»e offer to claimants coaing forward
      after the expiry of that deadline, but would cot, at this stage, wish to give
      an Indefinite conaltacnt for the future.

     'Any.unreaolved questions as to the scans of putting thik offer into effect
      * 11 b e .decided by application to the              .Uhfier;-tep* l, If jurisdiction is.
      r*j\uied because d o action bat been c o o w i c e ^ i n a p a r t i c u l a r case then the
      dlsrpute shall be resolved by action


      Terms

                      These actions will by consent, be stayed until further
                                                                     furl    Order, with
                      liberty to apply for the purpose of putting the teras of this offer
                      into effect.

      2.              Vi thin six aonths of the acceptance of this proposal:

                       (a)      Each claimant shall, through hie Solicitors, put forward a
                                statement of the factual basis of his cla a, including the best
                                particulars he can give a« to the following:

                                7ioe of arrival at ground.

                                Whereabouts when injured/deceased.

                                Cause of injury.

                                Nature of injury.

                                Confirmation whether Aaended Statement of Cl&ia in Chapaan (Pen 3)
                                or Riaaer (Pen 4) adopted as statement ©1 claimant's case.

              *J-V Our-clients accept that the ’’best particulars'] in this connection may
.                  be;very: limitedin cases-of bereavement and irdeed in so*e cases of
                    injury.

                     .(b).-.. Bach claimant shall put forward aedical evidence of injury and a
                                       of            supporting documents.
       'iV*          "*!•   y           I.''—-’■
                                In cases of continuing symptoms it will >« sufficient if an
                                initial report briefly describing the na ture of the injury is put
..T_j It'.*    «_V
                             '.r;Conrard .within, the: ti»e_- indicated




                                                                                       / . ,.contd,
 *i 6       NQU^’ 97    16:59        FROM   S YORKS   JOINT   SEC
                                                                                     PAGE.006
t'      •              _: L T >D A R D S                                        •■•ocNO 3




                                                      m* •             •
                Each claimant shall co— operats with any reaoonab e request by the
                First Defendant to provide further aedical or otl er evidence.

                Each claimant will agree (subject to payment of ixpcnees and costa) to
                respond to any reasonable request for further Information from the
                first Defendant in connection with bis pz^oposed ction agalnat the
                other Defendants to ths teat actions*

     5.         The reasonable costs of each claimant -rill b e pa d by the first
                Defendant.

     6.         Upon settlement of hia dale, u c h cJxlaaht'vill assign to the first
                Defendant all hla causes of action against *ach if the other Defendants
                to the teat actions H a l t e d to those arising out of the Injuries in
                respect of vhlch cowpensatioo is paid

     In cases wbere agreement cannot cannot t*'rmacsS^'on q u m t w Vrits will be
     issued pursuant to the terms of this letter *rxj'the First Defendant will agree
     to trial without pleadings pursuant to order lfi'rule 2l| subject to provision
     by the Plaintiff of details of injury end financial lot
                                                                    y» •
     We are happy for a copy of this letter to be produced t^ the court.

     Your* faithfully,                                          v-'\


                                                                •\w;-
                                                              • jv’<
                                                               *7




     We accept the offer on behalf of the Hillsborough Steering Committee.
   :s H O "    97   16:5
                      ■5 3   FROM   s   YORKS   JOINT   SET
                                         APPgNP-U. A                              PAGE.007

              CATEGORIES OF HERVOUS SHOCK CLAIXAMTS : WO»OTENES$ OF DAXACE

1.     The Clainant was in pen 3 or 4 «nd suffered physica       injury and
nervous shock.

2.     The Claimant was in pen 3 or 4 and suffered no phys     cal injury but
suffered nervous shock.

3.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and |»ay;>'ai spouse or
child injured or killed.

4.     The Claimant vas in another part of the ground, and knowing or believing
a spouse or child to be in pen 3 or 4, later found them ir jured or dead.

5.       The Claimant vas in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
a r e J'Mve vas in pen 3 or 4, or could be in those pens, bu t later found them
not1     have been physically injured or.   have suffered n (irvoUs shock.

6.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
friend vas in pen 3 or 4 and later found that they had befen killed or injured,

"’7.     The Claimant vas in another part of the ground anc knew or believed a
  friend vas in pens 3 or 4, or could be in those pens, and later found that
  they had not been killed or injured.

S.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and no relative or
friend in or believed to be in pen 3 or 4.

9.     The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the e\ ents live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believe?i a relative vas in
pen 3 or 4 at the Leppings Lane end and same was injured or killed.

10.    The Claimant was at the stadium but saw the event:; live on television
and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in pen 3 or a or
at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or kil ed.

 11.    The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the e ^ents live on
 television and/or described on radio and knew or believ ed a friend was in pen
 3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane end and same was injured or killed.

 12.    The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the «vents live on
 television and/or described on radio and knew or believ dd a friend was in pen
 3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane end and same was not inj ired or killed.

 13.    The Claimant saw recorded footage of the disaster and knew or believed
 a relative was at the match and knew that person would ipe at Leppings Lane and
 later found him/her to have been injured or killed.

 14.    The Claimant was not at stadium but saw the eve:nits live on television
 and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relat:. /e was in pen 3 or 4 or
 at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or ki Lied.

 15.     Persons involved in rescue attempts who were not originally in pens 3
 or 4.                 .-.j?'.

 16-    Attending to identify the body or to enquire in Sheffield as to
 whereabouts of victims.

 17.      Other:
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street.                                                         A       t
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk a nd Treasurer

                                                                          S O U TH Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref:     LEG/POL/HILLS/FBA/SB
                                                                                          P O L IC E
                                                                                    A U T H O R IT Y
Your ref:


Date:      25 November 1997


This matter is being dealt with by:   Mr F B Alderman   Direct Line:   01226 772853




Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

RE:          HILLSBO RO UG H DISASTER

I write with reference to your letter dated 23 October and the subsequent telephone
conversation with Mr Bone.

May I first apologise for the delay in providing you with the information requested. This
has been due to the need to consult with the Authority's public liability insurers at the time
of the disaster and my absence from work following a serious illness.

I would advise you that in December of 1989 an agreement was entered into between the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police and the Hillsborough Steering Committee which
provided for the payment of compensation by South Yorkshire Police to the claimants co­
ordinated by the Committee. A copy of this agreement which is in the form of a letter from
the solicitors representing the Chief Constable and the Authority’s insurers is enclosed.
As will be seen, the agreement was entered into without admission of liability and it is my
understanding that liability has never been formally admitted by South Yorkshire Police. In
that the offer was extended to all claimants irrespective of when the claims were notified
(subject of course to the Statute of Limitations) it has never become necessary for the
courts to determine liability.




                                                                                         /cont’d




Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON S W 1 H 9 A T
Contribution Proceedings were pursued against Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
Messrs Eastwood and Partners, two of the four Defendants named in the action brought
by Mrs Rimmer, referred to in the agreement, and these were compromised during the
course of the hearing on the Football Club and Messrs Eastwoods’ collectively agreeing to
make a payment of £3 million to relieve them of any liabilities arising from the disaster.
With regard to the other Defendant named in the action, Sheffield City Council,
contribution proceedings were not pursued against them in view of the fact that they were
insured by the same company insuring the Chief Constable. In the event a contribution of
£1 million was made by Sheffield City Council to reflect their assumed liability. It was
agreed between the parties that the terms of settlement in relation to the contribution
proceedings would remain confidential to the parties and would not be made public. In the
circumstances I would ask that you respect that confidentiality.

The majority of the claims falling within the scope of the agreement between the Chief
Constable and the Committee were settled by negotiations and without recourse to
proceedings. Those claims that were litigated were proceeded as separate actions and I
3nclose a sample of a fatal accident claim and a personal injury claim.

Of the 95 fatalities, 37 claims were intimated which included loss of dependency. Of
these 36 have been settled. 53 of the fatal claims were restricted to damages for
bereavement and/or funeral expenses. O f these 50 have been settled. In the remaining 3
claims offers have been made but have not been accepted. In 5 cases claims have never
been pursued.

A total of 1,473 claims for personal injury were intimated. All claims included a psychiatric
element. The vast majority were claims for psychological rather than physical injury. Of
these 1,035 have been settled and 19 remain outstanding. The remaining 419 have been
closed with a nil payment because of the claimants ineligibility or in some cases because,
having intimated a claim, the claim was not then pursued.

I trust that this information is sufficient for your purposes and once again please accept my
apologies for the delay in letting you have this.

Yours sincerely




F B Alderman
Legal Services

Enc




W P039227
