From: M J Addison                            oc   Mr Walters
      FI Division                                 Mr Yates %
      Extn 3743                                   Mr Chilcot
      13 June 1989                                HMCIC
                                                  Mr Woodcock
                                                  Mr Brownlow
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Malone-Lee
                                                  Miss Edwards
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Sandiford
                                                  Mr Whalley
                                                  Mr Archer
                                                  Ms Ransford
                                                  Mr Durbin-"'"


Ms Adams

HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
You asked for advice on the letter of 7 June to Lord Ferrers from
Councillor Ablett, the Chairman of the West Midlands Police
Authority.

2.   Mr Nagler's submission of 8 June to the Home Secretary
recommends that the costs of the Hillsborough investigation should
fall initially to South Yorkshire Police and that South Yorkshire
should be offered a special payment, to help meet the costs,
following the formula used in the miners' strike. The submission
recommended that the Home Secretary should write to the Chief
Secretary, seeking approval for this course, and seeking a response
before the date of Lord Ferrers meeting with the South Yorkshire
Police Authority on 20 June.

3.   Councillor Ablett's letter refers to the issues which West
Midlands raised at the meeting not being resolved and encloses a
letter which I had sent to Mr Barnfield, the Solicitor to the West
Midlands Police Authority.   A copy of Mr Barnfield's response to
that letter is at Annex A and my reply is at Annex B.

4.   Briefly, the correspondence from Mr Bamfield turns on the
questions, which were also raised at the meeting between West
Midlands and Lord Ferrers, of whether West Midlands would be acting
ultra vires in meeting the costs initially, who is to reimburse
them if they do (given that South Yorkshire are at present refusing
to do so), and who initiated the investigation.

5.   Mr Barnfield adds that if the Home Office refuses to pay West
Midlands directly then the Police Authority will seek a writ
against the Department.

6.   My reply to Mr Barnfield explains why our legal adviser is of
the view that West Midlands are not acting ultra vires in meeting
their obligation to meet the bills which they have incurred and
also explaining why we are of the view that South Yorkshire clearly
instigated the investigation and are liable to meet the costs.

7.   I suggest that the reply to Councillor Ablett's letter should
be fairly brief, should reaffirm that we accept that the additional
costs should not fall on West Midlands and say that we hope that
the issue of how West Midlands are to be reimbursed can be resolved
when Lord Ferrers meets representatives from the South Yorkshire
Police Authority on 20 June.     I attach a draft letter for Lord
Ferrers' consideration.


                                             A \ . “7 * •-


                                            M J ADDISON
                                                                  FILE NUMBER

DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE

 TO                                       ENCLOSURES                  COPIES TO BE SENT TO

 Councillor D M Ablett
 Chairman to the West
  Midlands Police Author1 -y
 Council House
 Dudley
 DY1 1HF




       (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                                    (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                       LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY -x -S ffT T S rr e r s .........................
                                                                 (NAME OF SIGNATORY)


                       Thank you for your letter of 7 June about the cost of the
                       investigation   by the West    Midlands police into the
                       Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy which we discussed at our
                       meeting on 25 May.

                       I fully appreciate the position of your police authority
                       and can reaffirm that, as I said at our recent meeting,
                       we  fully accept that the costs         of the police
                       investigation should not fall to your police authority.
                       I also explained that we shall shortly be meeting
                       representatives of South Yorkshire Police Authority, at
                       the request of whose Chief Constable the investigation
                       was instigated, in order to discuss how the costs should
                       be met.

                       As you know, Mr Addison has been in correspondence with
                       Mr Barnfield, thesolicitor to your authority, about the
                        issues which           you    raised at your meeting with me.                           I




       H.O. EST. 112
SS3S                                                                                           35688 9.85 XNW
enclose for your information a copy of his most recent
letter to Mr Barnfield, which deals with those issues.

I am very anxious to resolve      the costs issue and hope
that we can do so when I meet    members of South Yorkshire
Police Authority on 20 June.      I will write to you again
as soon as possible after that   meeting has taken place.
