From:      MRS G I MOODY                 cc   Mr Sutton
           F2 DIVISION                        Mr Burns
           273 2621                           Miss Clayton
           11 July 1991                       Mr Bolton,G2
                                              Miss Edwards
Mr Narey                                      Mr Moorey
Mr Pugh

HILLSBOROUGH

This note informs Ministers of developments to be expected within
the next few days and suggests lines to take in reply to likely
enquiries.

Background

On 15 April 1989, 95 fans of the Liverpool football club were
crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield. In
conducting the subsequent enquiry, Lord Justice Taylor asked the
West Midlands Constabulary to make investigations on his behalf.
Subsequently further enquiries had to be made and a number of
statements retaken (many under caution) to determine whether
criminal or disciplinary proceedings should be brought against
any police officer, Sheffield Wednesday football club, Sheffield
City Council or their advisers. These enquiries have been
completed and have been under consideration by the Police
Complaints Authority. Indeed, a parliamentary question tabled
yesterday seeks a reason for the PCA's failure to announce its
decision.

Latest developments

The Deputy Chairman of the PCA, Brigadier Pownall, has just
informed me that the PCA have decided to direct that charges be
brought against two officers of the South Yorkshire Constabulary.
The instructions will be FAXed to Yorkshire this afternoon so
that the officers concerned can be informed, and letters will be
dispatched by first class post tonight to the complainants (who
include Mr Hicks, the man who lost two teenage daughters in the
disaster). The PCA will themselves issue a short press statement
at 2 p.m. tomorrow announcing their decision but not giving the
names of the officers concerned. It would seem likely that Mr
Hicks will wish to use this occasion to make some comment to the
media and this, in itself, is likely to reanimate interest in the
matter.

Lines to take

The Hillsborough disaster was a terrible tragedy. Nobody can have
anything but sympathy for those bereaved.

It would be improper for the Home Office to comment on the matter
in advance of the decision of the disciplinary tribunals, more
especially because the Home Secretary is the appellate authority
in police disciplinary matters and might eventually have to
adjudicate on any appeal.

                                       MRS G I MOODY

GIM-004.GIM
