*y,M.



                                           TRANSMISSION REPORT

                                                       :HO F2 DIVISION               ■< 02 APR           '98 15:54 )


        DATE.'   START   REMOTE TERMINAL        MODE          TIME       /Re s u l t s   t o tal     d e p t , file
                 TIME    IDENTIFICATION                                                  PAGES       CODE. NO.

                                0171 £11 6149 G3EST                       OK             03




                                                                                                   <:*t:m ;■ t* !::***.+:***
m         H om e O ffic e
          Operational Policing Policy Unit
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
          Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 3612




     FAX
    TO:          Paul McCormack, DCMS


    From:        Mike Ward


    Date:        2 April 1998                        Time:   16:45


    Fax Nfl:     (0171) 211 6149


    Number of pages (including this one)                      3


    Message
    Subject:     PROFESSOR PHIL SCRATON - HILLSBOROUGH


    Further to your fax of 30 March to Peter Edmundson, please find attached a contribution on the
    Hillsborough Scrutiny for your reply to Professor Scraton.

    Please give me a call if you have any queries.




    h i
    Mike Ward




                   IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                     PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 3 6 1 2
Contribution for reply to Professor Phil Scraton


As the Home Secretary explained in the House, one of our first concerns on taking
office last year was to ensure that there should be a thorough and independent
investigation of any material which cast doubt on earlier findings about the disaster,
and it was to this end that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked to conduct his
scrutiny.

His report is comprehensive and sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the
reasons for his conclusions. He has considered all the material allegations about
missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and
witness statements and concerns about the use of the 3.15pm cut-off time at the
Inquest.

As far as the legal processes following the disaster are concerned, the Home Secretary
has indicated that he shares the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
in Chapter 7 of his Report when he says:

 “I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing their job

There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which we
intend to address. In January, the Home Affairs Select Committee published some
important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures.
The Home Secretary has recently announced his response to the HAC
recommendations including his intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil
standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy
provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. He has
also endorsed the Committee’s recommendation that forces should show greater
commitment to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where
appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion
of disciplinary proceedings.

The Home Secretary has also indicated his support for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
endorsement of the findings of a Home Office Working Party, published in March
1997, that the role of the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. The main
change proposed by the Working Party was to relieve coroners of the need to resume
their inquest after an inquiry has been completed. If this had been in place at the time
of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would have spared the families of those who died
unnecessary distress when the Taylor Inquiry had covered substantially the same
ground as the Inquest.

With regard to the changes which were made to police statements, Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith explains the reasons for his conclusions in some detail in his report. He says:




f:\oppu\complnts\contrib\mjw-0223.doc
 “I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was not in any way inhibited or
impeded by what happened. ” (p i06, para 23)

 “I am also satisfied that the exclusion o f these comments did not affect the outcome o f
the Inquests, or the decision by the Director o f Public Prosecutions not to bring
criminal charges....I do not consider that there is any question o f misconduct either by
the solicitor who gave the police advice upon the statements or by the police officers
who suggested alterations to the statements without referring the statement to the
solicitors. ” (p i07, para 24)

The Home Secretary indicated on 18 February that he was placing in the House of
Commons Library statements made by police officers about the events of the day. I
understand that copies o f all original and amended police statements have also been
sent to the Hillsborough Family Support Group.




f:\oppu\complnts\contrib\mjw-0223.doc
      30/03   ’9 8 , 1 4 : 1 6            FAX 0 1 7 1            211     6149                                  SARD DCMS                                                            0171 211 614 9              ©001




                                                                                                                                                                                                     J~»Telefax
                    edge hill                                                                                              FAV*                <>tn ItI ~
                                                                                                                                                        _ -T-^1 _                             ^ ^

      U N I V E R S I T Y COLLEGE
                                                                                                                          D ate:                ;^c> -                                               Pages: /
\ \                                                                                                                                                                       6&4rr?rFi7L-     >4 C&*srfZ iiUrncr, u
                                                                                                                                                                               jggr'cY       r^ .
                rvW                            r   Uc.
                                                                  Y l£             3oJ>
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                            7b f c u ^ u j u/*4 Q^S
                                                                                                                                                                                               JT~*T e le fa x
H                     Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice

                      Direct Line:                       01695 584305

                      Our Ref*                           PS/BH

                      9 March 1998

                      Right Hon Tony Banks MP
                      Parliamentary Under Secretary                                                                                                                    -----
                      Department of Culture Media and Sport
                      Trafalgar Place
                      2-4 Cockspur Street
                      London
                                                                                                                                                1                     *

                                                                                                                                                                                I A^sr*
                      L S W 1 Y 5D H
                                                                                                                                                                                          i
                       Dear Tony Banks

                      About eighteen months ago we had contact over Hillsborough, among other
                      issues.   I note with interest your comments to Alan Hubbard published in
                      yesterday's Observer. While I have no doubt about the personal integrity and
                      honesty of the Home Secretary I cannot share with you your acceptance of his
                      judgement on the matter of the recent Hillsborough Scrutiny. Jack Straw inherited
                      a procedure already in process which constituted yet another unprecedented
                      response to the serious issues of concern arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster.

                      Nothing that I have read or witnessed over the last 18 months has led me to revise
                      our considered findings published in No Last Rights, of which you have a copy.
                      The central finding being that the legal processes and their outcomes together
                      constitute a grave miscarriage of justice. On the contrary, my further research into
                      the role of the South Yorkshire Police in the investigation has revealed further
                      anomalies, if not institutional malpractice.     That Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                      expresses regret at some of the changes made to police statements, referring to
                      them as “errors of judgement", is just not good enough.

                      I have prepared a briefing paper for the eventual parliamentary debate, which is
                      sent today to Merseyside MPs. I enclose a copy for your information together with
                      copies of my submission to the Scrutiny and an unpublished article I wrole prior to
                      publication of the Scrutiny’s Report.

                      I look forward to hearing from you.

                     Yours sincerely




                      Professor Phil Scraton
                      Centre Director
                   D r J o h n C a t e r 0 ‘i*f E u v u t iv t    Si H e l e n s R o a d , O r m .s k l rk ,   lelfphnrx*: OlfV95 S 7 ? [ ? |
                                                                  L a n c a s h ire I     4QF                  F a c sim ile : 01695
                                                                                                               t n u r n ^ r ; t i n p ; / / w \ i * w c h d i C .a c . i l k
                                   A
U                  P c u i




    W it h C o m p l im e n t s




      2-4 Cockspur Street
      London SW1Y 5DH
    Telephone: 0171-211 b G $ 3
     Facsimile: 0171-211 (oitf ^
                                                                                                                                                                  . jr+ T e le fa x ^
                                                                                          Tol fc T frg                                  (5~b n OA/PSoAi          k t& tt (r 6ft-iOC
           edge hill                                                                      Fax: p m
                                                                                          From:
                                                                                                                                             n v      1-70 ^ /
U N I V E R S I T Y C OLLEGE                                                                                                           tM cocne.M t4dfc            2>^^
                                                                                          Date:                                                                  y Pages: /
                                                                                            U)e                                       6)6 i t 7-?i=V(L, fen A Cewrjli&onhu
                                                                                                                              b tL A fT            leercy ^ e    nJL
                                                     eX)CU>SO&FS n> fo u & u j Vi A C&S
                                                    tt^r                           JH* T elefa x.
             Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
                                                             <17/ 14. S o < i
             Direct Line:              01695 584305

             Our Ref:                   PS/BH

             9 March 1998

             Right Hon Tony Banks MP                                                                                                    M c _ .4 -o c .4 j
             Parliamentary Under Secretary                                                                                                     ^<=>13
             Department of Culture Media and Sport


                                                                                                                                             / *1"
             Trafalgar Place                                                                                                                 I                      I
             2-4 Cockspur Street
             London
             L S W 1 Y 5D H                                                                   1                                              If t -
             Dear Tony Banks

             About eighteen months ago we had contact over Hillsborough, among other
             issues.   I note with interest your comments to Alan Hubbard published in
             yesterday's Observer. While I have no doubt about the personal integrity and
             honesty of the Home Secretary I cannot share with you your acceptance of his
             judgement on the matter of the recent Hillsborough Scrutiny. Jack Straw inherited
             a procedure already in process which constituted yet another unprecedented
             response to the serious issues of concern arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster.

             Nothing that I have read or witnessed over the last 18 months has led me to revise
             our considered findings published in No Last Rights, of which you have a copy.
             The central finding being that the legal processes and their outcomes together
             constitute a grave miscarriage of justice. On the contrary, my further research into
             the role of the South Yorkshire Police in the investigation has revealed further
             anomalies, if not institutional malpractice.     That Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
             expresses regret at some of the changes made to police statements, referring to
             them as “errors of judgement”, is just not good enough.

             I have prepared a briefing paper for the eventual parliamentary debate, which is
             sent today to Merseyside MPs. I enclose a copy for your information together with
             copies of my submission to the Scrutiny and an unpublished article I wrote prior to
             publication of the Scrutiny's Report.

             I look forward to hearing from you.

             Yours sincerely




             Professor Phil Scraton
             Centre Director
           D r J o h n Cater Chief Executive   St H elens Road, O rm sk irk ,   T e le p h o n e : 0 1 6 9 5 5 7 5 1 7 1
                                               L a n c a s h ir e L 3 9 4 Q P   F a c sim ile : 0 1 6 9 5 5 7 9 9 9 7
                                                                                I n te r n e t: h t t p : / / w w v v .e h c h e .a c .u k
CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
        EDGE HILL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE




     THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
       BRIEFING AND RESPONSE




  Professor Phil Scraton PhD, MA, Adv Dip Ed, BA
                  Centre Director
                        and
        Director, The Hillsborough Project




   Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
            Edge Hill University College
                      Ormskirk
                Lancashire L39 4QP
                 Tel: 01695 584305
                 Fax: 01695 579997
       E-mail: Scratonp@staff.ehche.ac.uk
1     It is a matter of profound concern that after nearly nine years of
      investigation, inquiry and scrutiny the bereaved and survivors of the
      Hillsborough disaster remain burdened by a deep sense of injustice. They
      are persistently reminded that the South Yorkshire Police were allocated,
      and accepted, the main proportion of blame in the judgment of the civil
      action for damages and in the findings of Lord Justice Taylor. It has been
      suggested, unfairly, that the bereaved and survivors have been reduced to
      a prolonged campaign driven by vindictive and vengeful motives. What is
      clear, however, is that the legal processes have failed them. This briefing
      aims to overview the procedural inconsistencies and anomalies which
      dogged the initial inquiries and have been compounded by the judicial
      review of the inquests and, most recently, the Stuart-Smith scrutiny.

2     L ia b ility

2.1   In the civil action for damages soon after the disaster the court found the
       police to be liable in negligence. Damages were paid accordingly.
       Although the South Yorkshire Police successfully settled their claim
       against other parties their liability in negligence has been interpreted as a
       ‘technical’ acceptance of liability. sThe Chief Constable at the time, Peter
       Wright, and his successor, Richard Wells, consistently held the position
       that the South Yorkshire Police was one among several parties, including
       fans, whose actions contributed directly to the disaster.

2.2   Lord Justice Taylor rejected claims, primarily from the police, that fans’
      behaviour contributed to the deaths. He concluded that the main cause
      was overcrowding and the main reason was police mismanagement of the
      crowd. The decision to open Gate C, letting in approximately 2,000 fans,
      without sealing off the tunnel into the already full central pens 3 and 4,
      constituted a “blunder of the first magnitude". He also criticised Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club, their safety engineers and the local authority
      while exonerating the St Johns Ambulance Services, the South Yorkshire
      Ambulance Service and the Fire Service of any blame.

2.3   Effectively, the civil actions and the Taylor Report indicated negligence
      with regard to the causes of the disaster and the events through which
      people received their injuries. What has remained at issue is the question
      of liability beyond the point of injury and whether negligence, omission or
      lack of appropriate care caused people to die who might have been
      saved.

3     P ro se cu tio n

3.1   In September 1990 the decision was taken by the Director of Public
       Prosecutions that there was no evidence to initiate criminal prosecutions
       against any corporate body and insufficient evidence to pursue the
       prosecution of any police officer.




                                        l
3.2   The "DPP took this decision after seeking the legal opinion of two senior
       counsel.

4     Disciplinary Action

4.1   The decision was subsequently taken by the Police Complaints Authority
       to pursue disciplinary action against the Match Commander, Chief
       Superintendent David Duckenfield, and his assistant, Superintendent
       Bernard Murray, for ‘neglect of duty’.

4.2   There is no criminal charge equivalent to such a breach of the Force
       disciplinary code.

4.3   In October 1991 Duckenfield retired from the South Yorkshire Police on
        medical grounds and the disciplinary case against him could not be
        pursued. Consequently the case against Murray was dropped and,
       eventually, he also retired.

5     In q u e sts

5.1   Prior to the DPP’s decision on prosecution the Coroner took the unusual
       step, supported by the families’ solicitors (the Hillsborough Steering
       Group), of resuming the inquests on a limited basis before the jury. It is
       normal practice, reflected in the Coroners’ Rules, for an inquest to remain
       adjourned until criminal and/or civil actions are completed.

5.2   The Coroner’s Court is not a court of liability. It decides on the medical
       cause of death, establishing how, when and where death occurred;
       reaching a verdict from a prescribed list in line with the circumstances and
       medical cause. In controversial cases, causation - and therefore liability -
       inevitably becomes the central issue. When all other actions fail and
       families receive limited disclosure of evidence the inquest offers the only
       public forum in which material evidence can be heard and cross-
       examined.      The uneasy relationship between the coronial and
       prosecutorial systems is well-documented.

5.3   The South Yorkshire Coroner, Dr Stefan Popper, opened ‘preliminary
       hearings’ or ‘mini-inquests’ in April 1990.             Their format was
       unprecedented. Each family was invited to attend the Coroner’s Court to
      hear: i. the pathologist’s evidence regarding the death of their loved one
      and the recorded blood alcohol level; ii. A summary of all other material
      evidence written and presented by a West Midlands Police investigating
      officer; iii. An overview of sightings (still photographs or televisual) of the
      deceased before, during and after the crush presented by a West
      Midlands Police investigating officer.

5.4   Disclosure of the evidence which informed the police summaries was
      denied. The families’ legal representatives were not able to hear this
      evidence in full nor able to cross-examine on any issues of fact or opinion.


                                         2
 Y et the summaries were presented to the jury as a factual account.
 Following the mini-inquests the Coroner again adjourned proceedings.

 Once the DPP decided against prosecution the inquests were resumed
 on a generic basis. The bereaved families expected the questions
 unanswered by the mini-inquests, and much of the specific material
 evidence, to be dealt with and cross-examined. This was not so. The
 Coroner s criteria for selecting evidence were never revealed.

The Coroner imposed a 3.15pm cut-off on all evidence based on the
assumption that all who died had suffered injuries of such severity that by
that time their condition was “irrevocable" and death was inevitable.
Effectively this cut-off denied families the opportunity to explore, examine
or test evidence concerning the precise circumstances in which their
loved ones died. The families accepted their lawyers’ opinion to leave any
possibility of a judicial review of the 3.15pm cut-off until the completion of
the inquests.

After the longest inquests in legal history the Coroner directed the jury
away from the verdict of unlawfully killed and towards accidental death.
He emphasised that an accidental death verdict could accommodate a
degree of negligence. After much deliberation the jury returned verdicts
of accidental death on a 9-2 majority.

At the subsequent judicial review of the inquests, based on 6 test cases,
the Divisional Court upheld the verdicts and considered exemplary the
Coroner s handling of the inquests, his summing up and legal direction.

In November 1995 No Last Rights: The Denial o f Justice and the
Promotion o f Myth in the Aftermath o f the Hillsborough Disaster was
published. It provided an in-depth and critical review of the inquest
procedure and the judicial review arguing that the procedures endured by
the families, regardless of their legal advice or the Coroner’s use of lawful
discretion, amounted to a serious miscarriage of justice.

New Evidence

Following the screening of Hillsborough claims were made for new
evidence which revealed: i. that the police in the Control Box could see
more of the pens than they had previously claimed (evidence of video
technician Roger Houldsworth); ii. that some of those who died had lived
after 3.15pm (evidence of Dr Ed Walker). While this evidence was much
publicised and proclaimed, it was not strong (Stuart-Smith considered
Houldsworth s evidence to have been “blown out of all proportion").

Whatever the merits of the evidence, the public outcry which followed
Hillsborough and the media coverage surrounding it, led Michael Howard,
then Home Secretary, to consider a further inquiry.
In Jone 1997 Jack Straw, the incoming Home Secretary, announced an
Independent Scrutiny into the disaster to be conducted by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith.

While receiving a cautious welcome by the Hillsborough Families’ Support
Group and their lawyers, the decision to hold a Scrutiny, previously
unheard of, without formal ‘status' in officially recognised procedures and
with restricted terms of reference (scrutinising ‘new’ evidence of sufficient
significance that it would, in the Judge’s opinion, have changed previous
outcomes) was severely criticised.

The Home Secretary reassured critics that the Judge had the discretion to
examine and report on “any matters in the public interest". But it was
clear from the outset, and from the Judge’s comments at his meetings
with families, that his focus was ‘fresh evidence’ and its potential impact
on previous outcomes.

Submissions

The submission made by the families’ lawyers focused primarily on the
 new evidence arising from HiHsbbrough. It also included case material,
some of which had been presented to the judicial review, concerning the
3.15pm cut-off. Of particular concern was the clear evidence that a
number of those who died lived on after 3.15pm and in several cases
people thought to be dead had regained consciousness.

Professor Scraton’s submission regretted that there was no prosecution
available equivalent to ‘neglect of duty'. Further, the prescribed list of
inquest verdicts offered no verdict ‘between’ accidental death and
unlawfully killed which could have reflected negligence or lack of care in
line with ‘neglect of duty’.

This submission (enclosed) focused primarily on the denial of the right to a
fair and thorough public inquiry into the precise circumstances in which
each death occurred. A ‘fair’ and ‘public’ hearing, as enshrined in the
European (Article 6.1) and International (Universal Declaration Article 10)
conventions on human rights, should have included: i. disclosure of all
statements concerning the circumstances of each death; ii. evidence given
to the inquest regarding the circumstances of each death; iii. the
opportunity to cross-examine that evidence.

Further, the submission revealed that the procedure for taking statements
from South Yorkshire Police officers was outside normal custom and
practice, possibly breaching Force and criminal justice guidelines. It
demonstrated that this unprecedented procedure involved South
Yorkshire Police senior management and the Force solicitors in a process
of “review and alteration" which, at best, amounted to malpractice.
 Scrutiny

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny has been heralded as “meticulous",
 “detailed” and “rigorous" by, among others, the Home Secretary.

  It is clear from the Scrutiny report that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers
 the Taylor Interim Report beyond reproach or criticism. He accepts and
 endorses the scope and sufficiency of Taylor. In rejecting the case for a
 more detailed inquiry into the rescue operation after 3.15pm, for example,
 he concludes that “counsel for the Family Support Group ... made it plain
 that they accepted Lord Taylor’s findings and the sufficiency of his Inquiry"
 (p61 para 105). Again, in responding to the so-called “ 10 ‘unresolved’
 Questions (Appendix 10), Stuart-Smith relies on Taylor to respond to
 eight. Showing that Taylor dealt with matters relating to the questions
 does not demonstrate that they were adequately answered.

 Related to this, a detailed reading of the text and its appendices reveals
flaws in the Scrutiny particularly where Stuart-Smith fails to deal with the
complexity or relevance of specific matters. For example, his reiteration of
the Coroners logic in establishing the 3.15pm cut-off does not address
the contradictions inherent in the medical evidence on which the Coroner
relied. Further, his brief discussion of Eddie Spearritt's important case
(his whereabouts were unknown between losing consciousness at 3pm
and arrival at hospital at 5pm) leads him to state: “I do not think that it is
possible to conclude on the evidence that Mr Spearritt was at any time
 left for dead . However, from the evidence, the opposite conclusion is
more likely and this has significance for how the post-3.15pm operation
was handled. These are two examples of many.

In his evaluation of evidence and his interviews Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
adopts subjective criteria to assess and report reliability. Explanations or
evidence taken from official sources, particularly the police, are given
greater weight and credibility than those taken from other sources.

 In dealing with the 3.15pm cut-off Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes
that it is not relevant whether the person died instantly at the scene or
some time later, after medical or other unsuccessful treatment". In his
opinion this renders inappropriate a Coroner’s inquiry “into the response
of the emergency services" or consideration that with a quicker, differently
organised or better equipped response “a person who died might have
been saved".        What Lord Justice Stuart-Smith infers is that the
appropriateness of the emergency services’ response and the medical
facilities on hand bore no relevance as to whether people lived or died:

        They did not come by their deaths because first-aid or
       medical attention failed to resuscitate them" (p49 para 56).
     =   “ It would clearly be quite impossible to say about any given
         victim of the disaster that if more sophisticated or
         competent aid had reached him or her at some earlier
         moment, they would have survived ...” (p61 para 103).

         “ In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by the
         emergency or medical services" (p61 para 104).

 The implication here is that for those who died death was inevitable. It
 suggests that those who were resuscitated or received intensive care
 would have lived regardless of medical intervention. This is an untenable
 proposition. Finally, the opportunity to hear and cross-examine evidence
 from the relevant emergency services or hospital staff was denied. Yet the
 ‘best evidence rule' regarding inquests emphasises the desirability of
 calling witnesses “most closely connected with the circumstances of
 death".

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers that there were “only two possible
examples of cross-examination” (p89 para 24) where Liverpool supporters
giving evidence at the Inquests were treated with hostility.        This
conclusion is unacceptable given the extent of hostility and differential
treatment endured by survivors giving evidence. It is well-documented in
No Last Rights (pp139-149). The Judge was given a copy of the text.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions leave serious matters
unaddressed. He upholds the inquests both procedurally and regarding
their outcome yet the inquests were inadequate and flawed in giving
families a thorough and fair hearing. As shown above, they failed the
families. That they functioned within the boundaries of the Coroner's
discretion, upheld in the Divisional Court, provides no guarantee of a fair,
right or just process.

 It is clear that had not a former South Yorkshire Police officer come
 forward with his amended statement the entire process of how informal,
 ad hoc recollections were transformed into formal statements through
 review and alteration, would not have come to light. The evidence,
 presented by Professor Scraton, led to further revelations by Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith. According to the Judge ten alterations, covered in the
 Scrutiny s Appendix 7, represent the most substantial examples. Despite
this, and the further revelation that the West Midlands investigators,
Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor and the Coroner knew
of the process of “review and alteration”, the Judge finds no real fault with
the procedure; merely categorising some cases as constituting “an error
of judgement" (p80 para 89). His key criterion, questionable in some of
the cases illustrated, was whether removed or altered passages amounted
to statements of fact or opinion. Yet, examination of the amended South
Yorkshire Police statements reveals a prevalence of personal opinion and
observation, especially regarding the behaviour of fans. He finds no
cases in which amendments were misleading, nor does he consider that
 the, inquiries were impeded.      He expresses satisfaction that outcomes
 were not affected.

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith records a comment made soon after the
 disaster at a meeting of South Yorkshire Police officers involved with the
 inquiry. It concerned officers’ ‘recollections’ or ‘self-written statements' to
 be written on plain paper arid not taken under Criminal Justice Act rules:
 “our job is to collate what evidence South Yorkshire Police officers can
 provide to their Chief Constable in order that we can present a suitable
 case, on behalf o f the force, to subsequent inquiries" (p78 para 79
 emphasis added). Thus it was on the basis of presenting a “suitable
 case that the procedure was adopted and instituionalised.

 Responses


It is imperative that the Home Secretary orders a full judicial inquiry into
the events which followed the evacuation of the pens and constituted the
circumstances in which each person died. This should include the
evacuation of Pens 3 and 4, medical attention and pronouncement of
death at the back of Leppings Lane stand and on the pitch, the
procedures and events in the gymnasium, the Ambulance Service
response, treatment at the hospitals and the unprecedented Coroner's
decision to take blood alcohol levels from all who died.

The Scrutiny does not answer the serious question as to why the
unprecedented procedure of taking recollections from South Yorkshire
Police officers and transforming them into formal statements following
their review’ ancPalteration’ was adopted. Whether or not this procedure
affected outcomes is not the issue. This procedure must be investigated
thoroughly to establish whether or not it breached Force, Home Office or
criminal justice guidelines.
Generic

No Last Rights makes 8 recommendations for reforming the role and
constitution of official inquiries into disasters and 33 recommendations
concerning the role and function of inquests into disasters (ppxx-xxiii). The
reform of the inquest procedure, particularly with regard to controversial
deaths, is long overdue.


The procedure enabling police officers to retire on health grounds, thus
avoiding disciplinary proceedings, must be abandoned. It is unacceptable
that despite proven deceit and established liability in negligence no police
officer on duty at Hillsborough faced criminal or disciplinary proceedings.

The procedure within which police officers provide statements to official
investigations or inquiries must be reviewed to ensure that such
statements are witnessed, signed and forwarded in their original form.
Under no circumstances should they be subjected to review or alteration.
   CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE


            EDGE HILL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE




INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
      CONDUCTED BY LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH




                        Final Submission




         Professor Phil Scraton PhD, MA, AdvDipEd, BA
                    The Hillsborough Project


                               and


                         Centre Director
          Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
                   Edge Hill University College
               ORMSKIRK, Lancashire L39 4QP


                 Tel: 01695 584305 (direct line)
                 Fax: 01695 579997
                 Em: Scratonp® staff.EHCHE.AC.UK
INTRODUCTION

The previous two submissions were made early in the Scrutiny and before there was
opportunity to access and reflect on statements and other material made available by
the South Yorkshire Police. While the broader concerns raised in those submissions
still obtain, the Scrutiny has encouraged a sharper focus in terms of priorities and
direction. There remains a real concern over the conduct of the Inquests and the
conclusions of the Judicial Review. While some of this concern undoubtedly is
rooted in the adequacy and appropriateness of coronial procedure in such
circumstances, the conduct of the Hillsborough Inquests, from inception to
conclusion, denied the bereaved a full and thorough hearing of the evidence. This
issue and a range of others are well-documented in No Last Rights and there has been
no response to that critique suggesting that its conclusions should be revised.

As indicated in No Last Rights, the accidental death inquest verdicts sit uneasily
alongside statements of police liability, including Lord Justice McCowan’s ruling in
the Divisional Court. While understanding that the prescribed verdicts in the
coroner’s court offer no verdict (accommodating negligence or failure of a duty of
care) between accidental death/misadventure and unlawfully killed, the verdicts on
the 96 who died at Hillsborough are, at best, confusing and, at worst, contradictory to
the findings of Lord Justice Taylor and to all other rulings. It seems clear, given the
outcome and procedural irregularities, that the inquest verdicts should have been
quashed and the inquests revisited, possibly on a limited basis. The ruling in the
Divisional Court and the clear statement by Lord Justice Stuart Smith that the
Scrutiny could not challenge that ruling, suggests that a recommendation to leave the
verdicts ‘open’ would be appropriate in the circumstances.

This submission is not concerned with the matter of criminal prosecution and offers
no ‘new ’ evidence towards that end. It remains a concern that the decision not to
prosecute was taken on the basis of insufficiency of evidence yet there was no
disclosure of the relevant evidence or of the advice taken by the DPP in coming to
that conclusion. This is a matter, however, much broader than Hillsborough. Given
that the intention appears to have been to initiate disciplinary proceedings, possibly
for ‘neglect of duty’, against two senior officers it does appear anomalous that there
was no criminal prosecution of equivalence. Clearly, the evidence of the video
technician, Roger Houldsworth, is important regarding potential prosecution. A
further issue of significance is that he was listed to give evidence at the generic
inquests yet subsequently appears to have been dropped. Who took this decision and
on what basis?

An issue raised on more than one occasion during the Scrutiny has been whether, after
almost 9 years, an inquiry should be initiated which would expect that witnesses
accurately recalled events and would face cross-examination on their statements. This
lapse of time, however, should not undermine or disqualify a full and thorough
hearing and cross-examination of relevant evidence. It is not unusual for criminal
cases to be heard long after an event (the current murder case regarding the body in
Coniston lake). The resumed Marchioness inquests, which resulted in unlawfully
killed verdicts, were held six years after the tragedy. In a matter of such seriousness
the passage of time should not hinder the best possible examination of the evidence.



                                           1
Following ^written and oral submissions to the Scrutiny, the release of body files to
bereaved families and consideration of the material provided by a former South
Yorkshire officer, this final submission to the Scrutiny responds to Lord Justice Stuart
Smith’s question: “What sort of an inquiry do you suggest that I should recommend to
the Home Secretary?” (Scrutiny transcript, 24 October 1997 p33 lines 33/4).
IN Q U IR E INTO          THE       CIRCUMSTANCES              OF      DEATHS        AT
HILLSBOROUGH

As has been well established in the research literature, the inquest has become an
increasingly adversarial forum in processing deaths which occur in controversial and
contested circumstances. Invariably this problem is exacerbated when decisions are
taken not to prosecute because of insufficiency of evidence. Lawyers, coroners and
researchers have noted the institutionalised and procedural anomalies of conducting
an inquisitorial court which has a clear liability agenda. In such cases the inquest
bears the full adversarial weight. Inevitably, disputes centre on the construction and
meaning of ‘how’ (ie the precise circumstances) a person or persons died.

The decision by Dr Popper, the then South Yorkshire Coroner, to resume the inquests
with a jury and on a limited basis prior to a decision on prosecution by the Director of
Public Prosecutions was unusual, if not unprecedented. While accepting that the
Coroner’s Court is not a court of liability, in his own words, the decision restricted the
preliminary hearings to the ‘when’ and ‘where’ of the deaths, leaving the ‘how’ to the
generic hearing.

It appears that initially the Coroner was uncertain as to whether to hold the generic
hearing or the family hearings prior to the DPP’s decision. Correspondence with the
Solicitors’ Steering Group indicates that the decision to hold the family hearings as
the preliminaries was taken late. The conduct of these hearings remains a cause of
considerable concern. What did they establish? First, the existing medical evidence
relating to the pathological condition of each of the deceased together with
conclusions on the physiological cause of death. Second, as far as the West Midlands
Police investigation team could establish, the whereabouts of each person on the
terraces and subsequently. Third, a ‘story’ of each person’s movements on the day
from leaving home until the pronouncement of death, based on West Midlands
investigating officers’ summaries of the available witness statements.

The medical evidence, presented by pathologists in each case and largely uncontested
at the time, has since become an area of debate and dispute. Most of the pathologists
concluded that the deaths were caused by traumatic asphyxia. Initially this was
consistent with Mr Wardrope’s conclusions, as the senior accident and emergency
consultant at the Northern General Hospital. Many families were personally
reassured to hear that in the case of traumatic asphyxia, a condition consistent with a
sudden or violent pressure on the chest, unconsciousness occurred swiftly and death
followed within minutes. While this advice might have put minds at rest it was not
consistent with either the experiences of survivors who lost consciousness or with Mr
Wardrope’s eventual BMJ publication (Wardrope et al 1991). With colleagues, he
revised his opinion to that of crush asphyxia. While Professor Usher maintained that
traumatic and crush asphyxia “are synonymous” (undated, signed opinion) this is not
shared by other medical opinion. Further, the experiences of survivors suggest that
they struggled for breath for a considerable period of time as the compression on the
terraces waxed and waned. Unconsciousness was an eventual state on a gradually
developing continuum of discomfort. Crush asphyxia, a progressive compression,
would seem to offer a more accurate reflection of these circumstances. As Wardrope
et al (1991:1383) state: “The disaster at Hillsborough resulted in a gradual and
prolonged crush ... The patients presented with little evidence of the classic signs of


                                            3
traumatic asphyxia.” The authors conclude: “Although there were similarities to
traumatic asphyxia, the conditions differ in mechanism of injury, clinical findings,
main complications and outcome” (ibid: 1384).

Despite unconsciousness, a considerable number of people recovered, some having
been resuscitated by effective first aid and medical intervention. That they recovered,
some under their own steam and without resuscitation, is an indication that death was
not inevitable once unconsciousness had occurred. The case of Mr Eddie Speamtt is
particularly significant regarding the medical treatment administered following
evacuation of the pens. Both his son, Adam who died, and Mr Speamtt lost
consciousness around 2.55pm. Significantly Mr Spearritt’s last memory prior to
unconsciousness was imploring PC Illingworth, on duty at the perimeter gate of Pen
4, to open the gate and release fans from the pen. According to Mr Spearritt’s
evidence the police officer failed to respond, and he attempted to punch down the
perimeter fence with his bare hands. Mr Spearritt did not regain consciousness until
the following day. His hospital case notes, initially scribbled on an unheaded A4
sheet, Mr Wardrope’s records (published in Wardrope et al op cit) and a meeting held
between the Spearritts, their social worker and hospital staff at a later date, each
record Mr Spearritt’s admission to the Northern General at 5pm. It has remained
important to Mr Spearritt to try and establish his whereabouts throughout those two
hours. How was he evacuated? Where was he taken, the rear of Leppings Lane or the
gymnasium? The significance of Mr Spearritt’s case is not only that he lost
consciousness, was comatose for a lengthy period, yet survived. It also raises the
possibility that for a significant period he was assumed to be dead. Given that others
who survived were also placed with those assumed to be dead, Mr Speamtt’s case is a
further indication of the need to examine thoroughly the appropriateness and
 adequacy of the emergency response and the failure to mobilise effective intervention
through the Major Incident Plan. Again, it raises the issue of duty of care.

There should be no question as to the significance of what happened to each person
who died between the point at which they lost consciousness and the point at which
they were pronounced dead. In each case this period constituted the precise
circumstances in which the person died. The appropriateness of the care provided, or
lack of care, has a direct bearing on each case. It raises the issues of duty of care,
adequacy of provision and the failure to activate the Major Incident Plan. It was the
Coroner’s interpretation of the medical evidence, together with the assumption that
those who died had received injuries prior to 3.06pm that were irrevocable and made
death an inevitable consequence, that led him to impose the 3.15pm cut-off in
evidence.     Consequently, many questions raised by families concerning the
circumstances of death could not be asked and remain unanswered.

The issue of unanswered questions relates also to the procedures adopted at the
preliminary hearings for presenting the evidence of witnesses. It is difficult to
conceptualise a process of presenting summarised evidence, using the words and
values of investigating officers and covering the movements of the deceased from
leaving home to their death, which could remain detached from the question of ‘how’
death occurred. In constructing the story, in selecting and prioritising the evidence to
which they had access, the West Midlands Police investigators placed a set of
seemingly reliable circumstances before the jury. Yet, because this was summarised
evidence presented by a third party, thereby prohibiting the exploration questions of
‘how’, these constructed versions stood untested by cross-examination.

Wherever the responsibility lay, with the Coroner, with the Hillsborough Steering
Group of lawyers or both, the families were led to believe that their questions arising
from the summarised accounts would be aired at the resumed generic hearings. While
it appears that the Coroner provided no such guarantee, by implication the leaving of
the question of ‘how’ to the generic hearings was that unanswered questions would be
addressed. Indeed, this issue formed a considerable part of the families’ counsel’s
submission on Day One of the generic hearings (19 November 1990). On behalf of
43 families Mr King raised the issue of “a number of individual questions directed to
their own Inquest but also incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn about what happened between the time there was a first sighting of
any loved one being brought off the terracing and the pronouncement of death” (p3
para E). The logic of Mr King’s submission was that if the Coroner was to pursue
with thoroughness “how” the deceased had come by their deaths (p54 para F), it was
imperative that questions concerning the specific circumstances of individual deaths
should be considered. The Coroner was not persuaded and a range of questions
 significant to particular families were left unaddressed and the summarised evidence
 in each case stood as the true yet untested account of the circumstances surrounding
each death.

Despite the time, effort and cost invested in these extraordinarily long inquests it is
disturbing that a combination of unusual procedure, summarised evidence and limited
scope (the 3.15pm cut-off) collectively worked against the interests of the bereaved,
denying them access to the specific circumstances of the deaths. This procedure also
denied access to the statements of the key witnesses. It has been only as a result of
the Scrutiny that much of this material has been recently disclosed.

As the body files have been released to families it has become increasingly apparent
that in some cases the West Midlands’ brief and highly selective summaries disguised
contradictions, uncertainties and ambiguities in the full statements. These problems
relate to timings, identification and witnesses’ involvement. While discrepancies are
to be expected, given the chaos and confusion of the rescue and evacuation of Pens 3
and 4, there are numerous examples which taken together raise serious doubts about
the reliability of summaries placed before the jury and offered to the bereaved as
factual and accurate accounts of the circumstances surrounding the deaths.

Further, the picture emerging from the recently released body files, and the still
limited disclosure of statements, is one of disorganisation and further chaos in the
gymnasium. In the initial important phases the procedures lacked co-ordination and
effective leadership. It is clear that no incident plan was operationalised and this led
to a reliance on ad hoc responses. Again, it is not difficult to visualise the problems
associated with managing such a desperate situation. That is why, however, major
incident plans are constructed and rehearsed. The lack of triage, the confusion of the
dead with the unconscious and the blocking of the concourse area outside the
gymnasium with vehicles, including a driverless ambulance, undoubtedly lost vital
time in identifying and transporting those who had lost consciousness.




                                           5
Without effective organisation in the gymnasium and behind Leppings Lane as bodies
arrived it is possible that cursory examinations, whether by medical personnel or
others, generated an assumption of death. The preliminary hearing into the death of
Kevin Tyrrell heard from Dr Gumpert of the difficulty associated with establishing
life or death from a pulse in such circumstances. Yet there is now evidence indicating
that in certain cases death was pronounced following the briefest of examinations. It
remains a serious concern that only 14 of the 96 who died actually made it to hospital.
This places a responsibility on the investigation procedures to demonstrate that there
was no breach of any duty of care by those responsible for operationalising a major
incident plan and those authorities responsible for providing reasonable and adequate
medical services at a venue and occasion of such significance.

It was reasonable to foresee, especially following the 1985 Bradford stadium fire, an
incident at a packed stadium which might have resulted in multiple death and injury.
An interview with Alan Hopkins, the Deputy Chief Officer of SYMAS, confirmed
that such an incident had been discussed and prepared for within South Yorkshire
immediately after the Bradford disaster. Given the recent emergence, through
disclosed statements, of serious deficiencies in planning, preparedness and
appropriate responses, it is vital that the events on the pitch and in the gymnasium are
considered and examined as the circumstances in which many of the 96 died.


RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that a further Home Office inquiry is held to establish the
specific circumstances in which people died as a result of the Hillsborough
disaster. The inquiry should focus on: the evacuation of pens 3 and 4; the
medical services available and the treatment provided on the pitch, behind the
Leppings Lane terrace and at the Hillsborough gymnasium; the operational
effectiveness, or otherwise, of the Major Incident Plan; the transportation of
priority cases to hospital; agencies’ ‘duty of care’; immediate aftermath (use of
gymnasium as a temporary mortuary; taking of blood alcohol levels; the process
of identification; the taking of statements).
THE IRREGULAR PROCEDURES ADOPTED BY THE SOUTH
YORKSHIRE PO LICE IN REVIEWING AND ALTERING ‘STATEMENTS’
MADE BY OFFICERS INVOLVED AT HILLSBOROUGH

Sometime in early 1996 the Sefton family received police officers’ statements. These
statements had formed part of the summaries provided for the preliminary hearing
into Andrew Sefton’s death. Two of the statements were made by PC Ian Shipley.
The first is unusual as it was written as a personal account of ‘Duties for Saturday 15th
April 1989’. It is in PC Shipley’s own handwriting, is three A4 sides long and is
signed at the close of the final paragraph. It appears to be unwitnessed, has no
counter-signature and is undated. It provides a commentary mainly on potential
hostilities between fans, noting PC Shipley’s attempts to ‘calm’ “several groups of
angry males” and mentioning his participation in forming a police cordon across the
pitch. He also states: ‘lAt some stage I assisted in getting injured supporters onto
hoardings for transportation towards any available medical facilities.” Although
undated it is fair to assume that this account was written soon after the event.

The second statement is dated 13 September 1989. It was dictated onto West
Midlands Police CJ Act Statement paper and witnessed by PS J Killoch of the West
Midlands Police.      The opening comment is “Further to previous statement
(recollections) undated.” PC Shipley, prompted by photographs which placed him
close to groups of supporters carrying hoardings as makeshift stretchers, went on to
elaborate a more active part in the removal of bodies and to make a positive
identification of Colin Andrew Sefton. Whatever the reliability of these two
statements and the actual sequence of events surrounding PC Shipley’s actions, the
submission of his ‘recollections’, given the form in which they were presented, as a
formal statement was a departure from usual professional practice.

It has since transpired that police officers were instructed by senior officers to write
up personal accounts, or recollections, during the days that followed the disaster.
These often emotional and graphic recollections were collected by senior officers and
scrutinised. The eventual justification for this departure from normal practice has
been that the submission of recollections was simply a procedure to “make sure that
the statement was in proper form ... that anything which was not admissible as
evidence could be cut out of it and things of that sort” (Lord Justice Stuart Smith,
transcript of meeting with Sefton family 8 October 1997 p l8 lines 23-26). Lord
Justice Stuart Smith commented that after his initial examination of some of the
changes what had been removed were “observations of comment or opinion, which it
may have been perfectly proper to have been cut out” (ibid p l9 lines 4-6). He went
on to acknowledge this adopted procedure as forming “an important aspect of my
Scrutiny”.

There are several distinct but related causes for concern: why recollections were
requested rather than proceeding with the statutory process of statement-taking; the
pressure exerted on officers to make significant alterations or to make different
statements to those contained in their recollections; the relative status afforded to the
recollections and further orr alternative statements; the fate of those recollections
where alterations had been requested or suggested but the officer refused to comply;
whether officers would have written such personal, emotional and subjective accounts
for submission had they realised that they were to be used as the basis for objective


                                            7
statements'to be put to Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry, the West Midlands Police
Inquiry and the Inquests.

The experiences of PC David Frost provide confirmation of the seriousness of the
irregularities inherent in the procedures adopted by South Yorkshire Police in the
processing of evidence submitted by its officers. As requested by senior officers, he
wrote a personal account which included his emotional reaction to trying to save life
on the Leppings Lane terrace. He considered the request for recollections to be
unusual but at no point thought that their submission would form the basis of a
statement to any investigation. His hand-written submission was returned to him in
typed or word-processed form. While all that he had written was contained in the
printed script it was severely edited. Words, in some cases whole sentences, had a
line drawn through them with other words added in handwriting. In all, of 156
sentences 81 had been altered and of these 56 had been removed altogether.

Attached to PC Frost’s returned ‘statement’ was the front page of a letter from
Hammond Suddards, the South Yorkshire Police solicitors'. It was dated 15 May 1989
and headed Hillsborough. As the letter was incomplete there was no signature. The
reference, however, was PCM/PAB. PCM would appear to be Peter C Metcalf, listed
as one of Hammond Suddards’ partners. It appears that the letter was faxed to D
Denton Esq, of South Yorkshire Police Management Services. A further reference
indicated that this was a fourth fax. This one page commented on three officers’
‘statements’: PS Eddison; PC Healey; PC Frost. They were part of Serial No 21 and
were given the reference ‘9’ suggesting that 8 serials were dealt with in previous
communications.

The opening sentences read: “We have the following further comments on statements
requested by the West Midlands Inquiry. As before, the mention of a name without
comment means that the statement has been read and that we have no suggestions for
review or alteration.” What this establishes is that South Yorkshire Police
Management Services and their solicitors set up a procedure for ‘reviewing’ and
‘altering’ officers’ recollections which transformed personal recollections into formal
statements then put before the West Midlands Police investigation. Of fundamental
concern here, however, is the use of the terms ‘review’ and ‘alteration’. ‘Review’
suggests a range of possibilities and could be interpreted as no more than an exchange
of general advice. ‘Alteration’ is less ambiguous. When attached to a document
which contained so many specific changes it transmitted a directive and instructive
tone. In fact it was ‘suggested’ to Mr Denton that PC Frost’s “personal and graphic
account” was “not necessarily suitable in its present form for submission as a factual
statement to the West Midlands inquiry”. PS Eddison’s ‘statement’, in contrast, was
considered “Good ... but he may wish to reconsider some of the comments on pages
3/4, as to his views prior to realising the seriousness of the situation.”

 In a matter of such controversy, where police actions on the day were under
 considerable scrutiny and where criminal prosecution was a possibility, it was vital
 that the statement-taking procedure was beyond reproach. Effectively, senior officers
 of the South Yorkshire Police in consultation with the Force solicitors took part in a
 process of review and alteration of officers’ submissions thus developing statements
 from recollections. When Lord Justice Stuart Smith repeatedly asked PC Frost which
 of the deleted words or sentences he would have left in, the former officer replied that
\
I
    he would not have written such a text in the first place had he realised the intention to
    adopt it as the basis of a formal statement. Further, it is clear that the police were
    afforded an opportunity to resubmit their reviewed or altered statements in accordance
    with instructions, while other witnesses were given no such opportunity. This
    suggests that a privileged status was afforded to police witnesses.

    The procedures adopted by the South Yorkshire Police in this matter were, at best,
    irregular. It is not known what happened to the recollections of police officers who
    refused to alter their statements. For those statements which went to the West
    Midlands Police, to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner but were altered versions of
    officers’ recollections there is an important issue to be resolved. Presumably these
    statements were submitted, purporting to be a full account of each officer’s testimony.
    Yet, in some cases, they were versions of that testimony influenced by a review and
    alterations procedure involving senior officers. This raises the question of whether
    the adopted procedures amounted to tampering with evidence and a potential breach
    of the Force disciplinary code, the criminal code or both.

    RECOMMENDATION

    It is recommended that a thorough investigation is undertaken into the
    procedures adopted by the South Yorkshire Police for the taking of statements
    from their officers in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster. This
    investigation should be conducted by another Force and should consider whether
    the adopted procedures breached either criminal or Force disciplinary codes.




                                                9
HILLSBOROUGH ARTICLE                                             PHIL SCRATON

Many of the 96 men, women and children who died at Hillsborough endured fear
and pain as the fatal crush gradually tightened ‘like a vice'. We know because
these are the words of those who lost consciousness but survived. Hundreds
were injured and thousands traumatised, lives permanently damaged. Within four
months Lord Justice Taylor reported to the Home Secretary that the main cause
was overcrowding, the main reason police mismanagement. With compensation
awarded against the South Yorkshire Police for ‘liability in negligence’ you would
 have thought that was the end of the matter.

Successive Home Secretaries, judges and an Attorney General have stated
formally that the Police accepted blame for the 1989 tragedy. So why the fuss
nearly nine years on? Why do the bereaved and survivors angrily claim they are
victims of ineptitude, conspiracy and cover-up? Answers lie in the complex web
of internal police practices and inappropriate legal procedures dogging
Hillsborough from the moment the first body was laid out on the Stadium's
gymnasium floor. Yet the story began months before the April semi-final.

The Hillsborough ground, once a regular venue for FA Cup semi-finals was
withdrawn in 1981 after concerns about ©rowd safety. It was reinstated in 1987
and it was widely accepted that Chief Superintendent Mole, as Match
Commander, had developed a sound operational plan used again in 1988. But
by the 1989 semi-final he was gone, transferred to other duties, his place taken
by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield; little experience of policing soccer and 21
days to get his act together. Why?

In October 1988 a probationary officer from Sheffield's Hammerton Road Police
Station was jumped by two masked men while alone on duty at night. Forced to
lie face down, hands cuffed behind his back, a gun was put in his mouth. They
stripped him of his trousers and pants. He was left in shock, the victim of a
vicious initiation, later described as a ‘prank’, and several officers up to the rank
of inspector left the Force following a disciplinary inquiry. Within weeks a
management reshuffle took their station head, Brian Mole, to Barnsley and David
Duckenfield was appointed. His new duties included Hillsborough Stadium.

Whatever the circumstances, it was ill-judged to replace an experienced match
commander so close to the day. Dissent and resentment simmered beneath the
surface and loyalty was divided among officers. Duckenfield was reassured his
team of senior officers would more than make up for his possible shortcomings.

In his control box, above the Hillsborough’s Leppings Lane terrace, shortly before
kick-off on 15 April 1989 Duckenfield could see that the central pens behind the
goal were full. It was also clear that thousands of fans were still outside in the
confined turnstile area. He knew this from the CCTV monitors. One of his most
senior officers, Superintendent Marshall, requested the opening of an exit gate to
allow in fans quickly so that the crush outside could be relieved.




                                          l
                                                                                         \




Duckenfietd hesitated. Inexperienced in managing large crowds, he eventually
agreed to Marshall's request. Over 2,000 Liverpool fans walked through the exit
gate and down a 1 in 6 gradient tunnel into the backs of two already packed
pens. Like cattle pens. And as the vice tightened the screams of the dying were
drowned in the roar of the crowd. The game was under way.

Fans began to lose consciousness, some slipping under the feet of those around
them. Eddie Spearritt, an arms length from Pen 4's perimeter gate, begged the
officer on duty to open it, screaming “My lovely son is dying". The officer was
unmoved and Eddie followed Adam, his son, into unconsciousness. As others
desperately climbed the overhanging fence, officers, fearing a pitch invasion,
pushed them back to suffer their fate.

This callous disregard, born from years of seeing football fans through the lens of
hooliganism, was made worse by the panic and incompetence in handling the
eventual evacuation of the pens. With no adequate rescue or medical cover on
hand fans were left to their own devices. As they tore down hoardings to carry
the dying to the gymnasium, near the other end of the pitch, the agreed
emergency plan involving all blue light services was not operationalised. Many of
those carried into the gymnasium were put to one side, assumed dead on arrival.
The initial, vital physical examinations were, to say the least, cursory. A driverless
ambulance and other vehicles blocked exits and chaos reigned when order was
most needed.

In my judgement there is no question that many who died could have lived had
there been appropriate, skilled and swift medical intervention. Statements that
only recently have come to light indicate that people were laid out on the
assumption of death. At least two survivors regained consciousness only to find
themselves lying among-the dead. And Eddie Spearritt, admitted to hospital at
5pm, has no idea of his whereabouts during the previous two hours.

By now Duckenfield, and his assistant in the control box Superintendent Murray,
had realised the gravity of the blunder. Opening the exit gate without first closing
off the tunnel and failure to direct the incoming crowd to the end pens caused the
fatal crush. Unable to escape through the fence, penned to the sides and with a
blocked, steep tunnel behind, the fate of those at the front was sealed. A rotten
barrier in Pen 3 collapsed under the sheer weight of those trapped behind
producing a tangled mass of limbs several feet high.

As they died, before the eyes of the police in the control box and on the perimeter
track, Duckenfield lied to the world, claiming that the fans had forced open the
exit gate, causing an “inrush" down the tunnel. Eventually this lie was echoed by
Jacques Georges, President of FIFA, when he called the fans “animals" who had
stampeded into the ground. It is now clear from my research that Duckenfield's
lie triggered a train of deceit engineered to deflect responsibility away from the
police and their appalling neglect of duty.




                                           2
Incredibly only 14 of the 96 who died made it to hospital. The rest were laid out
on the gymnasium floor, some with bin liners over their heads. One doctor
certified 20 dead in 25 minutes. As they were transferred into body bags the
Coroner, Dr Stefan Popper, in consultation with the Police, demanded their blood
alcohol levels. This included children. Unprecedented and insensitive, it was a
decision which suggested that the dead were culpable. The police version of
events was already gaining acceptance. Worse was to come.

Throughout the night as distraught families arrived, ferried on buses from the
pungent atmosphere of a damp, disused boys' club where they had been held,
they were forced to view a gallery of Polaroid photographs: swollen, dirty faces
shrouded in body-bags. Each was numbered and on recognition these were
called out. The bodies were wheeled on trolleys to the gymnasium door; no
touching, no kissing, no time - just identification. Then a barrage of questions
from CID officers; criminal records, drinking habits, hooliganism.        In the
bleakness of a gymnasium, amidst the wailing and sobbing of sudden grief, the
 newly bereaved endured a police interrogation.

This inhumanity and indifference, with the Coroner's blessing, fixed the agenda.
With the entire procedure overseen by South Yorkshire's Head of CID, Chief
Superintendent Addis, officers were told not to write in their pocket-books.
Journalists were briefed, no names given and 'off-the-record', that drunken,
violent Liverpool fans stole from and sexually insulted the dead while urinating on
police officers giving aid. Three days later this led to Kelvin Mackenzie's now
infamous Sun headline, The Truth'. His first choice had been ‘You Scum'.

Nearly nine years on I have now discovered that officers were told by their
bosses to write full, personal and emotional recollections of the disaster. It was
unprecedented, flying in the face of standard practice and well outside Police and
Criminal Evidence Act regulations. What happened next was even more
disturbing.

The recollections were sent to the Force solicitors, Hammond Suddards, where
they underwent a process of ‘review’ and ‘alteration’ before being returned to
South Yorkshire's Head of Management Services, Mr D Denton. They were
given back to officers, word-processed but with hand-written changes to the
script. One example in my possession has changes to 81 of the original 156
sentences, with 56 removed altogether. “ In its present form", the solicitor states
the “personal and graphic account" is “not necessarily suitable" for “submission
as a factual statement to the West Midlands inquiry."

 In an interview with the former officer he stated categorically he would never have
 submitted a statement in that form. His supervisory officers had been given what
 they asked for. But the recommended changes were not limited to matters of
 emotion or expletive, they extended to criticisms of senior officers, personal
 reflection and professional judgement.




                                         3
Advice to one police sergeant was that while his recollections would make a
good statement he might like to reconsider his comments “prior to realising the
seriousness of the situation". What the West Midlands Police investigators were
given was a bundle of statements transformed from personal and emotional
accounts through a systematic procedure of review and alteration.

The West Midlands team, itself drawn from a Force whose Serious Crimes
Squad had been discredited and disbanded, serviced all three inquiries: Taylor,
the DPP and the Coroner. The Hillsborough Scrutiny’s judge recently confirmed
that the statement-taking procedure was carried out with the full knowledge and
co-operation of the West Midlands investigators. Given there was virtually no
disclosure of police statements these revelations raise serious doubts over
reliability of police evidence and whether the practice amounted to tampering or
even conspiracy.

At the time of the inquiries this highly irregular procedure was hidden and so it
remained. Lord Justice Taylor's finding of police mismanagement coupled with
his scathing attack on senior officers, suggested that prosecutions might follow.
The DPP ruled that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute senior officers
but the Police Complaints Authority recommended disciplinary action against
Duckenfield and Murray for ‘neglect of duty'. On Duckenfield's retirement,
pension protected, the case against them was abandoned.

The families only hope for establishing the circumstances in which their loved
ones died lay with the inquests; an anachronistic court where blame and liability
cannot be apportioned. Each family attended a preliminary hearing held in
Coroner's court before the jury.      Medical evidence was presented by a
pathologist, complete with the blood alcohol level of the deceased. This was
followed by a West Midlands investigating officer reading a summary relevant
evidence, culled from statements and written in the officer's own words.

Witnesses whose statements were summarised were not called so they could
not be questioned. Denied the right of cross-examination, families were further
denied access to the full statements on which the summaries were based. The
quality and reliability of the evidence heard by the jury during the longest inquests
in legal history remained untested. Police statements had undergone review and
alteration and witness statements relating to the circumstances in which each
person died were selected and summarised by West Midlands officers.

Worse still, those who tried to save life were not called to give evidence. Arguing
that by 3.15pm all who died had suffered “irrevocable" injuries, due to traumatic
asphyxia, the Coroner took no evidence after that time. But at that time many
were still alive and some who lost consciousness have survived.

And the medical evidence has since changed. James Wardrope, the Northern
General's Accident and Emergency Consultant, revised his opinion from
traumatic to crush asphyxia. Chests would not necessarily have been locked,
death was not inevitable in all cases, making the rescue and resuscitation care
the crucial circumstances in which the deaths occurred.
It is simply unacceptable that the quality of care given to the dying on the pitch, in
the gymnasium or one the terraces has never been scrutinised. Instead, the
families faced a group inquest at which blood alcohol levels were juxtaposed with
damning evidence from Sheffield locals and South Yorkshire Officers. They
claimed mass drunkenness and violence perpetrated by ticketless fans hell bent
on forcing entry into the ground at all costs.

This ‘hooligan conspiracy1, thrown out by Taylor, fitted neatly with Duckenfield's
lie. It also justified the taking of blood alcohol samples, the off-the-record
briefings, the parrot fashion phrases in many of the recently released police
statements and the selection of evidence.

Unlike Taylor, the Coroner accepted the police version.                It seemingly
corresponded with his own view. Our research exposes the full array of
injustices inflicted in a court in which a verdict of neglect of duty does not exist.
As the Coroner steered the jury away from an unlawfully killed verdict he told
them that an accidental death verdict could include a degree of negligence. 96
accidental death verdicts stood uncontested.

Six test cases won the right to challenge the inquests in the Divisional Court. The
judges rejected the families' appeal stating that the police had accepted blame
and nothing could be gained from new hearings. As far as the Divisional Court
was concerned the Coroner's conduct and his decisions were exemplary.

In late 1995 we published our research exposing the systematic denial of the
rights of the bereaved. Despite the cost and effort there had been no full and
thorough inquiry, as enshrined in international conventions.     We publicly
condemned the process as a serious miscarriage of justice.

Twelve months later, based partly on our work, Jimmy McGovern's HiHsporough
exploded onto the nation's television screens. At last the appalling treatment of
the survivors and the bereaved was given prime-time coverage. Eight years on,
the injustices of Hillsborough had become newsworthy, revealing mass public
support for a further inquiry.

After last year’s May election Jack Straw inherited the Hillsborough appeal.
Stating his intention to “get to the bottom" of the disaster “once and for all” he set
up an independent scrutiny under a senior judge, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. It
was an unusual step. The judge would scrutinise ‘new evidence’ and assess
whether its availability to Taylor, the DPP or the Coroner would have changed
outcomes of their inquiries.

When Stuart-Smith arrived in Liverpool in October he made clear his intention to
follow his remit to the letter. His focus was “fresh evidence". In other words,
evidence previously not available to the inquiries.      He acknowledged full
agreement with the Taylor findings, commenting that the police had technically
“accepted liability". But he could not be a “court of appeal" for the divisional
court’s decision to uphold the inquest verdicts, also reminding families that the




                                           5
DPP’s decision not to prosecute officers was based on the independent legal
opinion of two eminent counsel.

From the outset the Scrutiny was bound by its tightly focused terms of reference.
As families received the ‘body files' on their loved ones, reading the statements
and viewing photographs and video footage for the first time, more questions and
doubts were raised than were answered.

Only a handful of families were allowed to meet the judge, each for half an hour.
Sitting in on those meetings it was obvious that they wanted information on the
precise circumstances in which their loves ones died. With dignity, tolerance and
patience they tried to impress on him their fears and the suffering. h|e was from
a different world, seemingly unable to grasp full significance of the denial of
access to crucial evidence.

Accompanied by a former South Yorkshire Police officer, my personal visit to
meet the judge confirmed families’ frustrations. He appeared unconcerned about
the altering of police statements. The Force had justified it on the grounds of
standardisation. Neither did he feel that questions over the reliability of the ‘old’
statements, now in the public domain, were significant. That they had been put
before the inquiries, without the opportunity for cross-examination, was of no
apparent relevance. His faith in those inquiries was unswerving.

But it is the quality and reliability of that evidence, untested in open court, which
remains crucial. The 3.15pm cut-off suppressed the evidence surrounding the
circumstances in which people died. The unprecedented use of West Midlands
Officers' summaries prevented the testing of crucial evidence and its disclosure
to families. And the South Yorkshire Police sailed close to the wind in altering
statements.
                 /

Without doubt the inquest verdicts stand in stark contrast to the ‘blame’
apportioned to the police and other agencies on the day. As there is no verdict
of ‘negligence’ available in the coroner’s court and unlawful killing is notoriously
difficult to prove, the verdicts should be left open. The entire coronial process
needs changing.

Police officers under investigation for ‘neglect of duty’ should not be able to walk
away, their pensions intact and reputations unblemished. It is incredible that
there is no comparable criminal offence - culpability has to amount to
manslaughter - to the disciplinary offence of neglect of duty. Again, the law and
force regulations must be reformed.

Apart from these issues, there has to be a new, full inquiry into the specific
circumstances in which people died focusing on the evacuation of pens, the
emergency and medical response and the broader ‘duty of care' relating to the
incident plan and why it was not used. It must deal with what happened on the
pitch, in the gymnasium, in the ambulances, at the hospitals and during the
immediate aftermath.



                                          6
There has to be a criminal investigation into the irregular procedures adopted by
the South Yorkshire Police and their solicitors in reviewing and altering officers’
statements. Did this amount to tampering or even conspiracy?

These are the issues I raised in detail in my final submission. While they cut little
ice with the judge they cannot be ducked by Jack Straw. Until they are dealt
with, and the rights to a full and open inquiry re-established, the Home
Secretary’s commitment to the bereaved and survivors will remain unrealised.



Professor Phil Scraton is co-author o f No Last Rights: The Denial o f Justice and
the Promotion o f Mvth in the Aftermath o f the Hillsborough Disaster. He is
Director o f The Hillsborough Project.

Additional research by Melanie McFadyean.
