From:       J L Goddard                      cc:   Mr Cogbill
            F8 Division                            Mrs Lee
            Ext. 3314                              Mr Hopley
                                                   Miss Wooldridge
             26 February 1991                      Ms Rex
                                                   .Mr Evnrrrr—




Mr Clavton



b 4(|   ON TAYLOR OFFENCES: DRAFT INSTRUCTIONS



Thank you for your minute of 22 February.

2.   I have the following further comments on the suggestions
made in my minute of 20 February. I use the numbering which
you have added.

        Suggestion 6. I am now content. Your earlier reference,
        albeit implied, to the players on the pitch may be
        sufficient.

        Suggestion 7. You seem to assume that my suggestions
        here would be more relevant if the Instructions were a
        public document. This is not my point at all. I, and I
        Division I believe, wish the Instructions to convey to
        Parliamentary Counsel the force that we, as
        administrators in touch with majority and minority ethnic
        opinion, attach to the view that the activity in point is
        racially offensive. To suggest that the activity is       ^
        merely juvenile and just plain silly does not adequately
        convey the views of "those instructing Counsel", among
        whom administrators are included.
     Suggestion 8. I remain unconvinced that there is any
     need to cover this point. However, I would not press for
     the omission of the last sentence of paragraph 3.10.

     Suggestion 9. We are agreed about the concept here: I
     would not suggest that the concept be exemplified by
     cigarettes rather than boiled sweets if I found both
     equally likely occurrences. But in my view, cigarettes
     blend naturally into the scene on the terraces whereas
     boiled sweets are more redolent of the playing fields and
     touchlines of classier venues.

     Suggestion 14. "Those instructing Counsel" include both
     lawyers and administrators. You are entitled to your
     view as I am to mine. More importantly, perhaps, my view
     is influenced by the support given by ACPO to the
     creation of this offence - ACPO regard it as adequately
     enforceable. I therefore make a modified suggestion that
     in the first sentence "well" should be replaced by "at
     times".

       Paragraph 3.21. Mr Evans' comments    are persuasive. I
       suggest that the last two sentences   of the paragraph
    o |should be deleted. You may wish to    re-insert in their
^ I
,      place what was the last sentence of   paragraph 3.19 in the
     |draft instructions attached to your    minute of 21
      December.

3.   As to Mr Hammond's suggestions, I am content with what is
proposed for the additions at the ends of paragraph 3.5 and
paragraph 3.26. As to his comments on paragraph 3.11, I have
some sympathy with the view that "implied consent" is somewhat
artificial. But I am not attracted to the defence you propose
because of the uncertainty it would create as to what might
reasonably cause offence and as to whom the offence is to be
caused. I prefer a defence on the lines that the person
concerned reasonably believed that the intended recipient
would have no objection. Where there is no intended recipient
there would, of course, be no such defence.

4.   As to authority to use Parliamentary Counsel, my
understanding has always been that H gave that authority in
agreeing to Mr Waddington's bid last Autumn for a Bill to be
ready to be introduced in the present Session if an unexpected
slot arose. I see no reason to suppose that that authority
lapsed because of Mr Macgregor's indication that the
Government should stand ready to introduce amendments to the
Wheeler Bill in Standing Committee: such amendments could
only be taken from drafts already prepared by Counsel.
Ht^^ver, you tell me that you proposed an addition to the
draft letter for the Home Secretary's signature attached to my
submission of 20 February which made an explicit request for
authority to use Counsel now. You did not discuss the terms
of this proposed addition with me. But I understand from
Private Office that the letter will issue with the addition
you proposed.




                         J. L GODDARL


                         J L GODDARD
