                         STEWARDS BRIEFING NOTES.

                    WALES V MEW ZEALAND. 4th NOVEMBER 1989.


  1. Gates open 12.30pm K.O. 2.30pm. Pull capacity expected.

  2. Following programme of events will take place.
     NZ team will arrive at Gate 1a under police escort at a time to be notified.
     Welsh team will walk as individuals from the Angel Hotel and entrance via
     gate 4 or 5. The supervisor at that gate will provide the player(s) with a
     steward escort to take them to the players dressing rooms under the South
     Stand via East Lower and South Lower concourse.
        At 1.50pm 400 small rugby balls will be placed around the ground and will
        kicked into the spectators areas. Stewards will not beinvolved in catching
        the balls.
        At this time field stewards will be extra vigilant to stop spectators
        running onto the pitch.

        At 2.0pm presentation of photographs will take place near the players tunnel

        The band of the RRW will march onto the field and play.

        At 2.20pm   the teams will come out.

  3. A charity      collection for the Boys Clubs of Wales will take place inside the
     ground.

  4. The chairman of the Hillsborough Enquiry will be at the match with his clerk
     They have been issued with green WRU passes and will show them on demand.

  5. Two sound equiment firms will be in the ground taking recordings for a new
     PA system. They will leave the ground to take readings in the street. They
     will be in possession of green WRU passes and will be allowed to enter any
     entrance. (Not as pass states 4 entrance only).

   6. Two South Glamorgan Ambulances will be in the ground adjacent to the East
      and West Treatment rooms. A Fire Service vehicle with bolt cutting
      equipment will be in the East Terrace Tunnel.

7. The WRU have two trolley jacks at the Stadium and any vehicles illegally
       parked will be notified to the ground staff for removal by them.

   8. The usual programme outlets will be used on this match and shouldalleviate
      the complaints from the Cardiff v NZ game.

   9.    There are a number of receptions inside the Cardiff and WRU ground and
         persons using these facilities should use entrances 4 or 5. They will be
         in possession of special passes.
         Cardiff Club members will entrance through Gate 4 with membership passes.
         Persond using the Cardiff Hospitality suites will be escorted to t eir
         ticket entrance by a steward from the West Gate entrance.

   10. The goats trailer box will enter via Gate 5 and park off the spectator route

    11.The new style standing area tickets are in use for the first time. The main
       difference on the front is the figures '89' and on the rear the Three
       Feathers printed over the plan of the ground. (Sample tickets in your
       stewards packs.)
