 IN THf- HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                      1st November 1993


 IN THE MATTER .01- APPLICATIONS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW BY




 SANDRA S TRINGER AND OTHERS CO/1009/92.




     SUMMARY OF APPLICANTS’ SUBMISSIONS BEFORE A DIVISIONAL COURT




J INTRODUCTION


 1.1    Leave was granted by Macphcrson J on 6th April 1993 to move, out of time,
        for Judicial Review. Applications are made to quash Inquisition and verdict
        of accidental death, rccordcd by a coroner’s jury at Sheffield on 28th March
        1991, recorded upon six persons, relatives o f the Applicants. They died,
        together with 89 other persons, in the disaster at Hillsborough stadium, the
        ground of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, on 15th April                1989.
        Application is made, further, for the holding of fresh inquests and for such
        other declaratory relief as may he appropriate.


        The Applicants


 2      All the Applicants, and their deceased relatives, are from Liverpool. They are,
        in alphabetical order:


               Sandra Stringer and Donna Carlile. who are the mother and
               sister of Paul Carlilc, who died at the age of 19;

               John and Theresa Glover, who are the parents of lan Glover,


                                               1
f\^eAC^
        Leslie and Doreen Jones, who are the parents o f Richard Jones,
        who died at the age of 25;

        Joan Sinclair, who is the sister o f Michael Kelly, who died at
        the age of 38;

        Peter and Joan Tootle, who are the parents o f Peter Tootle, who
        died at the age of 2 1;

        James and Anne Williams, who are the parents of Kevin
        Williams, who died at the age o f 15.


The Attorney-General declined in August 1992 (Applicants’ bundle p 455) to
give his authority for an application under scction 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988
("the Act")-


                            The factual background


The Coroner’s inquests into the death o f all 95 victims were opened formally
by Hot Majesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District) on 18th April
1989 and adjourned. On 17th April 1989. the Secretary of State for the Home
Department had orderd an enquiry into the disaster, conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor, with ihe help o f two assessors. His interim report was presented to
Parliament in August 1989.


On 1Kth April 1990 a jury was empanelled in Sheffield to hear the adjourned
inquests. By that time the Coroner knew that there^were live and important
issues as to the conduct o f the police and emergency services. The interim
report of Taylor LJ (exhibit AP/1 to the affidavit o f Albert Page, on behalf o f
a Respondent) had made the following findings;


       (A)     There had been serious fault on the part o f
               officers of the South Yorkshire Policc. "although
               there were others causcs" (See Chapter 18, page
                  49, paragraph 2 7 8 );


        B)        The emergency services (who the report said
                  were not to blame) should have been callcd
                  earlier than    they     were   (although   it   was
                  "Improbable" that lives would have been saved
                  had they been called earlier) (Report, page 53,
                  paragraph 310).


The Coroner also knew that, in addition to possible criminal proceedings, there
were court proceedings on foot against the South Yorkshire Police for
             •v


negligence. Section 4 of the exhibit SLP/1 to the Coroner's affidavit contains
transcripts o f meetings with interested parties on 26th February and 6th March
1990, at which the inter-relation of the civil proceedings and the inquest was
discussed.


                                 The Interim Inquests


Summaries o f the facts in relation to all 6 Applicants, and the other victims,
were presented, between 18th April and 4th May I WO. These proceedings are
referred to as the "interim inquests".


In September 1990, it was announced that the Director of Public Prosecutions
would not bring criminal proceedings in respect o f the disaster.


                                  The Main Inquest


The same jury heard the full inquest into the deaths of all victims between 19th
November 1990 and 28th March 1991, when the majority verdicts of
"accidental death" were recorded, with findings that the deceased had died of
multiple crush injuries, in respect o f all the deceased.
The facts arc further summarised in the Memorial submitted to the Attorney-
General, and, in relation to the individual eases, in the appendices to the
Memorial.


                               Legal Argument


Judicial Review - The Attorney-General's powers


The refusal o f the Attorney-General not to grant his fiat under section 13 o f
the Act does not prevent the court from granting Telief by way of Judicial
Review. The common law remedy is independent of statutory remedies. Ho Re
Rapier f Deceased) |I9 8 8 | QB 26. In both R v. Fast Berkshire Coroner, ex
nartc Buckley (Unreported) 11th November 1992 and R v. Poplar Coroner, cx
p;irte Thomas [1992J 3 W.L.R 485, the Divisional Court granted relief, despite
the refusal of a fiat o f the Attorney-General. The High Court has a greater
range of powers at common law than under section 13 o f the Act; R v. Inner
South London Coroner, ex carte Kendall f 19881 1 W.L.R. 1186, 1188A .lt has
the power U» order a fresh inquest (R v. West London Coroner, cx parte Gray
[1988] 1 Q.D. 467), and, in addition, the power to strike down the verdict
without necessarily ordering a fresh inquest. <R v. St I'ancras Coroner, ex parte
IIiti^ins (Unreported) CO/1285/87).


Insufficiency o f Enquiry - Grounds 1 and 2- The Interim Inquests.


When the Coroner empanelled his jury on 18th April 1990, at a lime when the
Director o f Public Prosecutions was still considering whether to institute
criminal proceedings, he announced that he would hold a scries o f interim
inquests (sometimes known in the proceedings as "mini-inquests"), the scope
of which would be confined to investigating the question o f "who" the
deceased was, in each case, and "when and where” he met his death.


The question "how" would be deferred until after the conclusion of the
criminal investigation. No controversial, critical or hostile questioning would
be permitted at the interim inquests.


                            The Statutory Questions


Tlie questions "who", "when", "where" and "how", ("the statutory questions")
fall to be answered by virtue of section 11 (5) (b) of the Act. The Coroner’s
decision to postpone the substance o f the inquest was no doubt made in the
light o f Rule 26, 27 or 28 of the Coroners Rules 1984, which remain in force
after the passing of the 1988 Act by virtue o f the Interpretation Act 1978.
The questions o f ’’who" "when" and "whore" would fall to be answered in the
light o f "summaries" read out by presenting officers o f the West Midlands
police: by the evidcncc of police officer who had seen video-tape evidence;
and by the evidence of pathologists. The Coroner admitted that his decision so
to proceed was in breach of Rule 37 of the Coroners Rules, which lays down
the procedure to be followed before the admission into evidence o f
documentary, as opposed to oral, evidence. The Coroner justified this unusual
course on the ground of practicality.




                            Undisclosed Evidence


In all cases, the evidence given or summarised at the interim inquests
suggested that the deceased had sustained fatal crush injuries, followed by
rapid unconsciousness and death.        However, in four cases, there is other
evidence, not given or summarised, in the possession o f the coroner or his
officers (from the West Midlands Police Force), that the deceased in question
was alive for a considerable time after sustaining injuries in the crush. It was
not possible for this evidence to be adduced at the main inquest because the
Coroner declined to hear evidence as to events after 3.15 pm.
 Paul Carlile The evidence relating to Paul Cariile is sumarised in the memorial
and the Appendix to the memorial. (Applicants’ bundle p 49 tf) T he following
evidence was not disclosed;


(a) that Hollinghurst. an off-duty nurse, had said in his statement that Paul
Carlile had been trying to climb up his legs;


(b) that I lollinghurst had been told to abandon his attempts to resuscitate him;


(b) that Paul Carlile, who was not taken to hospital, was the first casualty to
be taken from the pen:


fan Glover. Although the remarks of Joseph Glover that he was told by a
doctor in the temporary mortuary that a pulse was detected in Jan Glover were
reported in the interim inquest, Joseph (Hover was not called, although he
could have given important evidence in relation to the statutory questions, (See
Memorial Appendix; Applicants’ bundle pp 92-116)). He carricd his brother
with others across the pitch; his statement to this efTeet wan charged to "may
have carried".


Important evidence was not disclosed, and has become know to the family only
in Sepembcr 1993 after the Coroner has supplied his continuity charts.
(Respondent’s bundle p 1149 ff) The chart discloses that a P.C Fojut, who was
not called at the inquest, made a statement saying that he assisted in carrying
lun Glover into the temporary mortuary and “I thoughy he was still alive at
that stage as he was vomiting as we carricd him".


This evidence was known at the time o f the interim inquest to the police and
the coroner ; it was highly relevant to the stautory questions. Ian Glover’s
lather lias sworn an affidavit in October 1993, indicating that he hod never
been told o f this. (Applicants’ bundle puge 515)
              Michad_KcHy. (Memorial Appendix, Applicants' bundle, pages 177-209) Mr
              Kelly s ease was notable because the signs o f asphyxia upon his body were
              mild. The evidence .summarised referred to attempts by a P.C Maugham to
              resuscitate Mr Kelly before he was left with an St John’ ambulanceman.
              However, ul the main inquest, P.C Maugham gave evidence thut Mr Kelly was
              still breathing when he was handed over, significantly after the 3.15 time
              imposed by the Coroner, a matter omitted at the interim inquest.           P.C
              Maugham has spoken to the Applicant Joan Sinclair and told her that shortly
             after leaving Mr Kelly, conditions were chaotic and "nobody knew what they
             were doing". The failure to adduce this evidence at the interim inquest, before
             the eul-off time was imposed, has prevented an answering o f the statutory
             questions in Michael Kelly's case.


             Kevin Williams, (Applicants’ bundle, pages 224-317) The evidence in this
             case is complicated. The iwo interim inquests in this ease had the effect o f !
             disparaging and dismissing the evidence of P.C Bruder, a Merseyside Police
             Officer, and WPC Martin, a special constable from the South Yorkshire Police.
             Neither of these witnesses was ever called; yet evidence is available from I
            statements and the evidence o f Mrs Williams that both o f them were induced
            to chanye their evidence in favour of the sudden death theory.           Justice
            demanded that they be called. The effect of presenting summaries has therefore
            had the effect of suppressing answers to the statutory questions in the case o f
            Kevin Williams.

•
    5.10    These omissions prove the utter inadequacy of the summarising procedure, and
            demonstrate not simply procedural inadequacies, hut a systematic failure to
            address the stautory questions.       They indicate an apparent desire in the
            Coroner to establish rapid death, a matter further developed under "Bias",
            below.


    5 .11   The fact that evidence was available, but not called, to demonstrate that the
            above four died some time after the crush injuries, in circumstances not


                                                   2


                                                          7
explained, or required lo be justified, has Increased the sense o f injustice and
anguish Tell by the other Applicants, the parents of Richard Jones and Peter
Tootle, whose summaries (Applicants’ bundle pages 116ff and 209ff) gave
similar accounts of early death. They had no opportunity to investigate matters
which might have shown that their sons died later, in different circumstances,
than the hearsay summaries indicated, matters which will romain unknown to
them in the absence of a proper inquest.


Although it is suggested below, under "Bias", that the decision taken by the
Coroner has had, or may have had, favourable financial consequences for the
South Yorkshire authorities, it is emphasised that none o f the Applicants in the
present cases has been moved by a desire for financial compensation. Their
desire has been to satisfy the basic human need to discover the circumstances
 of the last moments of Iheir relatives’ lies, a function the Coroner s inquest is

 designed to discharge.


 insufficiency o f Enquiry - The 3.15 cut-off Roint-


 The effcct of imposing this limitation at the main inquest was to prevent any
 further enquiry into the individual circumstances o f the 95 deaths; whereas the
 Coroner had assured the families at the time of the interim inquests that the
 question "how" would be dealt with later. The inquest thereafer became simply
 a general enquiry into the circumstances of the disaster.


  Sincc none of the facts after 3.15 pm might be investigated, the families were
  denied the opportunity to investigate the matters which had, as they now know,
  been withheld from them in the summarising procedure. In particular, the
  Coroner irrationally failed to comply with the reasonable requests for the
  calling of the evidence requested by Mr and Mrs Jones and Mr and Mrs
  Glover. (See letters Applicants’ bundle pages 344).


  It follows that the statutory question "how" was never properly considered, in
the eases «!’ the six Applicants and the other 95 victims. Fur example, the
name o f Peter Tootle was not mentioned throughout the main inquest until his
name was read out in » formal list by the Coroner at the end of the summing-
up. It is submitted that in reality there has been no proper inquest into any of
the six deaths in this case; only a flawed hearsay summary and a general, hut
seriously incomplete, enquiry into ihe disaster.


Insufficiency o f Enquiry - Failure to call relevant witnesses.


The following witnesses should have been called to describe the general
circumstances o f the incident, in addition to the numerous South Yorkshire
police who gave general descriptions. Phillips (Applicants’ bundle page 317)
, Ashton (page 329). licclcston (337), P.C Brudcr. WPC Martin. Paul Glover
(about events after 1.15pm). P.C Fojut. Their evidence was important lo all
ihe .statutory questions, and, in cach case, was controversial, and therefore
 relevant, in that it contained express or implied criticisms of the South

 Yorkshire authorities.


 There was no sufficient investigation into the failure to implement the Major
 Disaster Plan promptly, the failure to evacuate casualties promptly, the failure
 to call ambulances promptly, the failure to request help from the Fire Brigade
 before 3.13pm, and the failure to broadcast for the help of doctors and nurses
 before 3,29pm. when, according to the Taylor report, "it was too late".


 As a matter of first principle, it is wrong to impose a rigid test in any judicial
 proceedings as to the relevance of evidence. Where 95 separate deaths were
 under investigation, the only test, for cach potential witness, should have been,
 "Does this witness assist in resolving the statutory questions?"




 The failure to allow the iurv to answer the question "Hoag*.
      8.1      Submission.      The Coroner was wrong to leave only the conclusions o f
               unlawful killing, accidental death, and an open verdict to the jury. He should
               have permitted or required a narrative verdict in the circuinstanccs o f the case.
               He should have enabled the jury to record in the conclusion to their vcrdict any
               findings as tn the preventabiiity o f the deaths, that is. any findings o f failure
              by act or omission which contributed causally to the deaths. The inquiry of
              Taylor U hud found that there was more than one cause (See paragraph 3.2,
              above); a reasonable conclusion which ought to have been left to the jury.


     8.2
              Alternatively, he aught to have left the verdict o f "lack o i W       or -accidental
              death aggravated by lack ofcarc" (or, better, "accidental death attended by lack
              o f care”) to the jury.


    >.3      To direct the jury . t o the only answers to the statutory questions were
             "unlawful killing", "accidental death" and "open verdict" was a failure to
             comply with the schcmc o f the Coroners Act 1988, a scheme which, in respect
             of the issues involved in these applications, has remained essentially unaltered
             since 1887.



    s.4      In particular, the verdict o f "accidental death" in the circumstances o f the case.
             given the Coroner’s directions about it. rendered the entire inquest empty and
             meaningless. Il covered the entire spectrum of causation and contributory
n
            causation from simple accident to widespread negligence falling short, in any
            one ease, o f manslaughter. (See summing-up. section 6 o f exhibit Sl.P/l to the
            coroner's affidavit. Day 75, paee 62). It cannot be discovered whether the jury
            found that no-one was tn blame, whether one individual was at fault, or
            whether a variety of persons and institutions were at fault. Although the
            modem Coroners' Kulcs dictate that no-one may formally he held civilly „r
            criminally liable   B 8 inaiW t)f form   in the Inquisition,   it   is clear from the
            schedule to the Coroners Act 1887 that the question "how" (which remains the
            same in Ihe 1988 Act) may be answered by a concise narrative. Primary and
            contributory causcs may be given.


                                                   Ifl

                                                     10
                                              The legislative history


           8.3    Section 3 (2) of the Coroners Act 1887 contained essentially the same test as
                  scction 11 (5) o f the 1988 Act; the statutory questions arc identical. Scction
                  18 o f the 1887 Act provided for the use of forms as set out in the Schedules
                  to the Act, or such other forms as the Lord Chancellor might prescribe, and
                  "the statements therein may he made in concisc and ordinary language", By
                  virtue of section 37, the forms


                         " may be used in all mattera to which they apply, and when so
                         used, shall be sufficient in law."
/'**
       Q          The Second Schedule to that Act prescribes an acceptable form of Inquisition

                  which, after the formal part, reads,


                  "Here set out the circumstances o f the death, ax fo r example


           8.4    There then follows suggestions for short narrative findings, many but not ail
                  o f which are concerned with the attribution o f fault.


            8.5   The 1887 Act provided that all inquests be held by a Coroner and jury; section
                  4 (5) contemplated that only a majority might agree on the vcrdict.
r *
       ^ ^ 8 .6   The Coroners Rules 1916, replacing the terms of the Second Schedule adopt
                   a very similar approach. They were amended so as to provided for the
                   inclusion of the offence of infanticide by the Coroners Inquisition Order 1923

                   S.I. No 1365.


            8,7   The Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 provided, inter alia, for the holding of
                   inquests in certain cases without a jury. The Coroners Rules 1927 S.I. No 344
                   provided permissivelv lor the use o f inquisitions in the same form (Rule 6,
                   Schedule, Paragraph 3) as before.

                                                          II


                                                          11
g      The Coronets Rules l'« 3 S.I 205 embodied a change of approach. Rules 26
       and 27 prevented the jury from going beyond their statutory function to

       express opinions. Rule 33 provided that


                  "no verdict shall be framed in such a way as tn appear to

                  determine any question of civil liability.


           Hy Rule 42,


                  "The forms set out in the Third Schedule hereto, with such
                  modifications as circumsances may require, may be used for the
                  purposes for which they are expressed to be applicable."


           The notes to that schedule suggest a tighter form o f answering the question
           ••Uow”. U is submitted that this schedule is the origin of the modern practice
           of limiting findings to one of the suggested general descriptions; an advantage

           tor statistical purposes.


            The Coroners Rules 1056 S.I. 1691 provided for the Coroners Court to take
8.9
            cognisance of the new crime of causing death by dangerous driving.


            The Coroners Rules 1984 preserved the schemc of the 1953 Rules. An
8.10
            important am endm ent is made by Rule 42, which prohibits the Coroners
            Court from framing a vcrdici in such a way as to appear to determine any
             question of "criminal liability on the part o f a name person". (Section 56 ot the
             Criminal I .aw Act 1977 had abolished the duty and power of a coroncr’s court
             U> commit for trial for any offencc of homicide.) Rule 60 and the form ol
             inquisition 4 are substantially the same as Rule 42 and the prescribed form of

             the 1953 Rules.


    8.11     It is submitted therefore that Parliament, by preserving the 1887 statutory
             questions in the 1988 Act. preserves the duty of the coroners court to answer
        the question "how" in any way that is appropriate in a given case. Normally,
        il muy be sufficient ui record a verdict of "suicide" or "misadventure"; in other
        cases, a narrative may be required, recording, if necessary, primary and
        contributory causes in short, ordinary sentences.


8.12    Rule 42 cannot, and does not purport to, limit the words of the Act; it is
        concerned with form alone. It prohibits the use o f the words "manslaughter by
        John Smith" and ’the death was caused by the actionable negligencc o f the
        South Yorkshire Policc". A conclusion that death was caused by "Unlawfully
        killed by the grossly negligent opening o f the outer gates by the South
        Yorkshire police, causing a fatal crush to build up; a contributory causc was
        the failure o f the emergency services to be summoned promptly to the
        deceased XY after he was injured by the crush." is within the Aci, and might,
        if the facts warrant it. be the only way in which the question "how" might
        properly be answered. A less inculpatory verdict might be, "Accidcntal death,
         resulting from the negligent decision by officers of the South Yorkshire Police
         to open ....[as abovcj"


                                    The authorities on "how"


 8.12    R v. Surrey Coroner, ex narte Campbell [1982] 1 Q.B. 661. Watkins IJ held,
         obiter, that "tack of care by another or others" did not contravene Rule 33 o f
         the 1953 Rules (now Rule 42).


                 "Such conflict as may in any given circumstances appear to
                 arise between rule 33 and the duty to enquire "how" must be
                 resolved in favour o f the statutory duty to inquire whatever the
                 consequences of this may be” ( p 672E-F)


 8.13     R v. West London Coroner, ex parte Gray [1988] 1 Q.B. 467.             The jury
          foreman unnounced the conclusion as "unlawfully killed attributed to the
          degree after he was overpowered." However, the Coroner recorded only
       "unlawfully killed". It was held that the full words should have been recorded,
       and that there was no conflet between Rule 42 and the statutory questions, (per
       Watkins LJ. applying cx parte Campbell, at page 479).




•14          SlHjthw^ ,C o r o n e r , cx parte Hicks |1987] 1 W.L.R. 1624.        The
       Divisional Court reviewed the history o f the 1887 Act and regulations. It held
       that there was no confict between Rule 42 and the stautory enquiry; "lack of
       care" might therefore be an appropriate verdict Croom-Johnson I .J continued
       at page 16331’;


                "The histoiy o f the verdict "lack of care” indicates that it is
                appropriate only to the physical condition o r the deceased of
                causing death and should not be used to indicate a breach of
                duty by some other person"


      Lack of care "should generally be regarded as the obverse of scif-ncglcct."A
      vcrdicl of "accident, aggruvted by lack of care is illogical".


             "The word "how" is wide and it is not possible to foresee every
             way in which someone may meet his death.             Nevertheless
             common sense dictates that if the death is caused by accident it
             is unlikely in the extreme that it will also have been caused by
             lack o f care. In those cases where it is thought to be a possible
             verdict or part o f a verdict, the jury should receive a very
             careful direction as to its meaning and the need for a clear
             causal connection between the lack o f care and the death.”
             (1634 G-H)


5     R y--Po^Jnouth.Coroncr. cx oarte Andt? r m The Divisional Court followed
      the approach o f ax parte Cmppfoll and ex parte Hicks. Per Munn LJ. page
      1648A .
                   " I do not understand how death can be aggravated by lack of
                   carc. but I do understand how a cause o f death can he
                   aggravated and I proceed on the basis that this is what the
                   applicant intended by his application        I add that I do not
                   dccidc that aggravation by lack o f carc is never appropriate in
                   a case of accidental death, but like Croom-Johnson I.J. I find
                   that such a case is unlikely in the extreme."




    8-15   R V- Inner South Corner, ex parte Kendall 119X8] 1 W.L.R. 1186. Simon
           Brown J emphasised at page 1190D-F that the conclusions in the Rules were
9          only suggestions which "may" be used. Verdicts o f "abuse o f volatile
           substances", "accidcntal death resulting from the inhalation ofTippex thinncrs",
           or "solvent abuse; inhalation of Tippcx thinncrs" were lawful.


    8.16   R„vJ?r Whittington. Coroner for Birmingham and Solihull, cx narte Secretary
           of, Stats...fur..the Home Department (DC) (Unreported) 31st July 1990.
           Hutchison J, with whom Watkins LJ agreed, considered that the word "how".


                  "must mean "by what means", rather than embodying some
                  vague concept as "in what broad circumstances."" (Page 16F-
                  I;.).



           I le citcd ex nurte Hicks and cx parte Anderson, concluding that,


                  "if on the particular facts the coroner lakes the view that there
                  is evidence which could justify a jury in conclding that lack o f
                  care aggravated the cause of death, then it would, in my
                 judgment, be appropriate to leave such a verdict."


           Watkins LJ concurred.


                                                11

                                                  15
 R -^C iiro iio r far-kast Berkshire. ex parte Bucklcv (DC) (Unrcported) 20th
 November 1992. The Divisional Court, in an application for Judicial Review,
 quashed a verdict and ordered a fresh inquest where a schizophrenic had died
 in Broadmoor after rccciving sedative injections, where the Coroner refused to
 leave "lack o f care" m the jury. Citing ex parte Hicks and Whittington. Laws
 J.with whom Watkins I J agreed, held (1) that lack o f care, whether free­
 standing or adjectival, was wholly different from a finding ol* civil negligence.
 (2) that il was concerned with circumstances mush narrower than those in a
 trial o f civil liability for negligence, and (3) that such a verdict arises only
 where there was lack o f care in the events or circumstances immediately
 surrounding the death. 1here must be a close causal connection.


 R v. Poplar Coroner, cx         Tlw m « (1993] 2 W .LR. 547 (CA). This was
an appeal from the grant of Judicial Review, ordering the coroner to hold an
inquest. On the tacts it was held, on appeal, that the coroner was justified In
holding that he there was no need to hold an inquest, tn the Divisional Court
Tudors Evans J had cited ([1992] 3 W.L.R 485, 492-3) with approval, and
followed, the dicta o f Watkins LJ in ex parte Campbell, at 8.12, above,
emphasising that a verdici o f "lack o f carc" can be free-standing.


In the Court of Appeal, Dillon LJ said, after an analysis of ex parte I ticks:


        Other verdicts could easily be devised, if it were appropriate
       to hold an inquest, since forms of inquisition set out in form 22
       in Schedule 4 to the Coroners Rules 1984 (S.I. 1984 No 552)
       arc merely suggestions and not mandatory." (at 553C)


Farquharson L.J. agreed.


Simon Brown L.J. spoke o f contributory causes:


       'As in litigation, why should he not sometimes find a death to
                 he the result of two causes, either one o f which could serve lo
                 make it unnatural." (at 5540), and


                 " merely because the coroner’s inquest may nowadays be
                 thought lacking any very d ear or cogcnt role is no sufficient
                 reason for adopting too narrow nn approach to section 8"


          I le proceeded to refer to his own words in ex parte Kendall.


8.19      Conclusion. The Coroner ought to have allowed the jury to            reflect their findings
in a concise narrative.         Alternatively, although it is acknowledged that there arc       kgd
difficulties in the strict words "lack o f carc" or     "accidcntal death aggravated by lack of
care", these could        have been avoided by sornc such formula as "accidcntal death
          attended by lack of care", provided that that lack o f care had a causal link with the
deaths.
8.20      It is no answer to these arguments to contend that the lawyers appearing at the
          inquest pul forward no contrary arguments.


                 "In an inquest it should not be forgotten that there                  oe no puties.
there is no indictment, there is no             defence, there is no trial, simply an attempt to
                 establish facts. It is an inquisitorial proccss. a            process           of
investigation" Per Lane CJ in R v. South                London Coroner, cx parte Thompson.
Unreported. July                1982. cited in cx narte Gray f 19881 Q.B. 467, 473K0


9         Unlawful killing


           The Coroner's directions to the jury upon the elements o f the olTonee of
          manslaughter were wrong. He directed them in accordance with the judgment
          of Watkins LJ in R v. West London Coroner, ex parte Gray ancLothers [19881
          1 Q.tt. 467 by directing them on the application o f the concept of recklessness.
          (Sec, for example, Exhibit SI.P/1. Section ft. Day 75, 21st March, pages 45-
          48).   This is a misdirection; the otTcncc o f involuntary manslaughter is
           established if there is proof o f a grossly negligent act or omission causing
           death; R v. Andrews [1937] A.C; R v. Bateman (1925) 19 CAR 8.                This
           principle had been rc-affiracd by the Court o f Appeal (Criminal Division) in
           r   v. Hollowav; R v. Adomako: R v. Prentice and Sullivan (Unrcported) 20th
           May 1993.


     9.1   In particular, the Coroner ought to have directed the jury to apply the tests set
           out at page 10 o f the transcript o f that judgment; any o f four states of mind
           in one or more individual might lead a jury to the finding of gross negligence;


                    " (a) Indifference to an obvious risk of injury to health;
r-

                    (b) Actual foresight of the risk coupled with the determination
                    nevertheless to run it;


                    (c) An appreciation o f the risk coupled with an intention to
                    avoid it but also eoupled with such a high degree o f negligence
                    in the attempted avoidancc as the jury consider justify
                    conviction;


                    (d) Inattention or failure to advert to a serious risk which goes
                    beyond "mere inadvertence" in respect of an obvious and
                    important matter which the defendant’s duty demanded he
                    should address."


     9.2    The third of these states o f mind was particularly worthy of close consideration
            in ihe present ease.
            The Coroner directed the jury on the question o f opening the gates. SLP/1 to
            the Coroner’s affidavit. Section 6, Day 77. 25th March, pages 24-25). He
            directed them that the decision to opn the gates was taken in the "pretty
            desparatc" and life-threatening situation at the turnstiles, where a crush had
            built up. I lc continued (page 25. B-C),


                                                   JJL
                                                         13
               " Wc know that 95 people died on the tcrraccs and wc know
               also that not a single person died outside the turnstile areas. It
               is very easy to say, well, there you are, that must have been a
               wrong decision bccause nobody died there and 95 died inside,
               but yuu cannot do that because you do not actually know what
               would have happened if the gates had not been opened           All
               the cvidcncc would seem • not all but virtually all the evidence
               would seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open
               the gates was a reasonable one in the circumstances.


    The jury may have disagreed, preferring, as a matter of tact, the interpretation
    of the Taylor Enquiry (A P/l, chapter 10, chapter 11 ("The blunder i>n opening
    the gates"), and chapter 16. Had the jury rcachcd these Tactual conclusions,
    state of mind (c) in 9.1. above, which the Ifr parte QttBL approach docs not
    includc, should have been considered in relation to this ccntral event in the

    Hillsborough disaster.


    B ia s .    The Coroner failed to disqualify himself as Coroner, and to invite
    another coroner to preside over the inquest in accordance with section 14 (1)
    o f the Coroners Act 1988, on the ground that he was so closely associated with
     an interested party before him, namely, Sheffield City Council, that there was
     a real danger of bias in the discharge of his duties according to the principles
     in R v. Gough [1093J 2 W.L.R 883 (HL). The verdicts should be quashed on

     this ground alone.


I    It appears from section 1 o f the Coroners Act 1988, and the corresponding
     section 1 of the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 Act, which the 1988 Act
      replaced, that the coroner was appointed by Sheffield City Council, or its
      precedessor.       Ry virtue of paragraph I o f Schedule 1 to the Coroners Act
      1988, the coroner’s salary is the subject of annual agreement between the

      Council and himself-
    10.2     Sheffield City Council appeared before the coroner and the jury as an
             interested purty within the meaning o f paragraph 20 o f the Coroners Rules
             1984.     11 was represented by ”Mr Gregory. Solicitor for Sheffield City
             Council” at the interim inquests in May 1990, and by solicitor and leading
             counscl at the main inquest (Affidavit of Stefan Popper, paragraph 10, page 9,

             and paragraph 16, page 14).


    10.3     The conduct of the City Council was called into question at the inquest. It was
             the body responsible Tor safety at sports grounds.     In his summing-up, the
             Coroner gave strong cncouragcment to the jury to find that the City Council
             could not be guilty of unlawful killing (22nd March 1991. pages 31-37).


9   10.4     Both the Sheffield City Council and the South Yorkshire Police Authority, to
             which the Sheffield City Council made a precept from its community taxes,
              had a direct financial interest in establishing that deaths were followed very
              soon after the fatal crush. A writ was issued by the joint administrators ol the
              estate o f two victims of the Hillsborough disaster on 4th May 1990, in respect
              o f injuries caused prior to death; judgment was given by Hidden J on 3 1st July
              1990. holding that no damages are recoverable for pain and lcar when
              unconsciousness and death follow shortly after the onset of such pain and fear.
                       v T hief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police 11992] 1 A.F..R. 690

              <CA)).


     10.5     The Council, and the South Yorkshire Police, had therefore a potential
               financial interest in the decision o f the Coroner, made on or about 19th
               November 1990. that cvidcncc relating to events after 3.15pm was not to be
               admitted, even where there was evidence that victims were alive after that time
               and might have suffered prolonged pain before death. (See Coroner’s affidavit,
               paragraph 17, page 15).


      10.6     The appearnncc of bias in supported by the fact that the Coroner s solicitor in
               the present applications is Sarah Pimlott. employed by the Sheffield City


                                                      20


                                                     29
       Council, who submits an affidavit asserting that it is against the public interest
       lo hold fresh inquests. The identity o f interest between the Coroner and an
       interested party is thus openly acknowledged.


10.7   The Applicants will seek to rely upon the arguments presented earlier in this
       Argument lo demonstrate the appearance o f bias within the principles in R v.
       (iputih [1903] 2 W.L.R. 883 (HL).


10.8   Further, rcliancc is placcd on the following indications o f apparent bias.


10.9   Provision of witness statements. The Coroner decided tltal he would not
       distribute statements in advance to interested parties. (Coroner’s affidavit,
       paragraph 14. page 15; Lxhibit SLP/1, scction 4, 30/10/90, pages 10-11), It
       appeared, however, to parties at the inquest that the police officers had acccss
       to numerous statements. (Affidavit of Sandra Stringer o f 19/10/93, Applicants’
       bundle pages 513-4). The relatives were permitted only lo read through their
       statements very shortly before giving evidence. This matter has to be rcgrdcd
       agiiust the buckgound that only one barrister appeared for the families at the
        maiti inquest, whereas several appeared for the various Yorkshire authorities
        and individuals.




10.10 The selective use of the Tavlor report.Thc Coroner excluded the evidence of
        Ashton, Phillips and Kecleston (see paragraph 7.1, above}.        He did so, as
        appears from his affidavit at pages 23-25), on the ground that the findings of
        the Taylor report, inter alia, suggested their evidence would not be helpful.
        However, a different attitude was taken to the Taylor Enquiry’s findings effccts
        of alcohol on the disaster. Taylor LJ effectively ruled out the consumption of
        alcohol as a causc of the disaster; however, the question o f drink occupied a
        disproportionately large placc in the interim and main inquests.


 10.11 At the interim inquest into the death of Richard Jones, for example, the
       Applicant Leslie Jones was moved to complain about the emphasis upon drink.
       In the summing-up, the Coroner devoted 17 pages to dealing with the subject
       (SI.P/1, Day 76, 22nd March, pages 39-56)


10.12 The Taylor Report suggested a succession of blunders on the part o f the policc.
       including failures after 3.15 pm. (See paragraph 7.2, above)


10.13 The Taylor report should have been consulted in order to foresee the issues at
       the inquest. H should not have been used as a means o f sifting issues so as
       apparently lo exclude those areas o f enquiry where criticisms o f the Yorkshire
       authorities might be placcd before the jury.


10.14 Thti treatment of bereaved witnesses.       It is submitted that expressions o f
       sympathy on the part of the Coroner and the South Yorkshire authorites
       became so frequent and condescending that they appear to have been expressed
       as a substitute for serious enquiry. In some cases this became offensive. For
       example, Stephanie Jones (Appplicants' bundle 116-177), who, as the daughter
       o f the Applicants Leslie and Doreen Jones, lost her brother and a friend in the
       disaster, after receiving several expressions o f sympathy, was told,


               "You have already been complimented up hill and down dale....I
               think you have quitted yourself well. You were a credit to your
               Mum and Dad.         I am sure they were proud o f you this
               afternoon."


10.15 It is reasonable for the families to feel that this treatment was a substitute for
        enquiry, effectively an apology for the empty character of the main inquest,
        with its artificial 3.15pm cut-off.


10.16 It is submitted that the Coroner ought not to have conducted the inquest, or at
        the very leusi to have drawn his sensitive position to the attention of all
        interested parties. The relatives cannot be said to liave "waived" any rights in
          relation lo apparent bias. In any event, il is clear from the Coroner'&affidavit
          that, at Icats at the main inquest, only 44 o f the bereaved families were
          represented. (Coroner’s affidavit page 14).




    11    Uelav. The Divisional Court is asked to order fresh inquests in the 6 cases. It
          is submitted that the fmi(ie.s are not to blame in any way for the delay, and
          that, in the circumstances o f this case, it is in the public interest that fresh
          inquests be held before a Coroner outside South Yorkshire. Proposals will be
          made, if appropriate, at the hearing as to how the evidence necessary at such
          fresh inquests might sensibly be limited.




    3 Raymond Buildings
    Gray’s Inn
    London WCl


    29th October 1993.                                         Alun Jones QC




                                                                       Edward Fitzgerald.

#




                                                 22.

                                                  21
