                                                                                         2   3 OCT     1989 \dV°0
                                                                                             3223
                          NOTICES OF AMENDMENTS
                                              given on

                              Friday 20th October 1989

                            CONSIDERATION OF BILL

                   FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL [LORDS], AS AMENDED

 M r Colin Moynihan

     Page     1, line 14 [Clause 2], at end insert—
                ) The Secretary of State shall not make a designation under subsection (2) above
           without giving the Football Membership Authority an opportunity to make
           representations about the proposed designation, and taking any representations he
           receives into account.’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                   2
    Page      3,   line   5 [Clause 5], at beginning insert ‘Subject to subsection (3A) below,’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                   3
    Page       3, line 11 [Clause 5], at end insert—
              ‘(3A) The Secretary of State shall not designate any body corporate as the Football
            Membership Authority unless he is satisfied that its articles of association make
           provision securing—
                 (a) that its Board shall comprise a Chairman and six other members, of whom
                    the Chairman and four of the other members are persons approved by the
                    Secretary of State before their election as Chairman or as member, as the case
                    may be, and the remaining two members are persons nominated by the
                    Secretary of State, and
                 (b) that the Chairman shall be a person who has no such financial or other
                   interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the performance of his functions as
                    Chairman;
           and all the members of the Board shall hold office in accordance with the articles of
           association of the body corporate.
             (3B) The Secretary of State may withdraw the designation of a body corporate as
           the Football Membership Authority if he ceases to be satisfied of the matters
           mentioned in subsection (3A) above.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                  4
    Page       3, line 19 [Clause 3], leave out ‘withdrawn’ and insert ‘divested’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                           5
    Page    3, line 34 [Clause 5], at end insert—
          ‘(Where the Secretary of State withdraws the designation of a body as the Football
        Membership Authority, he shall, as it appears to him to be appropriate to do so, lay
        before each House of Parliament a report stating his reasons for the withdrawal.’.
  3224                   Notices of Amendments: 20th October 1989

                                    Football Spectators Bill continued
 M r Gplin Moynihan

     Page     3, line     47    [Clause 4], after ‘section’, insert—
              ‘(a)’.

 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                     7
     Page      3, line    47    [Clause 4], after ‘Association’, insert ‘,the Football of Wales’.

 M r Colin Moynihan
     _                                                                                8
     Page 3, line 48 [Clause 4], at end insert and
             (b) give such persons as appear to it to represent the interests of football
               supporters an opportunity to make representations. ’.

 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                          9
     Page 5, line 12 [Clause 5], at end insert ‘and requiring that in Wales any
         application form for membership of the scheme shall also be available in Welsh’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                        10
    Page 5, line 35 [Clause 5), leave out ‘imposing charges specified in’ and insert ‘for
        the imposition of charges under’.

M r Colin Moynihan

    Page 6, line 44 [Clause 7], leave out from ‘with’ to end of line and insert ‘the date
        of the conviction.’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                    12
    Page      6, line 47 [Clause 7\, leave out ‘be withdrawn’ and insert ‘cease on the date of
           the conviction’.

M r Colin Moynihan
    „                                                                                      13
    Page 7, line 9             [Clause 7], after ‘court’, insert—
           ‘(i)’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                    14
    Page     7,   line 10       [Clause 7], at end insert—
                      ‘(ii) shall explain to him in ordinary language the effect of the conviction
                    on his membership of the national football membership scheme; and’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                    15
    Page     7,   line 13       [Clause 7], leave out ‘give’ and insert ‘send’.
                            Notices of Amendments: 20th October 1989                          3225

                                        Football Spectators Bill continued
 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                   16
     "age          7, line 18 [Clause 7], leave out ‘send’ and insert ‘give’.


 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                   17
     Page          7, line 19 [Clause 7], at end insert—
              ‘( )Where, on an appeal against a person’s conviction of the relevant offence or
           against a sentence of imprisonment imposed on him in dealing with him for the
           offence, his conviction is quashed or the sentence is reduced to one which is not a
           sentence of imprisonment taking immediate effect, the court which determines the
           appeal or, as the case may be, the court to which the case is remitted, shall cause
           notice of the quashing of the conviction or of the sentence imposed to be sent to the
           persons specified in subsection (7)(b)(i) and (ii) above and, where his conviction is
           quashed, the Authority shall re-admit him to membership of the scheme, but without
           prejudice to any proceedings under the scheme to exclude him from membership’.


M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                 18
    Page      8,     line    22    [Clause 10], at end insert—
              ‘(2A) The licensing authority shall not refuse to grant a licence without—
                   (a) notifying the applicant in writing of the proposed refusal and of the grounds
                      for it;
                   (b) giving him an opportunity to make representations about them within the
                     period of twenty-eight days beginning with the service of the notice; and
                   (c) taking any representations so made into account in making its decision.’.


M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                 19
    Page     8,     line     31    [Clause 10], at end insert—
              ‘(4A) A licence to admit spectators may also include conditions requiring specified
           descriptions of spectators to be refused admittance to the premises to watch
           designated football matches, or specified descriptions of designated football matches
           or a particular such match.’.


M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                 20
    Page      8, line 46           [Clause 10], after ‘notice’, insert ‘in writing’.


M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                 21
    Page       9, line 3          [Clause 10], after ‘holder’, insert ‘in writing’.


M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                 22
    Page      9, line 8           [Clause, IQ], leave out ‘his’ and insert ‘the’.
 3226                  Notices of Amendments: 20th October 1989

                                   Football Spectators Bill continued
 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                23
     Page 11, line 23 [Clause 73], at end insert—
            ‘( ) Before exercising its power under subsection (2) above to require the inclusion
         of specified terms and conditions in any saftey certificate, the licensing authority shall
         consult the local authority, the chief officer of police and either the fire authority
         (where the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county) or the
         building authority (in any other case).
            ( ) As respects those terms and conditions, the local authority need not consult the
         chief officer of police, the fire authority or the building authority under section 3(3)
         or 4(8) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 before issuing a safety certificate or
         about any proposal to amend or replace one.’

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                              24
    Title, line 3, a fte r‘spectators;’, insert‘to provide for the safety of spectators at such
         matches by means of such licences and the conferment of functions on the licensing
         authority in relation to safety certificates for grounds at which such matches are
         played;’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                25
    Page    1, line      15    [Clause 7], after ‘above’ insert—
            ‘(a)’-

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                26
    Page    1,     line 17 [Clause 7], at end insert ‘; and
                 (b) may provide, in relation to the match or description of match designated by
                    the order or any description of match falling within the designation, that
                    spectators admitted to the ground shall be authorised spectators to the extent,
                    and subject to any restrictions or conditions, determined in pursuance of the
                    order by the licensing authority under this Part of this Act,’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                27
    Page 2,      line 2       [Clause 7], after ‘if, insert—
          ‘(a)’.

M r Colin Moyniham
                                                                                                28
    Page 2,         line 4   [Clause 1], after ‘match’, insert*; or
                 (b) he is an authorised spectator by virtue of subsection (3)(b) above,’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                29
    Page 8, line 31 [Clause 10], at end insert—
           ‘(4B) Where a designation order includes the provision authorised by section
        l(3)(b) above as respects the admission of spectators to any ground as authorised
        spectators, the licensing authority may, by notice in writing to the licence holder,
        direct that, for the purposes of any match or description of match specified in the
        direction, the licence shall be treated as including such specified terms and conditions
                        Notices of Amendments: 20th October 1989                                    3227

                                     Football Spectators Bill continued
             as respects the admission of spectators as authorised spectators as the licensing
             authority considers appropriate; and the licence shall have effect, for that purpose,
             subject to those terms and conditions.’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                        30
     Page 9, line 41              [Clause 10], after ‘licence’ insert ‘or in the case of subsection (4B) in
         the direction’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                                        31
    Page      2, line 40 [Clause 2], at end insert—
              ‘0 Where a person is charged under subsection (1) above with an offence of
           entering or remaining on premises, and was at the time of the alleged offence not
           disqualified from being a member of the national football membership scheme, it
           shall be a defence to prove that he was allowed to enter the premises as a spectator by
           a person reasonably appearing to him to have lawful authority to do so.’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                                        32
    Page       5,     line 15     [Clause 5], after ‘that’, insert ‘, except in an emergency,’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                       33
    Page     8, line 7 [Clause 9], after ‘prove’, insert ‘either that the spectators were
           admitted in an emergency o r’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                     34
    Page     9, line 15 [Clause 10], after ‘that’, insert ‘, except (in the case of the
           procedures) in an emergency,’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                                        35
    Page       13,    line   19    [Clause 15], at end insert ‘in ordinary language’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                                        36
    Title,     line    4,    leave o u t‘by designated agencies’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                 37
    Page      7, line 43 [Clause 5], at end insert—
              ‘(5) The expenses of the licensing authority shall be paid by the Secretary of State.’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                38
    Page       9, line 36 [Clause 10], at end insert—
               ‘( ) The fees charged on the issue of licences—
                  (a) may be fixed so as to reimburse the licensing authority their expenses under
                     this Part of this Act; and
                  (b) shall be paid by tlie licensing authority to the Secretary of State.’.
 3228                Notices of Amendments: 20th October 1989

                                 Football Spectators Bill continued
 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                              39
     Page 9       [Clause 10], leave out lines 44 to 46.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                              40
     Page     17, line    40 [Clause 21], leave out    out of money provided by Parliament,’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                               41
     Page      11, line 43 [Clause 13], at end insert—
              ‘( ) Section 5(3) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (appeals against terms
           and conditions of safety certificates) shall have effect with the insertion, after
           paragraph (ii), of the words “but not against the inclusion in a safety certificate of
           anything required to be included in it by the Football Licensing Authority under
           section 13(2) of the Football Spectators Act 1989” .’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                              42
    Page       21, line 23 [Schedule 1], at end insert—
              ‘( ) any offence under section 12 of the Licensing Act 1872 (persons found drunk
           in public places, etc.) of being found drunk in a highway or other public place
           committed while the accused was on a journey to or from a designated football match
           being an offence as respects which the court makes a declaration of relevance;
              ( ) any offence under section 91(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 (disorderly
           behaviour while drunk in a public place) committed in a highway or other public
           place while the accused was on a journey to or from a designated football match being
           an offence as respects which the court makes a declaration of relevance;’.

M r Peter Lloyd
                                                                                           43
    Page       21, line 33 [Schedule 1], at end insert—
              ‘( ) any offence under section 4 or 5 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (driving etc.
           when under the influence of drink or drugs or with an alcohol concentration above
           the prescribed limit) committed while the accused was on a journey to or from a
           designated football match being an offence as respects which the court makes a
           declaration of relevance,’.

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                           44
    Page   23, line 34 [Schedule 2], at end insert—
          ‘19A. The terms and conditions of appointments under paragraphs 18 and 19
        above shall require the approval of the Secretary of State and the consent of the
        Treasury.
          19B. The licensing authority shall, as regards such of its inspectors, officers and
        employees as with the approval of the Secretary of State and the consent of the
        Treasury it may determine, pay to or in respect of them such pensions, allowances or
        gratuities by way of conmpensation for loss of employment), or provide and
        maintain for them such pension schemes (whether contributory or not), as may be so
        determined.
          19C. If an inspector, officer or employee of the licensing authority—
             (a) is a participant in any pension scheme applicable to that employment, and
                      Notices of Amendments: 20th October 1989                              3229

                                  Football Spectators Bill continued
                 (b) becomes a member of the licensing authority,
            he may, if the Secretary of State with the consent of the Treasury so determines, be
            treated for the purposes of the pension scheme as if his service as a member of the
            licensing authority were service as an employee of the licensing authority, whether or
            not any benefits are to be payable to or in respect of him by virtue of paragraph 10 or
            11 above.’.

 M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                                45
     Page     23,   line   34   [Schedule 2], at end insert—
                                            ‘Accounts and audit
             19D. The licensing authority shall keep proper accounts and proper records in
          relation to the accounts, and shall prepare for each accounting year a statement of
          accounts in such form as the Secretary of State, with the approval of the Treasury,
          may direct.
             19E. The accounts of the licensing authority shall be audited by auditors appointed
          for each accounting year by the Secretary of State.
             19F. A person shall not be qualified for appointment for the purposes of paragraph
          19E above unless he i s -
               (a) a member of a body of accountants established in the United Kingdom and
                  recognised for the purposes of section 389(l)(a) of the Companies Act 1985;
                  or
               (b) a member of the Chartered Insititute of Public Finance and Accountancy;
                 but a firm may be appointed if each of its members is qualified to be so
                  appointed.
            19G. A copy of any accounts of the licensing authority which are audited under
         paragraph 19E above and of the report made on those accounts by the auditors shall
         be sent by the licensing authority to the Secretary of State as soon as reasonably
         practicable after it receives them; and the Secretary of State shall lay before
         Parliament a copy of any accounts or report received by him under this paragraph.
            19H. The Comptroller and Auditor General may inspect any records relating to
         the accounts.
            191. In paragraphs 19D and 19E above, “accounting year” means the period
         beginning with the day when the licensing authority is established and ending with
         the following 31st March, or any later period of twelve months ending with the 31st
         M arch.’


    Financial provision

M r Colin Moynihan
                                                                                          NCI
    To move the following Clause: —
          ‘ .—(1) Any expenses of the Secretary of State under this Act shall be paid out of
        money provided by Parliament.
          (2) Any fees received by the Secretary of State under this Act shall be paid into the
        Consolidated Fund.’.
