                           CLIVE WILLIAM CALVERT



      POLICE HEADQUARTERS - COMPLAINTS & DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT




From 1979 to late 198? I was responsible for liaison and in

organisation of (in consultation with senior officers) police

functions at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.    Prior to this the

task was undertaken on an ad hoc basis, usually by a shift inspector

or sub divisional chief inspector.     Following the publication of

the Standing Instructions on policing football matches I took over

the duty of liaison officer.




During this period it became apparent that despite stewards being

employed by the club many were failing to do anything other than

attend at the ground and disappear if problems arose - many failed

to wear their tabtiards and others were physically incapable of        ''

carrying out their duty.     It:was also apparent that many of the stewards

had no real idea what they should do.     One of the problems on match days

was that the. club had no overall management of their stewards.        ..o




In August 1981 I remember that I received a memorandum from then Chief

Superintendent Herold concerning the ineffectiveness of stewards at

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.




I brought Mr Herold's conments, and further views of my own, to the

attention of all stewards at a briefing held at Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club on 22 August 1981.     I have continued to stress these points
 in all the informal and formal discussions I have held with Stewards and

 the club since that time.




 The situation improved with the appointment of Mr Lock as security officer

 (in 1985 I think) who on match days acted as the club's 'link' man for

 their stewards and the subsequent adoption of a personal radio system

 to maintain contact with their chief stewards in various areas of the

 ground.




 Over the period I was liaison officer I had frequent and various contact

 with club o f f i c i a l s t h e   secretaries usually, when I pointed out problems

 with stewards - this included the clubs responsibilities for spectators

 on the terraces as well as in the stands.            I am aware this theme was

 frequently repeated by senior officers.            I also made this comment to the

 club's security officer on several occasions.            I gained the impression

 that the club believed that because, out of necessity, the police

 o c c a s i o n a l l y performed the function of crowd packing,   they had no need

 to show interest or responsibility for the standing crowds.




 For several years to 1987 I attended the annual meeting of the stewards,

.usually shortly cbef ore the start -of the season.;:. During rthe course oft'         g   %   v.-



 my presentation .I outlined what the police function and responsibilities

 were, what their'duties were in relation to the crowd (including on the

 terraces) and what the safety procedures were.                       ;>




 Prior to commencing my briefings - in (1984 or 1985 I think) I obtained

 a copy of the club instructions to stewards which was completely

 inadequate - giving only information on conditions of service and an
outdated evacuation procedure.     I made certain suggestions which were

incorporated in new instructions for stewards.      These instructions were

circulated at every annual meeting and explained by club staff.




In 1984 I (and other officers) realised that after Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club's return to Division 1 problems were evident at Leppings

Lane turnstiles due to increase in away fans.      I suggested with a rough

sketch that the whole of Leppings Lane turnstiles - then a crescent shape

- should be demolished with new ones built parallel to and near rear of

stand with access to individual pens and to the stands.       This was

discussed with then senior officers - Chief Superintendent Moseley and

Superintendent Lock - agreed should be put to club.       Then secretary Mr

Chester came forward with compromise as turnstiles are laid out now -

new turnstiles A/G built - in the light of climate then prevailing on

spending at football grounds accepted on basis that anything is better

than nothing.    The intention was twofold (1) on the practice then

operating   to allows different sets of suppoTtersrinto different pens and "

(2)   to give greater space at the turnstiles.




I was greatly involved in the planning, and on the d a y , execution of

policing for ‘the 1987 -SEMT-FINAL - LEEDS UTD;,r,V. -COVENTRY..v - 'no?      'r"




Leeds were allocated the Leppings Lane Terraces.       This game was played

on Sunday w i t h lunchtime kick off.   I was on duty outside the ground

before the kick off.    Despite the kick off time numerous drunks arrived.

In planning this match we had, because of Leeds United’s reputation, gone

to great pains to:
                                                                                            4



    1   prevent fans arriving without tickets

    2   taken steps to contain those Leeds fans who arrived without tickets




    In the event there were no problems at Leppings Lane - that end of ground

    filled to capacity.     The only problem was Coventry fans arriving late

    because of traffic on Ml.      The kick off time was delayed.       To the best

    of my knowledge there was no pitch invasion.           There was, however, a pitch

    invasion in 1981 Semi Final Spurs v Wolves.           This was caused:

    1   by the Spurs fans purchasing Wolves tickets to the Kop

         terraces then being allowed into Leppings Lane Terrace and                   t

    2    late arrival of Spurs fans who rushed onto terrace shortly after

         kick off causing surge

    We took this into account this year and last by ensuring that fans who

    had tickets for the Kop who were not Notts Forest fans were not

    transferred to other ends of ground so capacity would be exceeded - they

    were held on segregated area of Kop.




    It should be noted that in 1980 Semi Final Arsenal v Liverpool that

    capacity was exceeded on Leppings Lane terraces by at least 1000 due to

*.>***:-forged tickets - .no problems, experienced,   (This: terrace .was at that, igame •

    occupied by Liverpool supporters).                :    -            , >




    On 15 April 1989, I came on duty at Sheffield Wednesday football ground

    at 9-30 am and attended briefing.        I was responsible for two serials on

    the Spion Kop.     Following briefing and refreshments I took both serials

    onto the Spion Kop terraces at about 11 am and briefed them.             I also

    briefed the stewards allocated to the Spion’ Kop at about 11.30 am.               The

     turnstiles o p e n e d at about this time.   It had been anticipated that
Liverpool supporters would enter the Spion Kop with tickets allocated

to the Notts Forest fans.        To contain them an area adjacent to the North

Stand had been set aside for them.           This assumption proved correct and

by 3pm about 500 Liverpool supporters were in the area under close Police

supervision.     The majority were not, from their accents, from Merseyside.

Those from Merseyside numbered 200+, some said they had obtained tickets

from friends in Nottingham, others said from touts both in Liverpool and

around the ground.




Drink in excess was evident in a considerable number of supporters, both

Liverpool and Notts Forest.         This included those in a drunken condition

and in possession of drink.         The extent was such that I gave instructions

 that only those in an extreme state would be arrested in order not to

deplete manpower.




At about 2.^5 pm it became apparent there was a fault on the radio.

Transmissions-from control: were becoming' broken,*.although still audible^

I informed control of this.         The radio fault can best be described as

a warbling/clicking - missing out one word in three.




*•! was on the -Sftiien -Kop' iat‘tBp® w i t h :the serials*Ic-had d^taii-ecir.to supervise

the area containing the Liverpool supporters.             An apparent pitch invasion

shortly after kick off created a situation which incensed the Notts Forest

fans and the actions of some of them towards,the Liverpool group of                 ■

 supporters suggested there would be a public disorder situation on the

Kop.    I therefore remained at this location with my serials until the

 ground cleared.     I took no part in the events on the Leppings Lane

 terrace.
                                                                         6


My briefing to Stewards was for those on Kop only - also Sergeants present

and identified




I asked if worked Kop before - yes




They were told to keep aisles clear as possible




The emergency procedures were explained - all should be aware of own

responsibility




The senior steward was present - he was told if he had any problems to

speak to me




The stewards were told not to leave until ground clear




I knew the senior steward.   1 had carried out annual briefing several

times and knew others by sight




To the best of my knowledge stewards on Kop did job




I cannot say where they normally worked                                      .
