                                                                                           Q j f j r

ITF           Intermediate Treatment Fund, 33 King Street, London WC2E 8JD. Tfel. 01-379 6171.
•Community care for youngsters in trouble.                                .

  Our Ref:-       DB/NA                              ^                                 |10'

                                                            *dt    -t                < 0                        cp
  18th October, 1989.                                                         — '                           i
                                                             Horw^VwASa             L\«,                        fcc\)

                                                         Um— O w          lis—                         1W

  R.M. Whalley, Esq,
  Secretary,                                                         ■—
  The Inquiry by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,            [                        \ Mlw-              h c j u *~
  Room 662,                                                                     ^               r      1    7
  The Home Office,                                                OOk )
  Queen Anne's Gate,                                                  /
  London, SW1H 9AT.


 Dear Sir,

                             The Football Trust - I.T. Fund Initiative.

 Following discussion with the Football Trust and the Sir Norman Chester Centre,
 Leicester University, I am writing to you with brief initial details of the
 Football Trust - I.T. Fund Initiative.

 It is^ our intention to submit a fuller report on the progress of the Initiative for
 the information of the Inquiry.    I should be grateful to be informed of any final
 date by which such information should be received.

 Yours faithfully,




 David Bell,
 Deputy Director.
tat/s
  OL'iSo
ITF          Intermediate Treatment Fund, 33 King Street, London WC2E 8JD. Tfel. 01-379 6171.
Community care for youngsters in trouble.




                             Football Trust / IT Fund : New Initiative



     Following recent discussions between the Football Trust and the IT Fund, the
     Football Trust has provided an initial grant to be held by the Trust, but
     distributed by the IT Fund.

     The purpose of this initiative is to encourage the development of a number of
     new local community-based projects using football, or football related issues
     as a significant element of progranmes for young offenders, or young people
     clearly 'at risk'.

     The IT Fund has always received a range of applications in which football
     activities have played a part, and over the last ten years grant have been
     made to support junior and youth clubs and leagues and five-a-side teams
     involving boys and girls.     Funds have been allocated to match clothing,
     playing equipment and floodlighting, transport, improvements to facilities
     and surfaces etc. Often these grants have been small and in the past there
     have been requests from older young people which may have fallen outside the
     main IT Fund criteria (10 - 17 years).       The Fund continues to welcome
     applications to its general fund.

     The National IT Fund committee in co-operation with the Football Trust now
     has the opportunity to invite new and additional applications with broader
     criteria. We are particularly keen to attract ideas from all regions and to
     encourage new ideas and new approaches linking football related prograranes to
     the prevention of crime and the provision of constructive alternatives for
     young people.     The IT Fund also wishes to promote co-operation and
     partnershiop between local agencies including the voluntary and statutory
     sectors and local community groups.    We hope that this new initiative will
     also attract the involvement of and.the sharing of resources with existing
     football organisations of local clubs to encourage closer links between
     football and the wider community at a time of public concern.

     All applications to the Fund will follow the normal ITF grants procedure.         An
     outline for the criteria for grants is available.

     ITF is a government sponsered fund established in 1978 to grant aid to
     voluntary groups in England and Wales providing community based programmes
     for young offenders and projects designed, to prevent young people from
     getting into crime. ITF pursues its objectives through a programme of grant-
     making, technical assistance on project development, advocacy and resource
     generation.
                             FOOTBALL TRUST/IT FUND


                   What support Is available from the IT Fund?


Type of Grant                Capital Grants.

These will usually be made to assist with the provision of equipment for
activities and contributions may be made to the costs of the improvement of
facilities and in certain circumstances for the establishment, renovation,
adaptation or improvement of premises and playing areas.

Contributions may be made to the costs of transport facilities providing that
such applications relate to a broadly based programme of activities promoting
regular usage by relevant groups in the community.

Revenue Grants

It is expected that revenue grants will not normally be awarded, but may be
considered in exceptional circumstances by the IT Fund Committee at their
discretion.  These will be made only to the start up costs of NEW PROJECTS
ONLY and may include contribution to first year running costs and salaries.

Where revenue grants are sought projects must show that sufficient funding is
likely to be available after the first year from statutory or other reliable
sources to maintain the facility.

Maximum Grant

The maximum grant available for both capital and revenue costs (individually)
is £5,000.    In exceptional circumstances the ITF Committee may consider a
higher award.

Client Group

Those broadly at risk including those clearly at risk of offending or re­
offending.  Open to ail young people with relevant needs but not to include
more general youth work that could be supported from other sources. Awards
will relate to projects and programmes that provide facilities to people of
both sexes.

Age Range

Young people aged 8-21 years.     Age range will be considered flexibly and
account will be taken with regard to all criteria of local experience and
appropriateness of individual programmes.

Organisations     Voluntary, local community based bodies including           those
supported by but not directly managed by the statutory services.

Applications    All applications should be made on the IT Funds application
form.   Applications which satisfy the Fund's criteria are considered at
quarterly meetings of the Funds Committee usually held in April, July,
October and January. Application must reach the Fund a month before the date
set for Committee Meetings.

Address     33, King Street, London, WC2E 8JD.   Telephone No. 01-379-6171.
     Football Trust - I.T. Fund Initiative : Report on Progress.


Prior to the Initiative,    the I.T. Fund had in the period 1978-1988
distributed approximately £35,000 to directly initiate or sustain
football activities related to its area of interest.          Following
discussions with the Football Trust early in 1988 and an initial grant
to be held by the Trust, but distributed by the I.T. Fund, the
Initiative was launched in mid 1988 and applications were considered at
the October 1988 and January 1989 Committees.    Awards were made for
recommendation to the Football Trust totalling £26,058 to 10 projects.
In addition, the ITF has made 8 awards in the period 1988-89, in
support of football related activities totalling £30,135.

In the current period 1989-90 the Initiative has been allocated £50,000
by the Football Trust (a doubling of the award) and at the 27th April
1989 Committee considered 7 applications which were agreed totalling
£10,680.   No related awards were made from ITF sources and the total
claimed from the £50,000 available was £13,738 (including an additional
grant to St. Paul's, Birmingham,    for transport,  and the balance of
grant exceeded in 1988-89,     £1,058) leaving available a total of
£36,262.   The I.T. Fund Committee held on the 25th July,          1989
considered seven FT/ITF Initiative applications totalling £12,350,
leaving a balance for distribution at the I.T. Fund's October 1989 and
January 1990 Committees of £23,912.

In addition at the 25th July 1989 Committee,  the I.T. Fund agreed to
support the YMCA Mangravet Floodlit Area Project from its resources to
a total of £4,000.   The Football into the 1990's.   South West Scheme,
Crewkerne, Somerset is a partnership venture with the Sports Council of
the South West and has attracted a matching grant of £3,855.    Further
support for applications has been forthcoming from:-

     The Football Association.
-   Derbyshire, Somerset and Avon and Northumberland Constabularies.
-   Social Services Departments and Probation Services.
     Community, Recreation and Youth Departments.
     National Voluntary Bodies e.g. YMCA and NACRO.
     Local Football Clubs and organisations.

These demonstrate the success of the Initiative and the Fund's role    in
the building of inter-agency partnerships and the generation           of
additional resources.

A Report on the Football Trust - I.T. Fund Initiative is a major
feature in the I.T. Fund's eleventh Annual Report to be published in
October 1989. The Chairman of the Football Trust, he Rt. Hon. The Lord
Aberdare,KBE,G C ,ST J has kindly provided a foreward to the Report.
This Report outlines the initial development of the FT/ITF Initiative
in the period 1988-89.     A further analysis of awards made, including
those proposed for the 25th October 1989 Committee,      show that ten
awards have been made to the North West,    seven to the North East and
twelve to the West Midlands area.   In addition,  four awards have been
made to the East Midlands,   five to Greater London and single awards to
Wessex, the South West and the South East.
                                     .2 .
 Further targeting of the Awards and concern to remain close to the
 objectives of the I.T. Fund with respect to the promotion of voluntary
 effort and new work with offenders and young people clearly at risk in
 neighbourhoods of high need, but poor youth provision has been  ,
 demonstrated by the support of eleven projects including a significant
 emphasis on projects working with the black and Asian communities,   to
 eight projects with an emphasis on work with girls and young women
 (including exclusive girls work) and fourteen projects directed to work
 in inner city areas and problem estates.

A major feature of the Initiative has been the opportunity to develop
new networks and new interagency partnerships.   The Football into the
1990's Project in the South West involves partnership with the Sports
Council and the Football Association in seven counties.

-    The Football Association Inner City Coaching Initiative has
      involved development work in Birmingham, Bristol and Huddersfield
      and additional regional locations are planned.

-    Over 6 projects have been        developed   following   contact   with
      regional constabularies.

-    Projects have been developed with local branches of major national
      voluntary agencies including three projects with the YMCA and
      projects with Barnardo's, National Association of Boys Clubs,
      NACRO, Apex and the National Association of Young People in Care.

-    Major projects have been developed and funded in association with
     Local Authorities. One example has been the Matchmates Project in
      Stoke City winner in 1989 of the BBC 'It's My City Competition
     Sports Section'.

-    Further examples of major   cooperation have been the development of
     Little League Football in   association with the City of Birmingham,
     Department of Recreation    and Community Services and estate based
     projects with the City of   Carlisle.

The development of the Initiative has been monitored by the Football
Trust - I.T. Fund Initiative Working Party.     The last meeting of the
Working Party in the 11th July was chaired by Mr. Brian Ware,0BE as
Chairman of the Initiative and attended by Lord Henniker, Dr. John
Williams   (Sir Norman Chester Centre, Leicester University) .     David
Robins   (Oxford Centre for Criminological Research) and Mark England
(Sports Council,  London and the South East).    Apologies were received
from Col. A. Pagan and Mrs. E. Sadler, J.P.   The Working Party received
reports on the Highfields Community Coaching Project, Leicester, (1559)
and the Bridge Park Sports Trust, Harlesden, London (1565) and their
implications for future work with large scale multi-ethnic community
development projects in high risk communities.       The Working Party
received reports and discussed the development of the Initiative and
more exact targeting of support to developmental initiatives with wider
social aims in the community.      It was agreed that a paper on the
Initiative would be prepared by Dr. Williams and David Robins.

The current work programme for the Initiative has included the drafting
of the Football Initiative Report Feature for the Annual Report and
staff visits have been made to Wolverhampton, Bristol, Taunton,
Birmingham, Stoke, Manchester and within London.
                                   .3 .
 In August the role of the Initiative was discussed with the Department
 of Health and the Social Services Inspectorate and the I.T. Fund has
 been invited to submit a paper on the development of the Initiative and
 related issues to the Inter Departmental Working Party on which a
 number of relevant Government Departments are represented.


The Initiative has met with representatives of the Football Association
and Sports Councils and local services as well as with officers of
National   Charities and local voluntary bodies       and   footballing
organisations.

The Director of the I.T.     Fund attended a major presentation of    the
Matchmates Project in Leicester and outlined the aims of the Initiative
to representatives of local authorities,   local police authorities and
major league clubs.   As a result,   the Football League and a number of
northern local authorities and Football Clubs have approached the Fund
for further information.     Mrs. Edna Sadler, J.P, a member of       the
Initiative Working Party and the national I.T.          Fund   Committee
represented the Initiative at the AGM of the West Bromwich YMCA     (YMCA
Football and New Activity Project - 1561) and at the      launch of   the
Northfield Little League (Northfields and Selly Oak       Little League,
Birmingham 1567). The Initiative was represented at the opening of the
Hawkesley and Primrose Little League.      Meetings have been held with
the Community Programme in Professional Football and Manchester City
Football Club and the Initiative will attend the Football Development
Forum - Brentford Football Club on the 13th October to discuss the
Initiative with football development officers based at Arsenal,   Leyton
Orient, Millwall, Brentford and Crystal Palace football clubs.

Attached to this report is a current summary of detailed enquiries to
the Fund relating to the Initiative and projects under consideration
and development.    Since the launch of the Initiative and discreet
circulation of information enquiries and requests for application forms
average 3 per week (over 150 per annum). Much advice and assistance to
projects and potential applicants is provided by telephone or letter.
This is    in addition to the regular visits by     Fund officers and
publicity provided for conferences recent examples being the National
Intermediate   Treatment   Federation Annual    Conference   (18th-20th
September) and the Association of Juvenile Justice Study Day on Racism
(22nd September) and staff visits to the National Youth Bureau,    etc.
The current    publication of the I.T. Fund's new Annual Report and
Feature on the Football Initiative circulated to some 2,400 statutory
and voluntary bodies and authorities and project leaders is likely to
significantly increase the level of enquiries.

In addition to the work programme as outlined, the Fund has been
invited through the Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football Research to
submit information on the Initiative to the second stage of the inquiry
by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster.     The Chairman and members of theI.T. Fund National
Committee will also be meeting with the Rt.   Hon. David Mellor, M.P.
Minister of State on the 16th October to discuss the work and future of
the I.T.Fund.    In addition to the on going         development work,
investigation of applications, monitoring of grants made and analysis,
this additional work programme will greatly enhance the general
awareness of the Initiative and the role of the Fund and the Football
Trust.
»




                                     ..4 ..
    The Football Trust - I.T. Fund Initiative Working Party have noted
    issues for the future development of the Initiative.    A meeting has
    been arranged for the 11th October with officers of the Football Trust.

    A difference is emerging between smaller projects and applications
    relating to the type of work previously supported by the I.T. Fund and
    new   larger and more complex projects often requiring         detailed
    assistance and technical advice in the planning and development stage.
    This will often include help with the generation of additional support
    and the building of effective inter agency partnerships. Following the
    award such projects may need additional help and assistance.       Such
    levels of support have serious implications for the Fund and present
    restrictions on present staff time and community development assistance
    available.

    Projects supported under the Initiative have remained very close to the
    existing ITF criteria and the Fund has specific responsibilities to the
    Department of Health which remains a priority. The view of the Working
    Party is that the Initiative has indicated a major potential for
    project development including Football as a key element.   It is clear
    from projects supported, that they can often enable young people to
    gain abilities to move from restrictions on personal development
    imposed by multi-problem areas.   Sport, including football is not the
    only answer to crime prevention, but does provide a major point of
    contact and motivation particularly if attached to other youth and
    community training and educational opportunities.

    A future work programme for the Initiative is being prepared and will
    relate to the Development Plan 1989-90. The Fund will build on the
    response to the additional publicity for the Initiative provided by the
    Annual Report mailing.   The Fund will seek to develop new initiatives
    within the North East and North West and in the areas of Yorkshire and
    Humberside, Wales, East Anglia and the South.   Initial steps have been
    taken with the aid of the I.T. Fund's National Committee member for
    Wales and through contact with the Sports Council for Wales.   The Fund
    will support the Initiative underway in the South West.   In London and
    the   South East and through the Football        Association   Coaching
    Initiative.   New approaches will be made with the Football League and
    with the assistance of the Community Programme in          Professional
    Football.   The Fund is exploring with the City of Stoke an Initiative
    Conference for Sports Development and Recreation and Leisure Department
    Officers.   The Fund has been invited to contribute features on the
    Initiative to the National Youth Bureau publication 'Young People Now'.
    The   Fund will continue to work with the network of           national
    Intermediate Treatment Officers and with relevant national voluntary
    youth care organisations e.g. YMCA and Apex.    In all cases, the Fund
    will maintain close liaison with its advisors and with the requirements
    of key Footballing Organisations including the Football Trust.
THE JOHN HUNT AWARD TRUST



                Applications are Invited
                          for
                  The 1989 Awards




               To recognise the achievement of

         □      Community groups □ voluntary help
               □ individuals □ local businesses


diverting young people from crime and in preventing those
  at risk of coming into crime from doing so, through:

                     □ imaginative activities
     □       effective use or creation of local resources
                   □ sustained time and effort
The Awards
Awards of up to £1000 to be used to further existing projects or
to fund new projects will be made to non-statutory, community-
based enterprises in England and Wales, which undertake activities
to divert young people away from crime and into more construc­
tive pursuits.
These awards fall into two main categories:

Community Service and Reparation
Awards to projects involving groups oF juvenile offenders who
have made reparation to their communities.

Prevention and Reduction o f Juvenile Crime
Awards to individual volunteers, informal and registered voluntary
groups, w ho have undertaken particularly noteworthy projects
aimed at diverting juvenile offenders, and those at risk, from
criminal activities.
The Trustees will also consider awarding C ertificates o f M erit to
companies, businesses and commercial organisations w ho have
made significant efforts to help reduce juvenile crime in local
communities.
The Trustees will be looking for imaginative and effective use of
local resources, community involvement and lasting benefit to
young people and the community.

Entries
Nominations are invited from leading members of the community
in the voluntary and statutory sectors, such as:
Chairmen of Local Authority Committees - Chairmen of Probation
and After-Care Committees - Chairmen of Local Juvenile Benches
- Clerks to the Justices - Chief Police Officers of the area concerned
- Directors of Social Services - Chief Probation Officers - Chief
Education Officers - Senior Youth Officers.
Nominations for Awards, received direct from projects, will also be
considered, provided suitable references are given.

How to Enter -
There are no forms. Simply write a letter describing the project or
activity for which the Award is being sought. We want to know its
purpose, its activities, its membership - num bers of young people
and volunteers participating - and the benefits achieved for the
young people and community. We also would like to know how
you think an award would assist the work.

Where to send Entries -
        Nominations should be addressed to:
        The John Hunt Award Trust,
        c/o Intermediate Treatment Fund,
        33, King Street,
        London WC2E 8JD
        Telephone: 01 379 6171

Ensure you have included:
G name and address of nominators
G   references where needed
G   day-time telephone number.




             Closing Date: 31st July 1989
        The Awards are funded by private donations and administered by
        a charitable trust. Awards will be made at the discretion of the
        Trustees w hose decision will be final.
        Representatives of the winning entries will be invited to attend a
        presentation ceremony in London in December 1989.



             T he J o h n H unt Awards have been so named to recognise
             the outstanding services to youth, especially the under privi­
             leged, rendered by the Rt. Hon the Lord Hunt of Llanfair
             Waterdine, KG, CBE, DSO.
             Lord Hunt is distinguished not only as a m ountaineer and
             leader of the first successful expedition to ascend Mount
             Everest in 1953, but for the many offices in public life he has
             held since then. For several years Lord Hunt’s life-long
             interest in children and young people, particularly those
             w ho are disadvantaged, has been exemplified by his active
             Chairmanship of the national Intermediate Treatment
             Fund, from which he has now retired. The Intermediate
             Treatment Fund provides support to volunteers - individuals
             and groups - in setting up community-based projects to help
             meet the needs of young people in trouble with the law or
             at risk of becoming so.




                           Printed and donated by Allied Dunbar




79105-1 (4/ 89)
               Football Trust/IT Fund Initiative

                          Appendix II

                               1988-89.
Applications received and considered by the ITF and recommended to
the Football Trust.

31st October, 1988 Committee

1528 Fulwell Youth Club, Sunderland, Tyne and Wear

Equipment and running costs                               £500.00

1531 Spartans Football Club, Rusholme, Manchester

Equipment                                                 £400.00

1532 Stanfield Junior Football Club, Anfield, Liverpool

Equipment                                                 £411.00

26th January, 1989 Committee

1555   Barnardo's Youth Centre F.C, Speke, Liverpool

Equipment, fees and transport costs                       £1758.00

1557 Matchmates Football Scheme, Stoke on Trent, Staffs

Equipment, trophies, catering and transport               £4400.00

1559   Highfields Community Coaching Project, Highfields, Leicester

Premises, kit, coaching and travel assistance             £6000.00

1563 Ladworth Inter League Football, Handsworth, Birmingham

Training, pitch and playing equipment and publicity       £2050.00

1564 Oakland Girls F.C, Handsworth, Birmingham

Team clothing, equipment and fees                         £1009.00

1565 Bridge Park Sports Trust, Harlesden, London

Training, kit and equipment and personal development      £7500.00

1566 Bankfield Youth F.C, Eston, Cleveland

Team kit, equipment and transport                         £2030.00
Applications received, considered and supported by the ITF

31st October, 1988 Committee


1527 Horden and Easington Celtic Football Club, Peterlee, Co.
     Durham.

Clothing and running costs                                 £735.00

1536 YMCA Support Project, Birkenhead, Merseyside

Equipment, lighting and completion of rooftop play area.

Request -   £5,000                                         £3500.00

1543 St. Paul's Community Project, Balsall Heath, Birmingham

Renewal of Minibus and play surface.

Request -   £5,000                       £2000.00 in principle   *
26th January, 1989 Committee

1579 Old Trafford Football Club, Manchester

Kit and playing fees                     £500.00       (Hilden Trust)

1556   Woodview Community Association, Egbaston, Birmingham

Enlargement and provision of 5-a-side pitch               £8000.00

1560 Carlisle Sports 5-a-side Soccer, Carlisle, Cumbria

Equipment, trophies, travel and residential expenses       £5000.00

1561 YMCA Football and New Activity Project, West Bromwich,
West Midlands.

Resurface sports hall and surrounds etc.,
Contribution of                                           £5000.00

1567 Northfields and Selly Oak Little League, Birmingham.

Kit, equipment and facilities for 12 junior teams         £5000.00

1568 Highgate Harriers, Coaching Initiative, Birmingham

Team clothing and equipment                               £900
                                                 1988- 90.


     3.      Applications received and considered by the I.T. Fund and recommended to the
            Football Trust.


            27th April 1989 Committee.


            1543     St. Paul's Community Project, Balsall Heath, Birmingham.

                     Renewal of minibus and play surface.                       £ 2,000*

            1558     Raffles Estate Football Scheme, Carlisle, Cumbria.

                     Equipment, sessional fees, running costs.                  £ 4,300

            1562     Blyth Town Boys Club, Blyth, Northumberland.

C.                   Equipment, running costs.                                  £   850

            1601     Boys Club Soccer Project, Ellesmere Port, Cheshire.

                     Equipment.                                                 £   565

            1602     Young People In Care Football Project, Chesterfield.

                     Equipment,   running costs.                                £   600

            1603     Five-a-Side Football Tournament, Droitwich, Worcs.

                     Equipment,   running costs.                                £   905

            1604     Bennets Bank Womens Football Club, Telford, Shropshire.

                     Equipment,   running costs.                                £   960

            1610     Grantham Football Training Scheme, Grantham, Lincs.

                     Equipment,   running costs.                                £   250




     DB/NA/4.7.89.
                                          1989- 90.




4.     Applications for consideration at the ITF Comnittee on the 25th July. 1989.



       YMCA Mangravet Floodlit Area, Maidstone, Kent.

       Football and Sports Equipment and Sessional Staff.                   £ 5,000

       Off The Street Football, Buxton, Derbyshire.

       Clothing and Equipment.                                              £   570

       Crescent United F.C. Nuneaton, Warwickshire.

       Clothing, Equipment, Pitch improvement         andtransport.         £ 1,500

       Stoneygate Neighbourhood Project, Gateshead, Tyne and Wear.

       Clothing and kit.                                                    £   570

       Town End Farm Estate A.F.C. Sunderland, Co. Durham.

       Pitch and Referee Fees and Transport.                                £   415

       Field Lane Community F.C, Derby.

       Kit, Equipment, Fees and Transport.                                  £ 1,000

       St. Paul's Inner City Coaching School, Bristol, Avon.

       Kit and Equipment.                                                   £ 2,000

       'Football in the 1990 Initiative, Southwest', Crewkerne, Somerset.

       Kit, Equipment, Fees and Transport.                                  £ 5,000




DB/NA/4.7.89.
               Intermediate Treatment Fund, 33 King Street, London WC2E 8JD.ltel. 01-379 6171.
 Community care for youngsters in trouble.




                                    ITF 10TH ANNIVERSARY BULLETIN




                                             10 YEARS OF PROGRESS

               '   IN PROVIDING COMMUNITY CARE TOR YOUNG PEOPLE IN TROUBLE




                   Contents


                   - "The IT Fund : Origins and Puj^pose

                   - .The 1978-88 Record of Progress

                   - Grant Aid from the Fund

                   - Unlocking Additional Resources : Aiding Development

                   - Advocacy and Partnership Building

                   - Range of Services Offered

                   - Developments in Juvenile Justice

                   - Juvenile Crime i The Success of IT

                   - ITF’s Anniversary Programme Outline

                   - ITF Committee and Staff




1978                              10th AMNIVEBSABY                                                     1988
Community care : £4 million to voluntary IT groups: 1100 projects helped: Community care : &4 million to voluntary
The Intermediate Treatment Fund was established by the DHSS in 1978 under the
aegis of the Rainer Foundation, a charitable organisation of some 110 years'
standing which pioneered today's Probation Service.   An independent, nation­
ally representative committee was appointed to manage the Fund.




The Purpose of the Fund is to encourage community involvement in seeking local
solutions to the problem of juvenile crime. This task encompasses:

       stimulating the provision of community-based intermediate treatment         (IT)
       programmes and services for juvenile offenders;

  -    providing thie courts with serious alternatives to custody;

       assisting   community groups in providing activities and facilities de­
       signed to prevent young people at risk from becoming involved in crime;

  -    encouraging the development of processes such as cautioning,  to be used
       as alternatives to prosecution when a   young person's offence is not se­
       rious .




In its first 10 years, The IT Fund has achieved a great deal.   It has awarded
eleven hundred grants to voluntary projects working in the IT field:

      - over 400 of these grants enabled entirely new facilities to      become     es­
        tablished;

      - over 350 existing facilities have been expanded to provide new places;

      - over   250 facilities have been consolidated so that they might offer        an
        improved quality of service.

The IT Fund has been able to achieve this because it is a unique agency,           able
to offer help with many aspects of project development through:

  -     provision of grant-aid;

  -     the unlocking of further resources;

  -     targetting of. development aid to areas of particular need;

        specialised advice on programme development,    management and     organisa­
        tional capacity-building;

       advocacy at a local level,   to create an environment conducive     to     these
       approaches.


       Grant Aid

       In 10 years, the IT Fund has disbursed £3 million to projects throughout
       England and Wales.  Any voluntary group working with 10-17 year old of­
       fenders or those at risk of becoming involved in crime,  is eligible to
       apply for a grant. Up to £10,000 is available for capital costs (usually
       equipment), and new projects may also apply for help towards their first
       year running costs.
Unlocking Resources

The Fund does this in two ways.     Firstly, by attracting money from
Charitable Trusts. The Fund's £3 million of grants made from its own re­
sources has been augmented by a further £1 million in grants made to vol­
untary IT projects from charitable and other non-statutory sources as a
result of referral from the Fund.   A proportion of the Fund's DHSS grant
is dependent upon raising matching resources from the charitable world.

Over several years of working together, confidence in the Fund's exper­
tise, both as grant-maker and specialist in the field of juvenile jus­
tice, has been expressed by Charitable Trusts which now make direct
grants to the Fund - ranging from £2,500 to £25,000 annually - for dis­
bursement to projects at the Fund's own discretion.

Additionally,  through seed-funding and pump-priming, the Fund enables
projects to demonstrate their skills and value, and thus attract major
funding from local statutory sources in subsequent years.

The Fund was pleased to be instrumental in the setting up of the John
Hunt Award Trust in 1986, with which it maintains a close association.
The John Hunt Awards have been so named to recognise the outstanding
services to youth, especially the underprivileged, rendered by the Rt.
Hon. The Lord Hunt of Llanfair Waterdine, KG, CBE, DSO (Chairman of the
IT Fund from 1980-85). The Trust, through the granting of five annual
Awards up to £1,000, certificates and plaques, aims to acknowledge and
focus attention on the value of voluntary help and participation in the
provision of diversionary activities for young offenders, or young people
potentially at risk of getting into crime. The Awards are funded by pri­
vate donations and administered by a charitable Trust.

Development Aid

Some areas of the country have had more resources injected into IT than
others.   The Fund attracted further funding for a Development Programme
from 1982 to 1985, which concentrated on developing both a more even
spread of IT services and equitable distribution of the Fund's resources.
The North-East, the North West, and the West Midlands were targetted for
particular attention, and this produced most encouraging results.     The
North West,  for example, received twice as many grants in 1986/7 as it
had in the previous year. This developmental approach has been absorbed
into and is expressed through the Fund's everyday work.

Advice to Projects

The Fund has amassed a great deal of experience both of the development
of and the delivery of voluntary-sector IT services through its contact
with many hundreds of projects over the years.  It is therefore able to
offer advice to new groups applying for grants, and put them in touch
with experienced resources.

Advocacy and Partnership-building

Although the Fund provides financial assistance to voluntary groups only,
all its work is undertaken on the basis of fostering partnership and
close co-operation with the responsible statutory services, i.e. the lo­
cal authority social service departments, and the probation service.
The Voluntary Sector's Contribution to IT: The Range of Services Provided   for
Young People

The IT Fund has facilitated the involvement of a wide range of voluntary
groups in providing resources for IT,  from multi-purpose community organisa­
tions to small groups of volunteers. Support to young people has been provided
through group and individual programmes - educational activities, befriending,
outdoor pursuits and sports, drama, motorbikes and cars - which help in con­
fronting the young person's difficulties and provide opportunities for devel­
oping alternative interests.

The voluntary sector has contributed to IT by establishing special facilities
as well as making available its general resources to young offenders and those
most at risk of involvement in crime. It has demonstrated its ability to re­
spond flexibly to changes in legislation and IT practice, and has provided for
a wide range of needs. The IT Fund, through its brief from the DHSS, is able
to support a range of facilities for young people in trouble with the law -
alternatives to custody, programmes contributing to supervision orders, and
diversion from court - as well as preventive schemes. The following illustrate
the range of services being provided by the voluntary sector.

     Alternatives to custody: These are intensive,      structured programmes
     based in the community for young people who have appeared before the
     courts and may otherwise have been sent to a Detention Centre or Youth
     Custody Centre.    Attendance is compulsory for a set period of time and
     non-attendance results in a further court appearance.     Programmes are
     usually based on individual counselling or group discussion of offending
     and its consequences, and may also include community service or repara­
     tion, remedial education, work experience and participation in leisure
     activities which promote personal development and provide opportunities
     for the constructive use of free time.

     Diversion from court: The Fund supports the development of policies which
     keep young people away from formal court proceedings wherever possible.
     The use of cautioning for example, has increased significantly since the
     Home Office issued a circular in 1985 encouraging the greater use of
     cautioning for juvenile offenders as an important alternative to prosecu­
     tion.   Many voluntary groups provide support to young people who are
     known to the police,    either because they have been cautioned or in­
     formally warned, or are persistent truants, for example.    Attendance at
     such projects is entirely voluntary.    Young people are invited to par­
     ticipate in a group activity - such as computing,  football, or drama
     where they can develop personal skills and interests with the involvement
     of concerned adults, and mix with a non-delinquent peer-group.

     Social crime prevention: These projects are based in neighbourhoods where
     there is concern about the high incidence of juvenile crime, causing dis­
     tress and disruption to local residents.     Many are based in deprived
     inner-city areas, but young people in isolated villages where there are
     no facilities are often as much at risk as their inner-city counterparts
     of becoming involved in delinquency. The facilities offered by these
     projects are available to all young people but aim to attract those most
     vulnerable to being drawn into crime.   Each project is devised as a re­
     sponse to the local situation, and may take the form of detached youth
     work provision, a coffee bar facility for making contact with young
     people, or an organised activity - often suggested by the youngsters
     themselves - such as motor mechanics, sports or producing a local news­
     letter. The involvement of local adults and parents is often critical to
     the success of such projects.
   Developments in Juvenile Justice

   The last decade has seen significant developments in juvenile   justice.   The
   Criminal Justice Act 1982 introduced the requirement that young people should
   be given custodial sentences only if:
      - they were unable or unwilling to respond to non-custodial penalties? or
      - it was necessary for the protection of the public; or
      - their offence was so serious that a non-custodial sentence could not be
        justified.

   Local authorities were required to ensure that Intermediate Treatment   schemes
   were available to the courts as alternatives to custody.

   In April 1983, the DHSS launched a £15 million initiative known as L A C (83)3
   (the reference number of the Circular announcing the initiative) under which
   voluntary bodies were awarded grants to provide additional facilities for in­
   tensive IT.


   Juvenile Crime and the Success of IT

   Recent statistics on juvenile crime show offending rates vary significantly
   from one year to the next, and therefore do not lead readily to firm conclu-
    ions about current trends. But it is clear that juvenile crime is not out of
^^control.    If anything, it is decreasing.   The number of 14-16 year old boys
   found guilty of, or cautioned for, indictable offences (per 100,000 popula­
   tion) fell by 4.5% between 1978 and 1986.

   At least part of this reduction in juvenile crime rates may be attributed to
   the success of Intermediate Treatment.     A re-offending rate of 40-60% for
   young people leaving IT programmes compares well with a rate of 60-80% amongst
   those who spend a period in Detention Centre or Youth Custody. Indications axe
   that such re-offending as does occur is less serious and less rapid for juve­
   niles who have passed through IT.


   The IT Fund's Anniversary Programme : A Regional Focus

   An important part of the Fund's anniversary programme will be a series of   re­
   gional meetings and events, designed to promote a wider understanding of    IT,
   and to give impetus to further developments.

   There will be three or four such events between June 1988 and February 1989,
   in areas where the development of IT needs to be encouraged, and areas where
   the Fund has already established a network of local contacts but would aim to
   broaden knowledge and understanding of IT amongst the general community.

   The Fund will also be seeking to participate in a number of locally organised
   events such as AGMs, and area-based juvenile justice seminars involving the
   voluntary sector which aim to highlight community involvement with juvenile
   crime issues.

   The anniversary year began with a reception in the House of Lords, attended by
   the Rt. Hon. John Moore, MP, Secretary of State for Social Services, and the
   Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd, MP, The Home Secretary. The year will culminate in a
   major meeting in Spring 1989, which will discuss progress in juvenile justice
   since the Fund's inauguration and a DHSS conference "Trust in Youth", attended
   by His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales in 1979. The 1989 meeting will also
   provide a forum to discuss an agenda for the next ten years, and into the next
   century.

   Members of the IT Fund's nationally representative committee will   participate
   in these activities.
         I.T.F.    COMMITTEE

The Lord Henniker, KCMG, CVO, MC,    Chairman.

Ms. Maggie Baxter.
Mr. Maurice Hawker.
The Lord Henderson of Brompton.                  m   -
Mr. Michael Milan, JP.
Col. Archie Pagan.
Mr. Simon Rodway.
Mrs. Edna Sadler, JP.
Ms. Vivien Stern.
Mr. Brian Thompson, JP.
Mr. Peter Warburton.
Mr. Brian Ware, OBE.




          I.T.F.    STAFF.

Ms. Daphne Rawson-Jones, Director.
Mr. David Bell.
Ms. Celia Moore.
M s . Kathleen Boyle.
Mrs. Nigella Arobaga.

                       ■/ /A/I
                             /
                   . q flfc -Z fird M e n m k r,
                                             Chairman
                             Intermediate tre a tm e n t lJund
                                                              ., C T O ., -M C . ,



                         requests fife pleasure o f tde company o f
                                                                                                                    Intermediate Treatment Fond
                                 at a reception to celebrate tHe
                            lo t f i A nniversary o f tf\e I f f , lTund
                                             to be Held in
                                                                                                                             Tenth A n n i v e r s a r y
                       rffie Chatmondetey Room , J& use o f -Cards
                                ‘Thursday, iS tH fA p ril, i$ g $



                                                                                                                                    1978 - 1988 .
                                     i. o o p .m . to y o o p .m .
    l
    .
    rf
     .<fml
•K .S .V /T .
gfir
 _, X in g Street,
                   .
£jm
j j
   imWCz'E
Ht. M. 01-375S’sji                      J fo t ‘Transkrable
                                                                                     'Lntrance
                                                                                      Chancellors. Court
                                                                                     ‘T tt ‘Koval Court


      niipiniiimiiBB                          teSISS




                                                                                                                           IK
                                                                                                                  and cuts the
                                                                                                               anniversary cake.
                                                                                                                                           members, discuss th e ^ u n d ^ ' ^ Committee
      s -J S                S         S            S             "° ~            “                                                         John Moore.           Fund 5 Progress with




                D o u g la s Hurd with Maggie B axter of the ITF
                 Committee and Ian Butie .                                                                                 County Durham          '" S tiv e s ^ -n g taken in



                          «?v




                   Calton Younger,                                                                         contra
                                                                                                                       «    ^   S   S    s' S ^ I f
                                                                                                                                                  Arihie^ a n
                                                                                                                       alternatives to custody.     construc*ve
                The Interm ediate Treatm ent Fund
(serving England and Wales) was established by the DHSS in 1978, and is
managed by an independent, nationally representative committee.

                      The Purpose o f the Fund
is to encourage community involvement in seeking local solutions to the
problem of juvenile crime. This task encompasses:
• stimulating the provision of community-based intermediate treatment
  (IT) programmes and services for juvenile offenders;
• providing the courts with serious alternatives to custody;
• assisting community groups in providing activities and facilities
  designed to prevent young people at risk from becoming involved in
  crime;
• encouraging the development of processes such as cautioning, to be
  used as alternatives to prosecution when a young person's offence is
  not serious.

                In its first ten years the Fund has:
• awarded 1100 grants to voluntary projects working with 10-17 year old
  offenders or those at risk of becoming involved in crime;
• disbursed £3 million from its own resources;
• attracted a further £1 million into this area of the voluntary sector from
  Charitable Trusts.

                     Anniversary Programme
Following the launch of the anniversary year at the House of Lords
reception, a number of regional events are planned to run throughout
the year. These will provide opportunities to acknowledge the
contribution made to IT by voluntary organisations and also to
encourage new developments.

The Fund's Chairman, Lord Henniker, and members of the Committee
will participate in a programme of events in the North East, Wales and
the West Midlands, and in other meetings organised by voluntary groups
around the country.


    For details of the Fund and how to apply for a grant contact:

                  In term ed iate T reatm ent Fund.
      33 King Street, London WC2E 8JD. Tel: (0 1 ) 379 6171.
                                         Intermediate Treatment                                                               #
                                         Fund 1987-1988


C ontents________ _______________________ __________________
Foreword by the Chairman^---------------------------------------- ———---------- 3
Progress of the Fund____________________________ —— —------------ 6
Grant Analysis: 1987-1988________ __________________________ 11
1Oth Anniversary Programme                                 ___________________________17
Project Monitoring:
Projects Supported 1986-1987___                                                                                  23
A Regional View: I.T. in County Durham                               ______________________ 29                            &
Index of Projects Funded 1987-1988--------------------------------------------- 34
Information about the Fund and Publications------------------------------— 35



1TF Committee: Current Membership
The Lord Henniker, KCMG, CVO, MC, DL — Chairman
M aggie Baxter                                             Edna Sadler, JP
M aurice Hawker                                            Vivien Stern
The Lord Henderson of Brompton, KCB                        Tony Thompson, JP
Mike Milan                                                 Peter Warburton
Archie Pagan, MBE                                          Brian Ware, OBE
Simon Rodway

During the course of 1987-1988, Dan Jones and Elizabeth Rees retired from the Committee.
We were also saddened by the untimely death of Vivian (Chalky) White, OBE.



1TF S taff
Daphne Rawson-Jones — Director                             David Bell — D eputy Director
Celia Moore — A s s is ta n t Director                     Kathleen Boyle — Program m e O ffice r
Nigella Arobaga — P .A ./S ecretary                        Joann Greenslade — P .A ./S ecretary

The l.T. Fund’s audited account for th e year ended 31 st March 1988 is published in th e
Rainer Foundation’s Annual Report 198 7 -1 9 8 8 .

The use of any photography in this publication does not confirm or even imply that any person shown has been in trouble
with the police or is likely to offend in any way. Many Intermediate Treatment projects are part of general community
efforts and the involvement of youngsters referred fo r Intermediate Treatment may well be minimal.

 ITF, 33 King Street, London WC2E 8JD. Telephone: 01-379 6 17 1.


                                                       -   2   -
                                                    F o re w o r d
                                                         b y t h e
                                                   C h a ir m a n
       9 8 8 — o u r 1 0th Birthday — is                                                part. It cannot make sense, unless it


    1  an im p o rta n t milestone and
       the R eport looks ahead to the
       y e a r 's p ro g ra m m e
excitements. I t also provides an
occasion to assess w h a t w e have
                                    a nd
                                                                                        is essential, to take young people
                                                                                        away into strange and intim idating
                                                                                        s u rr o u n d in g s , to m e e t bad
                                                                                        influences, to accept crim inal ethics
                                                                                        as the norm , and to be labelled as
achieved and w here w e may be                                                          crim inal o r feckless and thus
going. This is even m ore im p o rta n t                                                confirm w h a t many fro m deprived
since it coincides w ith the Home                                                       backgrounds see as inevitable.
Office Green Paper — ‘Punishment,                                                               The Fund w ould n o t dispute
Custody and the C om m unity' — in                                                      th a t fo r a small num ber o f juvenile
which the Governm ent suggests a                                                        offenders w ho are so uncontrolled,
new approach w ith expansion in
                                                                  SMIifiHS
                                                                                        removal fro m the com m unity is the
exactly th e field o f the Fund's                                                       only course. We always emphasise
activity — the handling o f offenders                                                   th a t I.T. schemes, when assessing
in the com m unity ra th e r than in                                                    an offender, should never claim
custody.                                                                                m ore than they are confident o f
       In view o f the special nature                                                   achieving. But 9 3 % o f juvenile
•   the year ahead I shall n ot dwell
   here on the Fund's ongoing w o rk
                                                                                        crimes are n o t viole nt and a large
                                                                                        num ber o f the young people
program m e. Needless to say this                                                       involved should be suitable fo r I.T.
continues unabated am idst the
anniversary planning, and is fu lly
covered in th e Report.                                                                 The   Community                   and
                                                                                        Offending
                                                                                           The visits I have made during the
The Fund’s Experience                                                                      year have confirm ed in my mind the
It always seems curious th a t an alm ost blind fa ith in         many advantages o f com m unity involvement:
the efficacy o f custody — unsupported by any evidence                    a) Successful schemes b ring to ge th er many
— seems to be regarded as axiomatic. The Home                     s ta tu to ry agencies (magistrates, police, probation
Secretary him self describes prison as an academy o f             service, social and education services) w ith the
crim e w here th e apprentice crim inal learns his trade.         vo lu ntary sector — churches, voluntary bodies,
The Green Paper adds " i f they (offenders) are                   charities and a w ide range o f volunteers —
rem oved in prison fro m the responsibilities, problem s          professionals, retired o r giving th e ir spare tim e, artists,
and tem ptations o f everyday life they are less likely to        musicians, teachers, engineers, mechanics, etc.;
acquire the self-discipline and self-reliance which w ill                 b) Inter-agency co-operation leads ideally (often
p revent reo ffe nd in g ." This entirely coincides w ith the     in fact) to a common and consistent basis fo r dealing
Fund's experience and the main th ru s t o f program m es         w ith offenders;
we assist is to stim ulate these virtues. I welcome the                   c) Individual m embers o f the com m unity as
Green Paper and only have reservations when it seems              volunteers can influence and be involved in problems
a t undue pains to defend itse lf fro m the accusation o f        they norm ally regard as rem ote;
having diverged fro m w h a t is assumed to be the                        d) Volunteers cover many skills and enable
accepted w isdom th a t custody is necessarily best. My           program m es to have the degree o f fle x ib ility they
own experience leads me seriously to doubt if this is,            require, because young people need d iffe re n t things
indeed, a m a jo rity opinion.                                    and program m es have to be tailored alm ost
       A dm ittedly, o u r experience is w ith juveniles. M ost   individually;
people recognise, o fte n th ro u g h th e ir own families,               e) Local involvem ent means th a t schemes are
th a t g ro w in g up has become e xtraordinarily difficult.      quickly responsive to success o r fa ilu re o r to local
Young people need guidance and su pp ort if they are to           opinion and can be m odified fa r m ore quickly than
g ro w th ro u g h this period w ith o u t disaster. Many o f     m ore fo rm a l centralised schemes ever could;
the trad ition al supports, fam ily, school and w o rk , are              f) Resources provided — free — by volunteers
less reliable        one in three m arriages break down,          allow fa r m ore to be done than the budget could cover.
school often fails, and w o rk is hard to get. Some are                   Charitable trusts are anxious to help in this
lucky and have one o r all o f these props, b ut some —           im p o rta n t field b u t fin d it dangerous to go it alone.
and particularly those fro m deprived backgrounds —               They seek guidance fro m the Fund — and n o t only
may have none. The com m unity then remains the only              provide the £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 to projects suggested by the
bulw ark, and this, too, is often changing. But the               Fund which the DHSS agrees to match in o u r budget,
Fund's heartening experience is th a t w here the idea o f        b u t are often happy to be p u t into direct touch in ord er
Interm ediate T re a tm e nt is understood and has taken          to help schemes. They also provide money d irect to the
root, com m unities are ready and anxious to play th e ir         Fund to be used a t its discretion. We have no doubt


                                                              _ 3 _
                                                                                                                                          m



                                                                     money - fo r it costs £ 1 ,0 0 0 to keep an o ffe nd er in
                 RULES                                               custody fo r fo u r weeks.
                                                                            There are, o f course, problem s and criticisms.
                           5>S §Sffip|8sf                            S tatutory bodies have sometimes found it hard — even
                                                                     distasteful — to co-operate w ith each o th e r o r w ith the
                                                                     private sector. But experience usually proves such
                                                                     misgivings illusory. The police, though norm ally very
                                                                     helpful, occasionally seem to feel th a t the Fund
                                                                     maintains th a t all young offenders can be dealt w ith by
                                                                     I.T. and overlooks the d ifficulties and dangers o f th e ir
                                                                     w o rk . Some magistrates fe ar th a t inter-agency
                                                                     discussion about juvenile offenders and the concept o f
                                                                     police cautioning undermine th e ir a uth ority, w hile
                                                                     others have to ld me that, n o t they, b u t colleagues, see
                                                                     I.T. as a s o ft option. We are careful to guard against
                                                                     this and to ensure th a t program m es are, w here
                                                                     necessary, rigorous. They contain essential elements
                                                                     foreign to young offenders -             punctuality, selJ j j j |
                                                                     discipline, care fo r others, self-exam ination, c h a lle n jlr
                                                                     about the effect o f th e ir offence on themselves, fam ily
                                                                     and com m unity, and whenever suitable, an elem ent o f
                                                                     reparation to the victim o r society.
                                                                             We believe th a t program m es fo r older offenders
                                                                     in particular have to be intensive — and this is borne
                                                                     o u t by H ounslow w ho have a 1 6 + project. Participants
                                                                      have told me th a t they find the program m es, and
th a t w ith m ore encouragem ent charities w ould provide            particularly the admission o f fa u lt w hich they can
more. We have, fo r example, ju s t had a generous                   shrug o ff in custody, extrem ely hard. The program m es
donation fro m the Football T ru st and this involves us              fo r less serious offenders seem less severe, b u t they,
in a new and im p o rta n t field o f juvenile offending.            too, contain the same elements — the learning o f
                                                                      useful skills connected w ith possible offending, e.g. the
                                                                      management o f cars, caring fo r and co-operation w ith
Extent of Success                                                     others.
It is notoriously d iffic u lt to quantify success. A m ore
defined pattern is, however, emerging. A simple guide
in areas w here I.T. is w ell established is to compare              The Future
disposals to care o r custody w ith the national average             We believe th a t the past 10 years have been w ell spent.
o r the situation which existed before. In Essex. Maurice            But the tim e has probably come fo r a new phase;
H aw ker described in o u r last Annual R eport the                  things have changed and we, in particular, are
creation o f a county system o f juvenile justice on the
foundation o f I.T.. C om m ittals to custody stood at 6 %
 — h alf the national average — and could be reduced
still more. The present R eport features Durham w here
the custodial rate was ju s t above 9 % in 1987.
 Hounslow, w here I.T. is long established and well
 organised, has also seen a m arked decrease in the use
 o f custody. In the N orth East, such areas as Sunderland
 and South Shields are m aking progress in d iffic u lt
 circumstances. In Cumbria ‘Alternative to Custody'
 schemes have been running fo r only three years; the
 figures appear to show a reduction o f 4 0 % in the use
 o f custody and care orders fo r offending. On a sm aller
 scale the John H unt Aw ard scheme, set up to m ark
 special voluntary achievement, made awards to tw o
 deprived estates a t Gateshead and Loughborough
 w here parents, fed up w ith vandalism, petty crim e and
 th e ir children's constant involvem ent w ith the police
 spontaneously set up schemes and clubs, in one case
 w ith the help o f tw o policemen, w ith astonishingly
 good results. All th is m ust save very large sums o f



                                                             -   4   -
9



                                                                         larger and am orphous body. Finally, I am sure th a t in
                                                                         I.T. local involvem ent and firstha nd knowledge o f local
                                                                         needs is param ount. 1 w ould hope th a t any new
                                                                         organisation w ould concentrate, as we have done, on
                                                                         encouraging local consortia and n ot on building a
                                                                         rem ote bureaucratic and centralised organisation.
                                                                                I hope I have n ot claimed too much. Having only
                                                                         been Chairman fo r three years I still see m yself as an
                                                                         outsider looking in w ith adm iration a t w ha t my
                                                                         predecessors did. It was perhaps fittin g , it was
                                                                         certainly fo rtu n a te , th a t the explorer o f Everest, John
                                                                         Hunt, should have been a t the helm during much o f the
                                                                         exploration o f the last 10 years. He was ably supported
                                                                         by a small experienced s ta ff and by an admirable and
                                                                         deeply involved com m ittee — fro m whose num ber we
                                                                         have in the last year m ourned the loss o f Chalky W hite.
                                                                         And behind us all has been the consistent and firm
                                                                         su pp ort o f the DHSS and its successive Secretaries o f
                                                                         State.




                                                                         John Henniker


    fru s tra te d by the fa ct th a t the concept o f com m unity-
    based care expressed th ro u g h I.T. is confined to those
    under 17, when the pace o f g ro w in g up is so disparate
    th a t is could be m ost useful to those even considerably
    older. We welcome the Green Paper, and the proposals
    fo r a new look and even a new organisation to deal
    w ith com m unity involvement. We hope th a t a rtificial
    barriers and divisions w ill be dism antled and allow this
    problem to be considered as a whole.
            There are a fe w personal points I w ould like to
    add. Having fo r the last fifte e n years been deeply
    involved in running grant-giving charities, I hope
    Governm ent w ould n ot succumb to a tendency to
    which they seem to be increasingly prone and which
    disturbs charities. They quite rig h tly acclaim the p art
    volunteers can play, b u t too often seem to th in k th a t
    this means they can w ith d ra w all financial assistance
    and leave the volunteers to get on by themselves. This
     is a recipe fo r failure. Volunteers are splendid: they
     give a lo t o f tim e and skills and save a lo t o f money; b u t
    they need a core o f paid s ta ff to guide, adm inister and
    tra in them ; otherw ise, a fr u itfu l enterprise can break
     up in a feeling o f neglect and confused anarchy.
     F urtherm ore, I have been m ost impressed by the
     dedication, pride and real expertise o f the I.T. teams.
     T heir conscious feeling o f a special role and o f personal
     responsibility is very precious and 1 hope it w ill n ot be
     lost by th e ir inclusion, as is m ooted in some places, in a


                                                                     _ 5 _
                                             P r o g r e s s *
                                          of t h e F u n d

          n 1 9 8 7 -8 8 th e         Fund                                                             are encouraged to ensure police


 I        e m b a r k e d
          im p le m e n ta tio n
          1 9 8 7 -1 9 9 0    plan. This
 coincided w ith the beginning o f a
 fo u rth period o f renewal by the
                                         on
                                   o f its
                                                                                                       contact w ith o th e r concerned
                                                                                                       agencies, and indeed to make
                                                                                                       contact themselves. As the C.P.S.
                                                                                                       is centrally adm inistered it is
                                                                                                       intended th a t it w ill be an
 DHSS, also fo r 3 years. The year                                                                     additional force fo r consistency
 ahead w ou ld m ark the 10th                                                                          in prosecution and cautioning
 Anniversary o f the Fund, and                                                                         practice in d iffe re n t police force
 provide an o p p o rtu n ity to focus                                                                 areas. A system o f juvenile
 on the fu tu re .                                                                                    specialists has been instituted
          As the review published in                                                                  w ith centralised train in g.
 o u r 1 9 8 6 -8 7 R eport has shown,                                                                        However, fro m th e p o in t o f
 effects o f initiatives taken since                                                                  view o f vo lu ntary I.T. facilities in
  1982 w ere beginning to be fe lt                                                                    some areas, the C.P.S. may be
 and needed to be contended                                                                            seen as y e t another professional
 w it h .     They       have     e lic ite d                                                          body to liaise w ith and, indeed,
 responses fro m both sta tu tory                                                                      one n e c e s s a rily s o m e w h a t-
 and vo lu ntary agencies and have                                                                     detached fro m         the existi rW
 b ro u g h t considerable influence                                                                   services. While it is early to fo rm
 to bear on the w hole o f juvenile                                                                   ju d g e m e n t s     about       th e
justice. The effects have been                                                                         consequences o f this new factor,
 m ost pronounced in changing                                                                          it does appear th a t there is
 approaches to the tre a tm e n t o f                                                                  potential fo r a m ore enlightened
juvenile offenders, necessitating,                                                                     response to juvenile offending,
 quite          properly,           some                                                               and again a b e tte r context fo r
  reconsideration o f the Fund's                  C om m u n ity service on an a lterna tive           voluntary action in providing I.T.
 approach and response to the                           to custody p ro g ra m m e                     services.
 field. Although n ot deviating                                                                        4 . T h e D H S S ’s In itia tiv e
 fro m its rem it, established in 1 97 8 by the DHSS, there               announced in Local A u th o rity C ircular LAC(83)3,
 was some sense o f a need fo r shifts in emphasis,                       providing 3 year funding fo r the developm ent o f
 although n ot in purpose. The m ajor influences in the                   alternatives to custody embodied in the 198 2 Act,
 field producing progress, developm ent and change                        came to an end. Projects m ounted under this initiative
 w ere discussed in fu ll in o u r last Report, b u t are                  (some 110) have dem onstrated that:
  summarised here f o r reference.                                         ► I.T. can successfully intervene w ith young
                                                                                  offenders, reducing th e frequency and
                                                                                  seriousness o f th e ir re-offending;
  Developments in Juvenile justice
                                                                           ► I.T . can w in th e c o n fid e n c e o f m ag istrates
  1. The 1 9 8 2 C rim inal Justice Act gave new powers
                                                                                  and o th e r local agencies;
  to m agistrates' courts fo r custodial sentencing. Despite
  fears to the co ntrary there has been a reduction in                     ► The      voluntary sector can w o rk effectively
  sentencing to detention centres, although this has been                         alongside        and in close co-operation w ith
  accompanied by some increase in longer youth custody                            statu to ry provision, and indeed has special
  sentences being given.                                                          qualities o f its ow n to bring t o bear;
  2. The H om e Office C autioning Circular (1 4 /8 5 ) has                ►  In te r-a g e n c y      c o -o p e ra tio n    b ased       on
  resulted in a considerable and g ro w in g increase in the                      system atic and sound in fo rm a tio n can
  use o f cautioning nationally, although there is quite                          significantly a lte r and im prove th e response
  w ide variation between areas.                                                  to  ju v en ile offenders.
  3. The Code fo r th e Crow n Prosecution Service                                A  critical  question cu rren tly is how many o f these
   (1 9 8 6 ) stipulated th at:                                            projects w ill be continued th ro ug h local authority
   "        there is in the case o f juve nile offenders a much            funding, which was the intention once the lim ited life
  stron ge r presum ption in favour o f methods o f disposal               funding fro m central governm ent ceased.
   which fall sh o rt o f prosecution unless the seriousness                      The main effects resulting fro m the above have
   o f the offence o r o th e r exceptional circumstances                  been a significant reduction in the num ber o f young
   dictate otherwise. The objectives should be to d ivert                  people coming into the courts and, consequently, fe w e r
 juveniles fro m c o u rt w herever possible. Prosecution                 juveniles being com m itted to custody. However, the
   should always be regarded as a severe step". (Source:                   g ro w th in diversionary and preventive schemes has
   Code fo r C row n Prosecutors, 1986).                                   allowed us to gain not only experience o f the process
                                                                           and w o rk in g o f such schemes b ut o f related needs in
           Also w ith in the Code, Crown Prosecution s ta ff               te rm s o f fa cilita ting services.



                                                                       6   -
m



            Despite these positive developments there is                  award being made. In some cases this is because the
    undoubtedly patchiness in provision — some areas only                 context in which projects operate is richer and fu lle r
    r e c e n tly h a v in g e m b a rk e d u p o n any s e rio u s       and attention m ust be paid to avoiding duplication and
    developm ent o f I.T. O ther areas, having well planned               ensuring th a t projects are targeted upon m eeting real
    and adequately resourced ACC and I.T. provision, are                  and unm et needs. Additionally, fe w e r applications are
    looking a t ways and means o f funding social crime                   fo r small capital amounts w hile an increasing num ber
    prevention schemes fo r a som ewhat younger age                       include elements fo r fir s t year running costs. This
    group (1 0 -1 3 years) w ho live in 'high ris k ’ areas and           frequently necessitates assisting projects in securing
    w ho are seriously a t risk o f coming into crime.                    some certainty o f continuing funding fo r subsequent
                                                                          years, which is getting harder to find. Perhaps the
                                                                          m ost significant change to note, fo r the grant-m aker,
    Issues for the Future                                                 is th a t applications increasingly centre around the need
    The three year review on which the Fund’s Forw ard                    fo r a funding package o f which the request to the Fund
    Plan was based suggested th a t emphasis should be                    is only one element. In some cases, and increasingly,
    given to the fo llo w in g issues:                                    th is     involves th e Fund in u n d e rta k in g        an
    1. The uneven spread o f I.T. provision;                              entrepreneurial o r brokerage roie, as, unlike some
    2. P rom otion and su pp ort o f schemes aiming to                    Charitable Trusts the Fund cannot make grants
       event juvenile crim e;                    i                        w ith o u t assurances o f security, o r hold allocations on
    f     Facilitating a m ore defined response fro m the
    v o lu n ta ry sector to ju ve n ile delinquency: Building
                                                                          account fo r lengthy periods. Critical application o f
                                                                          small capital awards is becoming, undoubtedly, m ore
    capacity;                                                             difficult.
    4. Securing the achievements o f I.T.: Augmenting
    resources.

                                                                                          As th e re p o rt fr o m th e analysis o f
                                                                                  g ra n ts m a d e b e tw e e n A p ril 1 9 8 7 and
    ► Fund Resources and                                                          M a rch 198 8 show s, th e F und d is b u rs e d
                                                                                  so m e £ 3 6 3 ,6 9 9 fro m its ow n resources to
    Program m e                                                                   9 9 p ro je c ts , a s lig h t re d u c tio n over th e
                                                                                  pre vio us ye ar. In a d d itio n to th is , £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0
                                                                                  w as a ttra c te d fro m C h a rita b le T ru s ts i n .
    Through its grant-m aking role the Fund has found th a t                      re s p e c t o f 3 4 p ro je c ts a p p lyin g to th e Fund.
    both the scale and diversity o f projects seeking su pp ort                   Some, b u t n o t all, w e re a d d itio n a l to
    require rather m ore developm ent tim e than has                              p ro je c ts receiving s u p p o rt fro m th e Fund.
    previously been the case, resulting in applications                           £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 o f th e F un d ’s £ 5 0 0 ,0 0 0 g ra n t
    taking slightly longer to come to fru itio n th ro u g h an                   fr o m th e DHSS is available o nly upo n th is
                                                                                  p o u n d fo r p o u n d m a tc h in g basis. T w o
                                                                                  C h a rita b le T ru s ts in th e y e a r m a d e d ire c t
                                                                                  a w a rd s to th e Fund fo r d is b u rs e m e n t a t its
                                                                                  d is c re tio n to p ro je c ts w ith in its s p h e re o f
                                                                                  in te re s t. F ro m th e s e a m o u n ts a to ta l o f
                                                                                  £ 4 ,0 3 7 w as d is b u rs e d to 8 p ro je c ts , so m e
                                                                                  b a la n c e        r e m a in in g        fo r    fu rth e r.,
                                                                                  d is b u rs e m e n t.        .                ..           ■ .



                                                                              Stewardship
                                                                              Receiving stew ardship o f n o n -sta tu to ry funds in this
                                                                              way is o f enorm ous benefit to the Fund. Firstly these
                                                                              amounts are n ot tied, as is its main grant, to a financial
                                                                              year, and secondly they allow a modicum o f fle xib ility,
                                                                              in th a t w o rk closely related to the Fund's concerns and
                                                                              which augments services it has supported, can be
                                                                              offered assistance although one technicality o r another
                                                                              (age range, type o f activity offered, etc.) w ould have
                                                                              p u t the request outside the Fund's rem it.
                                                                                      In summary, therefore, the Fund has processed
                                                                              some 141 applications in the year facilitating
                                                                              disbursem ent o f £ 4 8 7 ,7 3 6 to Alternatives to Custody



                                                                      7   -
                                                                                                                                                  I




 and Interm ediate T re a tm e nt projects, and to schemes
 designed to prevent young people a t risk fro m
 becoming involved in crim e. Additionally, in agreem ent
w ith the Trusts concerned, many projects have been
 referred directly. It is d iffic u lt fo r the Fund to keep
 tra ck o f the results o f such referrals and m ore
 effective ways o f recording the results o f this w o rk are
 being examined.
       In the context o f its w o rk w ith the Inner Cities
 Youth Initiative (reported on later) the Fund processed
 and disbursed £ 9 ,5 0 0 to 8 inner City Projects — fro m
 funds made available to the 1CYI fro m a charitable
 source.
       As the Grants Analysis section shows, the Fund’s
 objects allow it to su p p o rt responses to the problem o f
juvenile offending across the fu ll spectrum o f need.


A Problem of Definition?
However, the use o f I.T. as a te rm to describe this
range o f provision is now questioned, in particular by
those w ho regard i.T.'s focus as appropriate exclusively
to alternatives to custody and care, o r to w o rk w ith
adjudicated offenders. This issue is b ro ug ht even more
clearly into focus w ith the evolution o f more defined
w o rk aimed a t preventing young people fro m
becoming involved in crime, w hich is moving away
fro m ‘preventive I.T.', which identifies individuals ‘at
ris k ’ fo r particular attention, to focus instead on
 'com m unities a t risk' as the ta rg e t fo r social crime
                                                                            Underpinning Development
 prevention measures, now being much debated. This is                       W hilst it is essential to prom ote new w o rk and
 an issue to w hich the Fund w ill give close attention in                  stim ulate new services w here provision is still thin, the
the m onths ahead.                                                          Fund m ust also contribute to ensuring th a t sound
                                                                            developments are underpinned and maintained, and
                                                                            th a t the vo lu ntary sector’s achievements over the last
Support Offered                                                             three years are acknowledged and n ot allowed to
The Fund's role in supporting voluntary participation in                    evaporate.
both m aintaining and developing I.T. provision, has                                 In te r-a g e n c y c o -o p e ra tio n is u nd ou bte dly
been th ro w n into high re lie f by the changes referred to                showing benefits both fo r the clients concerned, the
above, the emphasis being on building capacity to meet                      com m unities in w hich they live and fo r the responsible
the increasing responsibilities being passed to the                         s ta tu to ry agencies. Ways and means m ust be found to
voluntary sector.                                                           ensure th a t these benefits percolate to the local level -
        Requests fo r technical assistance on project and                   on estates and in small neighbourhoods w here
o rg a n is a tio n a l d e ve lo p m e n t and on resource                 voluntary com m unity e ffo rt is essential to success. The
generation, fro m agencies at the early stages o f th e ir                   Fund's 10th Anniversary Year Program m e w ill focus
own developm ent o r fro m well-established groups                          closely on this approach, and the ways and means o f
fo rm u la tin g plans fo r new schemes are increasing.                      achieving it.
Undoubtedly the Fund has b u ilt a solid reputation in                               T hrough its advocacy role the Fund pursues these
this respect am ongst projects, sta tu to ry agencies and                    m atters on a regular and sustained basis. O f m ajor
 grant-m aking bodies — both public and charitable —                         importance w ith in this program m e area are the visits
 alike. E ffo rts are made to maintain a fa ir balance                       o f the Chairman to Fund-supported projects both to
 between responding to these requests and fu lfillin g                       acknowledge w o rk achieved and to facilitate g ro w th ,
 o the r program m e requirem ents.                                          developm ent and partnership w ith the sta tu tory
        In addition attention has been given to seeking                      agencies.
 newer fo ru m s and netw orks th ro ug h which to                                    During the year the Chairman visited Liverpool
 prom ote the Fund and its w o rk and reach small local                      and Sefton. and South Tyneside. An accelerated
 groups in need o f assistance and support. The need fo r                    program m e o f visits w ill be carried o u t during the
 this inp ut has been confirm ed by the Fund's w o rk w ith                  10th Anniversary Year (see page 17). Both Committee
 the inner Cities Youth Initiative (1 9 8 6 -8 8 ) which is                  members and s ta ff have attended a large num ber o f
 described, in sum m ary a t the end o f this section.                       conferences, meetings and w orkshops, m ostly to



                                                                -   8   -
i




    provide a program m e in p u t and tra n sfe r experience.                        Both these arrangem ents are exceedingly
    P rio rity has been given to local and regional meetings.                 beneficial to both projects and Fund alike and e ffo rts
    Prom otion o f the Fund and its aims th ro ug h local and                 w ill be made to increase the num ber o f such
    regional media netw orks has been much increased.                         arrangements. The advantage to Trusts prepared to
                                                                              co-operate w ith the Fund in this way is the application
                                                                              o f the expertise o f the Fund's Com mittee and staff,
    17-21 Year Olds                                                           specialised in the field o f juvenile justice and the
    O f concern to the Fund, b u t cu rren tly outside its re m it            systems it has developed over 10 years, in respect of:
    in term s o f o ffe rin g d ire ct support, is the question o f           ► Review o f applications th ro u g h site-visits,
    the large num ber o f 17-21 year olds com m itted to                             area-w id e consultations and reference to
    custody — w ho are excluded by an a rb itra ry age 'cut­                         know ledgeable sources;
    o ff' p oint fro m I.T. provision. The Fund, to ge th er w ith
                                                                              ► Financial m o n ito rin g o f awards 6 m on th s
    many others, knows th a t the experience and lessons
                                                                                     a fte r paym ent to assess th e status o f
    learned fro m w o rkin g w ith juvenile offenders th ro ug h
                                                                                     expenditure and use;
    ACC and I.T. schemes have much to o ffe r those
    grappling w ith the tre a tm e n t o f slightly older                     ► Project m o n ito rin g one year after an aw ard
    offenders. A dialogue has been opened w ith the Home                             is m ade to ascertain progress o f th e w o rk ,
         ice w ith a view to tra n sfe rrin g this experience and                   trends and developm ents w h ich can be

    f    trib u tin g to the developm ent o f new initiatives in
         this area.
                                                                                     d raw n on fo r establishing fu tu re policy and
                                                                                    funding criteria, constraints on o p eratio n
                                                                                     and newly em erging needs.
                                                                                     C urrently, in addition to funds provided by the
    Continuation Funding                                                      DHSS (£ 5 0 0 ,0 0 0 annually) the Fund manages several
    As in every sphere o f com m unity care the issue o f                     awards made to it fro m non-statutory sources, ranging
    resource generation has become more critical and the                      fro m annual grants o f £ 2 ,5 0 0 to £ 2 5 ,0 0 0 .
    Fund's role in this area has continued to grow .                                 A m ost welcome developm ent in 1 9 8 7 -8 8 was an
    D ifficulties over continued funding, to which the Fund                   allocation o f £ 2 5 .0 0 0 fro m the Football Trust, to be
    cannot attend fro m its ow n resources, seem to abound                    applied to the development o f com m unity facilities
    and take a great deal o f project tim e and e ffo rt. To                  concerned w ith football-related activities which w ill
    facilitate its own capacity to su pp ort and seed-fund                    also contribute to crime prevention am ongst juveniles
    new w o rk , the Fund increasingly assists new projects                   and young adults.
    in finding funders w ho w ill su pp ort second and th ird                        The benefits accruing to the Fund fro m such
    year costs. Less easy to fin d is m ajor annual funding fo r              arrangements, which allow both fle x ib ility and
    long-established projects seeking to sustain w o rk o f                   o pp o rtu n ity to augm ent the application o f its own
    some 5 o r 6 years' standing. Sadly a num ber o f these                   resources cannot be overstated.
    are having to close, which seems som ething o f a waste
    o f investment. Undoubtedly many have n o t only m et
    local com m un ity needs b u t have raised the
    expectations o f comm unities in term s o f quality and
    relevance o f service. It is d ifficu lt, currently, to see how
    these gaps w iii be filled.


    The Contributions of Charitable Trusts

         One o f the m ost rew arding and enjoyable
         aspects o f the Fund's w o rk continues to be the
         development o f partnership and co-operation
         w ith the Charitable Trusts, w ho are generous
         not only in contributing funds to projects
         referred by the Fund, b u t in giving advice and
         guidance draw n fro m th e ir w ealth o f
         experience and knowledge. Some Trusts make
         direct awards to the Fund fo r disbursal to
         projects on th e ir behalf. Other Trusts set aside
         an amount, annually, fo r application by th e ir
         Trustees to projects investigated and referred
         by the Fund fo r support.




                                                                  -   9   -
                                                                                                                                    I




The Inner Cities Youth Initiative, a consortium                 ► A to ta l o f £ 5 1 9 ,9 9 5 was attracted fo r •'
o f three leading national voluntary agencies,                          projects - £ 3 8 9 ,9 9 5 fro m s ta tu to ry
was set up in late 1 98 6 w ith D epartm ent o f                        sources and £ 1 3 0 ,0 0 0 fro m companies
Em ploym ent funding to w o rk closely w ith                            and charitable sources;
Inner Cities Task Force teams w ith in the                      ► The creation o f 111 cu rre n t and 8 6
Governm ent's new Inner Cities Initiative.                              planned training places fo r young people;
       The th re e consortium agencies — the                    ► The creation o f 9 perm anent job s, one
National Youth Bureau, Apex T ru s t and the I.T.                       w o r k e r c o -o p e ra tiv e , one lim ite d
Fund — jo in e d forces th ro ug h a shared                           -.Company and 21 vo lu ntary sector MSC
practical concern fo r disaffected yo u th in inner                     posts.
cities, and a conviction th a t pooled expertise                         “ W here i t has been available, it is fe lt th a t
supporting special Governm ent provision                         the specialist in p u t o f ICYI w ith in the Inner
w ould be a p ow erful fa cto r fo r change.                     C itie s     In itia tiv e     assisted T a s k Force
       The project's basic re m it continued                     effectiveness in a num ber o f vital areas,
unchanged when responsibility fo r th e Inner                    namely th ro ug h:
Cities Initiative was tran sfe rred to the                       ► Provision o f expertise in y o u th and
D epartm ent o f Trade and Industry in 1 9 8 7                           n e ig h b o u rh o o d w o rk . T ask Force
and a fu rth e r 8 Task Force areas w ere created.                      expertise usually centres on commercial
       The consortium 's central purpose was to                          knowledge and experience o f s ta tu to ry
 reach the m ost disadvantaged and alienated                            funding;
young unemployed people th ro ug h p ilo t w o rk                ► Identification o f emerging youth projects
w ith tw o Task Force areas. The Initiative                              and intensive capacity building in these
 aimed to su pp ort viable em ploym ent-related                          projects, which is central to Task Force
 schemes fo r these disaffected young people,                            aims in areas w ith minimal voluntary
 and to help them make new and positive                                  sector presence;
 contributions to th e ir own communities.                        ► Enhancing th e quality o f existing Task
                                                                         F o rc e fu n d e d        p r o je c ts    th r o u g h
                                                                         assessment o f young people’s needs and
                                                                         o f services delivered, and th rough
 In its in te rim re p o rt to th e D epartm ent o f                     negotiation o f supplem entary training
 Trade and Industry, the 1CYI highlighted both                           and s u p p o rt facilities;
 achievements and lessons learned which                           ► Facilitation o f specific ta rg etin g w ith in
 ensued fro m its w o rk w ith the 8 Task Forces:                        established Task Force funding criteria;
         “ The Inner Cities Youth Initiative began a              ► Increasing th e credibility o f Task Forces
 program m e o f jo in t developm ent and su pp ort                       and com m unity co-operation in areas o f
 w o rk w ith the 8 p ilo t Inner City Task Forces                       acute deprivation and w here hostility to
 early in 1987. Funded fo r a 15-m onth                                   external and governm ental measures
 operation initially by the Departm ent o f                               exists. A 'com m unity voice’ supporting
 Em ployment, its b rie f was to w o rk alongside                         Task Force approaches is a p ow erful
 Task Force teams to maximise new local                                   fa c to r in overcom ing local prejudice;
 tra in in g and em ploym ent provision fo r                       ► Building up local com m unity netw orks to
  alienated young people.                                                 g iv e f o llo w - t h r o u g h      s u p p o r t to
         “ In 12 m onths o f operation, the ICY1                          developing projects. Given the s h o rt­
  achieved tangible results locally th ro ug h                            te rm nature o f Task Force intervention
  intensive fie ld w o rk in the Task Force areas o f                     this is vital in te rm s o f the continuing
  H andsworth and N orth Peckham, particularly:                           developm ent o f yo uth services.”
  ► -P ro v is io n    o f te c h n ic a l a ssis ta n c e /        (City Youth: A R eport on the First Year's W ork
           developm ent to 4 5 projects concerned                   o f the Inner Cities Youth Initiative — January
           w ith  disadvantaged young people,                       1987-January 1988).
           bringing them to operational level;




                                                               10
                                                                                  G r a n t
                                                  A         n     a               Iy s is :
                                          I 9 8 7 ■                                             I 9 8 8
                                                                          Table 1 compares the allocation o f funds in
                                                                   1 9 8 7 /8 8 w ith the previous year and shows th a t the
                                                                  C om m ittee distribu te d its resources to a slightly
                                                                  sm aller num ber o f projects and th a t the increase in the
                                                                  average g ra n t awarded was m odest — some £ 3 7 0 .
                                                                          Table 2 gives a breakdow n o f the level o f awards
                                                                  made in the year. The comparison w ith the previous
                                                                  year's awards shows th a t the pattern o f allocations did
                                                                  n ot alter significantly, and the Fund remains able to
                                                                  assist a high p ro p o rtio n o f new projects to be
                                                                  developed w ith relatively m odest grant-aid; 4 2 % o f
                                                                  awards made w ere fo r less than £ 2 ,0 0 0 , and 7 7 %
                                                                  w ere fo r less than £ 5 ,0 0 0 . The figures show a small
                                                                  increase compared w ith the previous year in awards
                                                                  made fo r amounts over £ 5 ,0 0 0 (2 3 % compared w ith
                                                                   19% ) which reflects a greater demand fo r awards
                                                                  co ntribu ting to w ards s ta ff and running costs (see
                                                                  tables 5 and 6 below).
                                                                          The Fund's re m it encompasses support to
                                                                  projects th ro u g h o u t England and Wales. In both
                                                                  stim ulating and responding to inquiries the Fund seeks
                                                                  to refle ct its national role and to ta rg e t resources to
                                                                  those areas w here fu rth e r developments are needed.
                                                                  Table 3 overleaf shows the regional distribu tion o f
                                                                  resources in 1 9 8 7 /8 8 compared w ith the previous
                                                                  year. The difference shown in the distribu tion fo r each
             V olunteers pass on th e ir skills                   year refle ct both the Fund's own targeted stim ulative
                                                                  approaches and also responses by the voluntary sector
                                                                  to the changing pattern o f need fo r resources to
► I . Allocation of Funds:                                        accommodate juve nile offenders.
                                                                          A feature o f the cu rre n t year's d istribution o f
Distribution and Purposes                                         awards is the increase in awards made to projects in
                                                                  the Greater London region compared w ith the previous
                                                                  year. This is notable because during the Fund's early
               he analysis o f the awards made annually by        years o f operation the Com m ittee became concerned


 T             the    I.T. Fund provides the Fund's
               C om m ittee w ith a composite picture o f its
               su pp ort to vo lu ntary projects. It also gives
the w id e r fie ld detailed in fo rm a tio n on the
co ntribu tion made by the voluntary sector to the
                                                                  th a t a disproportionate num ber o f awards w ere made


                                                                  Table 1: A llo catio n o f Funds — Annual
                                                                  C om parison
provision o f facilities fo r young people in trouble w ith
the law, in te rm s o f the nature o f program m es                                                          1 9 8 6 /8 7      1 98 7 /8 8
provided and the structures and resources which are                                                              111               99
                                                                  No. o f a w a rd s m a d e
required to enable this co ntribu tion to be made.                                                          £ 3 6 6 ,4 5 8    £ 3 6 3 .6 9 9
                                                                  A m o u n t d is b u rs e d
        Figures fo r the previous year are also given fo r                                                                      £ 3 .6 7 4
                                                                  A ve rag e a m o u n t a w a rd ed          £ 3 ,3 0 2
the purpose o f m aking comparison, although it is
im p o rta n t to note th a t changes fro m one year to the
next do n o t necessarily indicate the direction o f a
trend. They may, however, provide guidance to                     Table 2: A llo catio n o f Funds by Level o f Awards
emerging needs w hich the Fund m ig h t assist the
voluntary sector to m eet in the fu tu re .                       Level o f A w a rd                   1 9 8 6 /8 7           1 9 8 7 /8 8
        The I.T. Fund C om m ittee m et on 4 occasions
                                                                  Up to £ 1 ,0 0 0               24%            (27)         22%        (22)
during the year and made 9 9 awards to projects. The
                                                                  £1,001 - £ 2 ,0 0 0            20%            (22)         20%        (20)
sum allocated to projects fro m the Fund's own
 resources was £ 3 6 3 ,6 9 9 . In addition, the Fund directly    £2,001 - £ 5 ,0 0 0            37%            (41)         35%        (34)
 attracted in excess o f £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 in grants made by         £5,001 - £ 1 0 ,0 0 0          1 7%           (19)         22%        (22)
 Charitable Trusts to voluntary bodies providing                  O ver £ 1 0 ,0 0 0              2%              (2)         1%          (1)
 facilities fo r young offenders, and is aware th a t many        TOTALS                        1 00 %        (111)         100 %       (99)
T rusts now make awards directly to projects w o rk in g
 in our field.                                                    Actualnumberso f aw ards given inbrackets.
                                                                                                                                                      I




Table 3 ; Regional D is trib u tio n o f Awards


Region                                                                    A w a rd s M ade                             % o f T o ta l D isbursed
                                                              8 6 /8 7                         8 7 /8 8                   8 6 /8 7         8 7 /8 8
N o rth e rn                                          21%                 (23)          15%            (15)                 1 7%             8%
Y o rk s h ire /H u m b e rs id e                      7%                   (8)          6%              (6)                  7%            10%
N o rth W e s t                                       13%                 (15)           6%              (6)                1 6%             9%
W e st M id la n d s                                  13%                 (15)          16%            (16)                 12%             15%
E a st M id la n d s                                   2%                   (2)          5%              (5)                  1%             3%
E a st A n g lia                                       9%                 (10)           5%              (5)                12%              6%
T ha m es Valley                                       2%                   (2)          2%              (2)                 2%              1%
G re a te r London                                     9%                 (10)          18%          - (17)                 1 0%            17%
S o u th E a st                                        4%                   (4)          5%              (5)                 2%              6%
W essex                                                1%                   (1)          1%              (1)                  1%             1%
S o u th W e st                                       11%                 (12)          13%            (13)                 11%             14%
W ales                                                 8%                   (9)          8%              (8)                 9%             10%
TOTALS                                               1 00 %              (111)                            (99)            100%            100
* Figures in brackets r e fe r to the num ber o f awards made.

                                                                                   to projects in the South East. The Fund's development
Table 4: Purpose o f grants                                                        program m e, which ran fro m 1 98 2 to 1985, addressed
                                                                                   this issue th ro u g h a concentration o f stim ulative w o rk
                                      1 9 8 6 /8 7      1 9 8 7 /8 8               in areas w here I.T. had been slow to develop, and
                                                                                   successfully achieved an im proved regional distribu tion
T ow a rd s a N ew F acility         47%      (52)     46%        (45)             o f awards. The c u rre n t resurgence o f applications
To Expand a Facility                 20%      (22)     30%        (30)             w ith in Greater London reflects the fa ct th a t although
To C onsolidate a F acility          33%      (37)     24%        (24)             some parts o f London w ere a t the vanguard o f I.T.
TOTALS                              1 0 0 % (1 1 1 ) 100%                          development, o the r areas have only recently addressed
                                                                  (99)
                                                                                   the need fo r highly focussed I.T. facilities to fu lly
                                                                                   im plem ent the measures o f the 1982 Crim inal Justice
                                                                                   Act. Awards to projects in London included 3 made to
                                                                                   new Alternative to Custody and Care (ACC) projects set
                                                                                   up under the DHSS LAC(8 3 )3 funding and another to
                                                                                  an established ACC scheme. O ther awards were in
                                                                                   respect o f particular needs such as 2 made to projects
                                                                                  w o rk in g w ith young people fro m m in o rity ethnic
                                                                                  groups. The Fund anticipates fu rth e r changes in the
                                                                                   pattern o f its grant-m aking over the coming years, to
                                                                                   reflect such developments.
                                                                                          Through its g rant-m aking role, the Fund seeks to
                                                                                  mobilise the involvem ent o f the com m unity in
                                                                                  addressing the problem s arising fro m juvenile crime,
                                                                                  and to increase the resources available to m eet the
                                                                                  needs o f young people in trou ble w ith the law o r
                                                                                  seriously a t ris k o f becoming so. Table 4 illustrates the
                                                                                  Fund’s continued capacity to stim ulate new resources.
                                                                                  7 5 o f the awards made w ere fo r the purpose o f
                                                                                  creating an entirely new facility, o r to expand the
                                                                                  capacity o f existing program m es to enable them to
                                                                                  make adequate provision fo r young offenders. It is
                                                                                  p articularly encouraging in the cu rre n t clim ate w here
                                                                                  resources fo r new projects are more d iffic u lt to secure
                                                                                  than was previously the case, th a t the Fund is able to
                                                                                  ide ntify and su pp ort such a high p ro p o rtio n o f new
                                                                                  w o rk . This undoubtedly reflects the a bility o f the
                                                                                  voluntary sector to respond quickly to em erging needs.
                                                                                          The Fund provides both capital and revenue
                                                                                  awards to support the provision o f program m es fo r



                                                                     -      12    -
  juvenile offenders and fo r schemes w hich aim to
    prevent involvem ent in crime. Capital grants are
    usually made to assist w ith the provision o f equipm ent
   fo r activities, b u t in certain circumstances grants are
   also available fo r the renovation, adaption o r purchase
   o f premises. Grants can be made a t the s ta rt o f a
    project's life, o r to an established pro je ct in the process
   o f expanding.
          Revenue grants are intended to assist new
   projects w ith th e ir fir s t year's running costs, including
   salaries, up to a £ 1 0 ,0 0 0 lim it. In o rd er to qualify,
   projects m ust satisfy the Fund th a t su fficien t funding is
   available a fte r the fir s t year, fro m s ta tu to ry o r o the r
   reliable sources, to maintain the facility. Where
   contributions to salaries are made, the Fund
   Com mittee looks fo r assurances th a t recruitm en t o f
. ra id w orkers w ill fo ste r voluntary participation and
 w p t displace it.
         Table 5 gives a breakdow n o f awards made fo r
   capital and revenue purposes. The comparison w ith the
  figures fo r 1 9 8 6 /8 7 shows a substantial increase in
  the num ber o f awards which included amounts fo r
   revenue costs — 3 3 % o f awards compared w ith 2 0 %
   in the previous year. Table 6 gives fu rth e r inform a tion
  on the application o f awards.
         Grants fo r revenue purposes w ere introduced
  into the Fund’s re m it in 1981, in response to the
   identified needs o f some developing projects. The
  p ro po rtio n o f funding applied to revenue has remained
   m odest over the years, fo r example to provide the                        made to su pp ort critical new developments, in areas o f
   running cost element o f a new activity o r a sessional                    especially high need o r to support new methods o f
  paym ent to employ a w o rk e r w ith specialist skills,                    w orking .
  w here the local a uth ority has indicated th a t such costs                        The increase in the num ber o f requests which
  w ould be included in budgets in the fo llo w in g financial                include a revenue element appears to be due to a
  year. Awards tow ards the cost o f salaries have been                       num ber o f factors: local authorities taking over the full
                                                                              funding o f ACC schemes set up under LAC(83)3, and
Table 5 — T ype o f G ra n t — C ap ital/R e ven ue                           hence absorbing any g ro w th in budgets fo r the 'heavy
                                                                              end’; a g ro w th in schemes w hich require specialist
                                                                              skills o r the resource o f a paid w o rk e r to provide
                                 1 9 8 6 /8 7                                 overall organisation o r continuity; and general
                                                                              constraints on the availability o f new funding.
                                                                                      Nine o f the awards made in 1 9 8 7 /8 8 included a
                                                                              contribution tow ards a salary. Three o f these
                        80%                                                   co n trib u te d to fu ll-tim e     posts, enabling new
                                                                              developments in d iffe re n t areas o f the country to
                                                          1 9 8 7 /8 8        com plem ent existing resources and encourage
                                                                              d iffe re n t approaches. One gave intensive help to
                                                                              youngsters on ACC program m es to develop skills fo r
                                                                              obtaining w o rk . The second was fo r a scheme
                                                                              providing a bridge into com m unity facilities fo r young
                                                                              people receiving cautions, and the th ird was a social
                                                                              crime prevention scheme targeted a t an area w ith a
                                                                              high rate o f juvenile crime.
                                                                                      The o the r awards fo r salaries made contributions
                                                                              fo r p art-tim e w orkers and included befriending
[   [ C apital Only
                                                                              schemes (fo r which there has been a notable increase
                                                                              in requests), detached youth w o rke rs and com m unity
      Revenue Only                                                            arts w orkers.
                                                                                      In assisting the development o f these projects the
     C apital a nd Revenue
                                                                              Fund has noted greater difficulties fo r many projects in



                                                                    ~    13   -
Table 6: A p plication o f Funds

                                                                   1986/87                                    1987/88
                                                    Am ount                 % o f T o ta l     Am ount             % o f T o ta l
                                                   Disbursed                Disbursed         Disbursed             Disbursed
E q u ip m en t fo r:                                    £                                          £
O u td o o r P u rs u its                            2 0 ,3 68                     6%           3 1 ,6 4 4                9%
W a te r S p o rts                                   17 ,450                       5%           2 6 ,6 8 5                7%
W heels S p o rts                                    77,505                       21%           5 2 ,5 2 8               15%
O th e r S p o rts                                   12,42 6                       3%           3 0 ,7 1 2                8%
C ra fts a nd D o m e s tic Skills                   12,264                        3%             8 ,4 8 7                2%
In d o o r R ecrea tion                              10,500                        3%             9 ,65 6                 3%
E d u c a tio n a l R esources                       4 1 ,1 5 8                   11%           3 4 ,2 6 8                9%
M u s ic /T h e a tre /A rts                          10,413                       3%           2 1 ,4 8 5                6%
F u rn itu re , etc.                                  10,475                       3%           12,555                    3%
                                                                                                                                    f4
S u b -T o ta l E q u ip m e n t                  £ 2 1 2 .5 5 9                  58%        £ 2 2 8 .0 2 0              62%        '

T ra n s p o rt*                                      13,990                       4%           2 0 ,0 1 3                6%
B u ild in g (p u rch ase )                           19,085                       5%           12,300                    3%
B u ild in g (im p ro v e m e n t)                   7 6 ,2 25                    21%           2 7 ,5 8 9                8%
Salaries                                             27,600                        7%           5 6 ,7 3 5               16%
S pecialist V o lu n te e r Fees (sessionals)          7,722                       2%             1,452                   1%
V o lu n te e r T ra in in g                                   _                    -             1,390                   1%
V o lu n te e r E xpenses                                      _                    —             1,230                   1%
General R u n n in g Costs                             9 ,6 5 7                    3%           14,970                    4%

S u b -to ta l o th e r p u rp o s e s            £ 1 5 3 ,9 8 9                  42%        £ 1 3 5 ,6 7 9              38%

TOTALS                                            £ 3 6 6 ,5 4 8                 100%        £ 3 6 3 ,6 9 9             1 00 %

* indicates capital a nd revenue am ounts.


securing fo llo w -o n funding due both to constraints on
funding fro m sta tu to ry sources, and the com plexity o f
funding 'packages' required to meet the needs o f
larger scale projects. In some cases, the Fund has been
able to draw on its relationship w ith Charitable Trusts
to support these new initiatives, b ut many Trusts are
unable to make awards fo r revenue purposes and such
resources as are available are applied to m eet a very
wide range o f requests.
       Table 6 gives a detailed breakdow n o f the
purposes o f the awards made in the year, and shows
the increase in the p ro po rtio n o f funding applied to
revenue purposes. The analysis also shows th a t the
pro po rtio n o f funding applied to equipm ent was only
m arginally higher than in the previous year, b u t th a t
substantially less was awarded fo r the purpose o f
building improvem ents o r purchase. The Fund has
noted in the past the lengthy developm ent period fo r
projects requiring substantial resources fo r building
costs, and the experience during the last year
underlines the complexity o f drawing to ge th er funding
f or this purpose, particularly when schemes require a
large am ount o f capital o r involve the use o f an MSC
w orkforce.



                                                           -       14   -
)




                                                                                      to custody and care schemes, and the voluntary sector
      ► 2. Programmes and                                                             continues to co ntribu te to this area o f need. Voluntary
                                                                                      organisations also play an im p o rta n t role in providing
      Organisations Supported                                                         services fo r o th e r needs. These include schemes which
                                                                                      o ffe r su pp ort on a voluntary basis to young people
                                                                                      receiving low er ta r iff disposals as well as social crime
                   able 7 below gives a breakdown o f the                             prevention schemes — which provide a fa cility in a


        T          projects supported by type o f scheme. The
                   Fund’s re m it fro m the DHSS has remained
                   unchanged since its in ce p tio n , and
       encompasses su pp ort to projects m aking provision
       across the spectrum o f need fo r juvenile offenders and
                                                                                      locality w here juvenile crim e is identified as a
                                                                                      significant problem , w ith the aim o f reducing the
                                                                                      am ount o f crim e com m itted. The voluntary sector is
                                                                                      often m ore appropriate fo r providing program m es fo r
                                                                                      these purposes, being able to su pp ort young people
       young people seriously a t risk o f becoming involved in                       w ith in th e ir own com m unities on an inform al basis.
       crime. This gives the Fund essential fle xib ility to                                   In the last 2 -3 years the Fund has supported
       su pp ort program m es which are relevant to locally                           several im p o rta n t social crim e prevention initiatives,
       identified needs and to assist the provision o f services                      including neighbourhood-based detached youth w o rk
       which are com plem entary in th e ir purposes to those                         program m es, yo u th clubs on estates w ith high crime
    / -.provided directly by the local authority.                                     rates and inadequate recreational provision fo r young
      JP Following the im plem entation o f the 1982                                  people, and activity groups aimed at alleviating specific
       Crim inal Justice Act developments focussed resources                          problems. These schemes have developed as responses
       on provision fo r serious and persistent offenders, and                        by local residents whose involvem ent is usually critical
       between 1984 and 1 9 8 7 the Fund supported a                                  to bringing about change. In many cases several o f the
       num ber o f schemes each year which contributed to this                        s ta tu to ry agencies are involved in supporting social
       development. In some areas o f the country fu rth e r                          crim e prevention schemes, although a clear strategy
       resources are needed to prom ote the use o f alternative                       fo r funding such schemes has n ot y e t emerged. The
                                                                                      Fund's experience to date suggests the need to develop
                                                                                     jo in t funding to ensure adequate su pp ort to sustain
       Table 7: Type o f I.T .
                                                                                      these initiatives.
       S ch em e                                                                              Table 7 indicates the prim ary ta rg e t groups o f
                                                                                      projects supported by the Fund. Table 8 shows th a t
                                              1 9 8 6 /8 7   1 9 8 7 /8 8             many projects in fa c t make provision fo r a range o f
       A lte rn a tiv e to C u sto d y/                                               needs and it is encouraging to note the high pro po rtio n
       Care                                 11%      (12)   9%                        o f projects w hich, th ro ug h close liaison w ith the
                                                                        (9)
                                                                                      sta tu to ry agencies, are able to add to the resources
       O th e r Exclusive IT P ro je c t    18%      (20) 2 2 %       (22)
                                                                                      available fo r w o rk in g w ith young people on I.T. orders
       F orm al IT P ro je ct s e t in
                                                                                      and to assist th e ir integration w ith in the com m unity.
       B ro a d e r C o n te x t            28%      (31) 2 4 %       (24)
                                                                                              The organisations receiving awards are broken
       Exclusively P re ve n tive /
                                                                                      down into categories in Table 9. This illustrates the
       D ive rsio na ry P rovision          15%      (16)    12%      (12)            diversity o f vo lu ntary bodies w ith w hom the Fund is in
       P reventive Provision                                                          contact and th e capacity o f quite d iffe re n t
       o p e ra te d in a B ro a d e r                                                organisations to provide resources fo r young people in
       C o n te x t                         28%      (32)    33%      (32)            trou ble w ith the law. A relatively small pro po rtio n o f
                                                                                      awards are made to large organisations and the Fund
       TOTALS                              1 0 0 % (111) 1 00 %       (99)            continues to focus its su pp ort on those bodies which
                                                                                      have a close involvem ent w ith the local com m unity, as


        Table 8: T a rg e t Groups — Referrals

                                                                                     1 9 8 6 /8 7                          1 9 8 7 /8 8
                                                                             No. o f              % of             No. o f               % of
                                                                            Projects             Projects         P rojects            P ro je cts

        A lte rn a tiv e to C ustody/C are                                      36                32%                26                  26%
        O th e r K now n Y o u n g O ffe n d e rs                               85                76%                76                  77%
        Y oung People Id e n tifie d as ‘A t R isk’                             85                76%                75                  76%
        Y o un g People fr o m an A re a o f H ig h Risk                        63                57%                53                  53%
                                                                                *                   *                 *                     *
        TOTALS
        *   Thesetotalsexceed10096asseveralprojectsworkwithmorethanonetypeofreferral.
                                                                            _   is   _
                                                                                     these are best placed to initiate responses to local
                                                                                     problems. The Fund's ability to resource groups which
                                                                                     are n ot registered charities is especially valuable in
                                                                                     draw ing on highly localised su pp ort fo r young people.
                                                                                     A num ber o f the schemes supported arise fro m quite
                                                                                     inform al groupings o f concerned residents, w ho
                                                                                     require relatively m odest financial aid to s ta rt up an
                                                                                     activity fo r local youngsters — draw ing substantially
                                                                                     on the voluntary co ntribu tion o f tim e and often
                                                                                     m aterial resources as well. However, the Fund advises
                                                                                     groups to consider seeking charitable status in m ost
                                                                                     cases.
                                                                                             Table 10 gives fu rth e r inform a tion on the
                                                                                     structure o f the organisations supported. This shows
                                                                                     th a t 4 7 % o f projects funded em ploy a t least one fu ll­
                                                                                     tim e w o rk e r and 7 2 % o f projects use some element o f
                                                                                     paid staffing, often a specialist sessional w o rke r.
                                                                                             The g ro w th , over a num ber o f years, in project"
                                                                                     which use paid s ta ff reflects a greater sophistication i,
                                                                                     the program m es provided and the organisational
                                                                                     structure required to su pp ort this. It is however
                                                                                     notable th a t 1 8% o f projects supported are run
                                                                                     entirely on voluntary e ffo rt and 8 8 % o f projects are
                                                                                     able to d ra w on the resources o f volunteer staff. The
                                                                                     value o f this co ntribu tion in term s o f tim e, skills and
                                                                                     co m m itm ent to the w elfare o f young people in
                                                                                     immeasurable.          '                                 k ■? i

T ab le 9 : G ra n t R e c ip ie n ts by O rg a n is a tio n a l S tru c tu re

                                                                                         1 9 8 6 /8 7                          1 9 8 7 /8 8
O rg a n isa tio n a l S tru c tu re                                     No. o f                          % of        No. o f                 % of
                                                                        A w a rd s                      A w a rd s   A w a rd s             A w a rd s

N a tio n a l C hild Care C h a rity                                         8                           7%               2                      2%
O th e r R e g is te re d C h a rity                                        47                          43%              48                     49%
L td . L ia b ility Co. ( w ith o u t C h a rita b le S tatu s)              0                           0%               3                      3%
L td. L ia b ility Co. (w ith C h a rita b le S ta tu s)                    11                          10%               4                      4%
V o lu n ta ry G roup (w ith F o rm a l C o n s titu tio n )                38                          34%              29                     29%
V o lu n ta ry G roup ( w ith o u t F orm al
C o n s titu tio n )                                                             7                        6%             13                     1 3%

TOTALS                                                                     111                      100%                 99                 100%


T a b le 1 0: S ta ffin g

                                                                                         1 9 8 6 /8 7                            1 9 8 7 /8 8
S ta ffin g S tru c tu re                                                No. o f                      % of            No. o f                 % of
                                                                        P rojects                   P rojects        P rojects              P ro je cts
Full T im e S ta ff Only                                                     4                            4%              5                      5%
Full Tim e/S essional S ta ff Only                                           1                            1%              2                      2%
V o lu n te e rs Only                                                       23                           21%             18                     18%
Full T im e & P a rt T im e                                                  3                            3%              5                      5%
Full T im e & V o lu n te e rs                                              15                           13%             12                     12%
Full T im e , P a rt T im e a nd V o lu n te e rs                           36                           32%             25                     25%
P a rt T im e & V o lu n te e rs                                            29                           26%             32                     32%

TOTALS                                                                     111                          1 00 %           99                 10 0 %



                                                                       -     !6      -
                        A        n n iv e
                                 P r o g r a                                                                          m                        e


         S i P w W ia


                                                                 'ifsIt'KS




                                                                                                                                          Si&Sgs




                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                40+
                                                                                                                                          •>       ‘
                                                                                                              o-
                                                                                                                #     4. -. .
                                                                                                                            £ .....     .t if t




                                                                                                                             _
                                                                                                               **                »-£.3=S




 ^       “ S ^ r s T r y raception at the House «                                        C u ttin g th e annivers.
                                                                                                                  ary cake


                                                                                                                         .
     ■            he firs t 10 years o f the I.T. '
           . Fund's life .have been years'-f  A, Successful.                                stimulate a more rapid and even
          / o f considerable ^ activity. ■
 Policy and : =practice within the          :Cpvernrrierit -                                growth o f provision - the start of
juvenile justice field have advanced        Initiative.                                     the Fund's project development
 steadily throughout the decade,
 re s u ltin g Jn ■ m ore co he re nt
 strategies and better methods fo r              The IT . Fund was established in           In 1983 the DHSS's LAC(83)3
 responding tojuvenile crime.                     1978 by the DHSS to encourage the         initiative provided £ 1 5m ;o f-e x tra : .
                                                 voluntary .provision o f supervised .      resources fo r bodies designated by
 The I.T. Fund’s role has been to help           activity forjuvenile offenders within      local authorities fo r the purpose, of
 the voluntary sector to play an                 the community. The Fund was asked          e s ta b lis h in g and m a n a g in g
 im p o r t a n t p a r t in th e s e                                                       alternative to custody facilities. The
                                                 to:
 developments. It has helped to build                                                       I.T. Fund was able to make .capital
 partnerships in the community,                  ► foster partnership and co­               grants o f up to £5,000 and assisted
 enabling voluntary groups to                          o p eratio n betw een the            49 of the 110 projects which were
 contribute their particular skills to a ,             voluntary and statutory              funded. Additional support was
 wide spectrum o f programmes,                         sectors;                             provided through Fund negotiations
 from social crime prevention to                                                            with Charitable Trusts.
                                                 ► encourage the grow th of
  intensive alternative to custody                     local community initiatives
  schemes.                                             for young offenders or
                                                       young people at risk;
 A 10th Anniversary Programme has
  been planned to run from April                 ► and stim ulate the growth
   1988, and will be used to take stock                of adequate resources from
  o f progress, to promote success,                    statutory, voluntary and
  and to look to action fo r the future.               charitable sources.



                                                           -    17     -
                                                                                                            m MM:'
              ttm       %




Lord H enniker visrts P ractical
                                                                                      J » S S S ‘”
 Alternatives to Custoay                              sSIKisssssi        mmmwM
           C um bria

                                            Lr , u
                                                 Hn « S ^ “S r f
                                                                                  t h e ir in v o lv e m e n t in and /
                                                                                  contribution to its Anniversary Year. ,

                                                                                  Visits in the year w ill be made by the
► Ten Years of                                                                    Fund's Chairman and members of
Achievement                              ► Anniversary                            the Committee to a number of
                                         Y ear Programme                          regions, to meet representatives of
                                                                                  the statutory agencies and visit
In 10 years the I.T. Fund has                                                     v o lu n ta ry p ro je cts pro vid ing
awarded £3 million to projects                                                    programmes for I.T, and crime
throughout England and Wales.        ,   A Birthday Party                         prevention. Attention will be given
► The I.T. Fund has awarded               The Fund celebrated its 10th            to achieving a higher awareness
     o ver 1 1 0 0 g ra n ts to           b irth d a y and launched the           amongst both professionals and the
     voluntary projects.                  Anniversary Year on 28th April with     general public o f the benefits of
                                          a reception held at the House of        community-based provision, and the
► Over 400 of these . grants
                                          Lords. The Chairman and members         p o t e n t ia l  fo r    v o lu n t a r y
     e n a b le d e n t ir e ly n ew
                                          o f the Committee welcomed over         organisations and volunteers to
     facilities to be established.
                                          100 distinguished guests, including     contribute. The visits will also aim to
► Over 350 existing facilities            the Rt. Hon. John Moore, Secretary      highlight critical requirements in
     have been expanded to                of State fo r Social Services and the   te rm s o f e xterna l s u p p o rt,
     provide new places.                  Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd, Home             resources, and c o -o p e ra tio n
► Over 2 5 0 fa c ilitie s have           Secretary, trustees and officers of     re q u ire d to fa c ilita te th is
     been consolidated so that            major grant-making Trusts and           contribution.
     th e y m ig h t o ff e r an          national bodies, and representatives
     improved quality of service.         o f the voluntary and statutory         The programme has been supported
                                          sectors involved with provision for     by the p ro du ction o f new
The Fund has established special         juvenile offenders.                      information and publicity materials,
relationships w ith a number of                                                   including a new leaflet and ITF 10th
Charitable Trusts. Over the 10                                                    A nniversary b u lle tin . Special
years, a further £1 million has been     A Regional Focus                         attention has been paid to contact
channelled into the field through        An im p o rta n t p a rt o f the         with national and local media, and
grants from charitable sources           anniversary programme is a series        coverage of events has been made
made to voluntary I.T. projects as a     of regional meetings and events          on television and radio and in
result o f referral from the Fund.       designed to promote a wider              newspapers.
Currently, up to £120,000 made in        understanding of I.T. programmes
awards to I.T. projects from these       and crime prevention schemes, and
charitable sources is matched on a £     to give impetus to fu rth e r            London Borough o f H ounslow
fo r £ basis by the DHSS, as part of     developments in meeting the Fund's       The Fund has given 156 grants
the Fund's annual allocation. The        objectives fo r the future.              totalling £490,000 to voluntary
Fund does not restrict its efforts in                                             groups working in Greater London.
attracting additional resources for      The Fund has contacted over 300           11 o f these, totalling £34,000 have
this important field to this financial   national and local statutory and         been made to support project
limit.                                   voluntary organisations to invite        developments in Hounslow.



                                                      -   18   -
Fund C om m itt.
               ■ee m e m b e r Brian Ware
                                              m «ets p a rtic ip a n ts a t Newcastl,
                                                                                     e Children's A d ve n tu re Group S u m m e r cam p


    Hounslow has been at the forefront
    o f the development o f both
    statutory and voluntary based I.T.            care, and issues surrounding the
    facilities, and has demonstrated              provision o f a range of services to
    particular success in delivering              meet the diversity o f young people's
    services through a partnership                                                             and preventive projects throughout
                                                  needs.
                                                                                               C a m b r id g e s h ir e , in v o lv in g
    between the local authority and
    voluntary organisations, to which                                                          partnership and co-operation
    th e F u n d ’ s assistan ce has              N ew castle                                  betw een th e s ta tu to ry and
                                                  The Fund has assisted a number of            voluntary sectors. A visit has been
    contributed.
                                                  successful schemes which aim to              arranged during the Autumn fo r I.T.
                                                  prevent young people getting                 Fund Committee members to
     In July, Lord Henniker attended a
                                                  involved in crime by providing               review the involvement o f voluntary
     civic reception which acknowledged
                                                  opportunities in areas where there           organisations w ith the social
     the progress achieved, and visited a
                                                  are few facilities, fo r young people        services department, probation,
     n u m b e r o f p ro je c ts w hich
                                                  to participate in programmes which           youth and education services in
     dem onstrated the range o f
                                                  w ill enh an ce t h e i r s o c ia l         providing services fo r both rural
     community-based alternatives to
                                                  development and bring them into              and urban communities. They will
     custody and care and preventive
                                                  contact w ith individuals and                meet members and officers o f the
     projects operating in the borough.
                                                  organisations offering support.              local authority, representatives
                                                                                               from business and industry, and will
     C u m b ria                                  Newcastle Children's Adventure               v is it a num ber o f projects
     P ro v id in g a p p ro p r ia te and        Group has an established reputation          demonstrating the diversity of
     imaginative facilities in rural areas,       fo r providing programmes fo r                resources in the voluntary sector.
     where the numbers dealt with by              young people from disadvantaged
     the courts are relatively small and          backgrounds. The Fund was pleased
                                                                                                T h e W e s t Midlands
     the population is dispersed, can be          to accept an invitation to participate
     difficult. Alternative to custody and        in a promotional day at its summer            Over 80 grants, totalling some
     care facilities were developed in            camp. I.T. Fund Committee member              £ 200,000 have been made to
     Cumbria, with the assistance o f the         Brian Ware, who has extensive                 projects in the West Midlands
      DHSS I.T. Initiative by three               involvement in the field o f outdoor          conurbation. Lord Henniker is to
     separate voluntary bodies with               education, m et members o f                   visit projects in Birmingham, where
      management committees comprised              N.C.A.G.’s management committee              the local authority has formed
      of representatives o f the local            and staff, representatives o f the            partnerships with a high number of
      communities and the statutory                local authority, and programme               voluntary organisations to assist in
      agencies.                                    participants, and discussed working          meeting the varied needs o f a multi­
                                                   m ethods and the extensive                    racial youth population. Projects to
     In August, Lord Henniker visited              p ro g ra m m e   o f v o lu n t e e r        be visited include a computer
     two o f the projects and met                  involvement.                                  e d u c a tio n p ro g r a m m e , an
     members o f the management                                                                  alternative to custody scheme and
     committees and staff to discuss                                                             tw o community associations which
     their programmes and success in               C am bridgeshire                              provide a range o f cultural and
     reducing the use o f custody and              The Fund has supported over 35 I.T.           educational activities.
                              jimmem                                                                                                              m




                                                                                                                                       fS f-fcP w fi'




                                                                                                                                             H urd •
  r ^ o S S r e at ® e launch o,                            .The H om e S®c J ^ S J m a n
.."■.      /t h e anniversary year ..-        ,
                                                              ;....,   ....'.'•   Stacey.. .   .      . ■




     W a le s '                                                                                              . need, -for hew / partnerships /as ,;a:/ion
  . .Lord . H u n t. . .(of ".Everest                    ►■Spring                                              ■ means f-fo r/i involving / the whole
     Chairman o f the IT . Fund from                                                                        ' comm unity /in taking responsibility -
 . VI980: 1985" 'ari'd member. o f .the:.,.
                                                         Consultation 1989                                  : .. fo r ..crime prevention,.and providing -
  ; /Parliamentary .^A ll^rP arty -.Penal /                                                                      community-based /programmes fo r '
.; .Affairs Group is to visit Wales in th e /                                                                   ;offenders.. -/-v/;- ' /:. ’ : / // -:/,-.-;; /.-'•/"/•■'
>: Autumn... The visit w ill contribute; to ;         /. ■The /1 0 th / Anniversary- /.Year . w ill:
  ; "the: ^Fund's; A n n iv e rs a ry Year ,;'         :; -cu 1m in ate ", i n - a ''/h ig h ,/ /level '       . The Fund’s primary, concern, is. the
 :.. programme- .through.. ;a series ..of, '          / ../consultation in the .Spring o f:,19 8 9 .;,/        - problem o f juvenile crime"and the .
; : 'meetings; to/review /progress in I T . /"        :         ;;w iir:. recall "th e c o n fe re n ce       : provision: o f ■appropriate -resources- ;
/,;-:and discuss areas o f unmet n e e d ./" ■,                                                             ; to support young people in a rapidly -
                                                                                                            ///xhafiQing:society/;Current objectives - /
      Lord Hunt w ill meet officials o f the                rice ::Charles,'.; the. ^Secretary -of'         ;/ include -the-extensidmdf experience.//
 :,/; Welsh'Office ;and ;representatives;;of ;:         /State fo r Social. Services,-and ..leading..       :;L. pf.^successful;;j.T.//programiries/tO;/; '
  " th e statutory agencies, as well as                                                                           areas where community-based
   -■ visiting Fund-supported-projects In "-                                                                  ^■provision;ls' inadequate and’ custody; ;
  / / both the north and south o f the                                                                        v.rates- /rem ain/highland -fo;deveiop -
  /; Principality.                                                                                          .v-; effective approaches to social crime
                                                       /: The aim /o f th e 1989 consultation,. .                'prevention. The consultation w ill
                                                      ../' w ith the theme ‘invest in Youth’-will, . .            explore; / continuing issues Vw h ic h -
  ; B u ild in g th e p ro g ra m m e '.. ..               .be .to; build, a new agenda'.'gained ;              - have a bearing on these objectives,"
 ■ The Fund anticipates participating in-             . from the experience o f - the -.I.T. ;                  /and experience: drawn from .the .
    other events throughout the year to               - . Fund’s firs t .10 years o f operation/■ / .          -programme o f regional visits during
    h i g h l i g h t - . and / ' c e l e b r a t e                                                          / . the Anniversary Year will contribute
    achievements and contribute to                        The consultation will, highlight the.                   to the discussion.       -/.
    setting an agenda fo r fu tu re -                 . . significance o f the .I.T. 'Fund as an
    developments.                  :                      enabler,.facilitator and channel fo r                The meeting w ill also address
                                                       . resources. It w ill also underline the                current concern about the high rate
        Archie .Pagan, m ember. o f the I.T.              importance o f local initiatives, inter- -           o f custody amongst the 17-20 years
        Fund Committee, is to address the                 agency management and co­                            age group in the light o f the Green
        a n n u a l; N ational Interm ediate              operative action in creating effective               Paper ‘Punishment, Custody and the
        Treatment Federation conference in                responses and solutions to juvenile                  Community’, ' published in July
        the Autumn and visits by Committee              - crime.                                               1988, and will consider the scope
        members are also proposed to areas                                                                     fo r voluntary organisations to
        in the south west and the north east             The meeting w ill seek to identify                    contribute to community-based
        later in the year.                               newer strategies and explore the                      programmes fo r this group.



         1978                                                                                                                                    1988


                                                                             - 20 -
c




    Table 11: P ro g ram m e Elem ents


                                     % of Projects Pro9 ra m m e
                                       including          e le m e n ts
                                     th is e le m e n t su p p o rte d by
                                                        Fund A w ards
                                        8 6 /8 7 8 7 /8 8 8 6 /8 7 8 7 /8 8
    G ro u p w o rk/C o u n se llin g   53%       40%         54%    62%
    O u td o o r a c tiv itie s
    in c lu d in g S p o rts            53%       70%         44%    54%
    C ra fts /H o b b ie s              55%       57%         48%    47%
    Education/W ork R elated            36%       36%         36%    36%
    C o m m u n ity S ervice/
    R ep aratio n                         6%       4%         6%         8%
    O th e r                              2%       0%         0%         1%
    TOTALS
    p

      These to ta ls exceed 10096 as m o s t projects
    include m ore th an one p ro g ra m m e elem ent.

    Table 12: Annual Th ro u g h p u t

                                   1986/87           1987/88
    Annual
                               No. of   % of     No. of   % of
    T h ro u g h p u t
                              Projects Projects Projects Projects
    Up to 10 p e r
    annum                        2         2%            1        1%
    1 1-20 p e r a n n u m      13        12%            8        8%
    21 -5 0 p e r a n n u m     44        40%           35       35%
    M o re th a n 5 0 p e r
    annum                       50        46%           55       56%
    TOTALS                     111       1 00 %         99     100%                        Table 11 provides an illustration o f the diversity
                                                                                   o f program m e components provided by projects
                                                                                   supported by the Fund. Although the Fund mainly
    T ab le 13: A v a ila b ility o f Services                                     provides small capital grants, the awards may enable
                                                                                   projects to develop a range o f w o rk in g methods. The
                                                                                   analysis fo r 1 9 8 7 /8 8 shows a sharp increase in awards
                                19 8 6 /8 7 -          1 9 8 7 /8 8
                                                                                   made to s u p p o rt group w o rk and counselling, and a
    A v a ila b ility      No. o f       % of      No. o f       % of
                                                                                   continued g ro w th in the application o f funds to
                         P ro je cts P ro je cts P rojects P rojects
                                                                                   su pp ort program m es involving reparation.
    Less th a n 1                                                                          Table 12 shows the capacity o f the organisations
    Session* p e r                                                                 receiving awards in te rm s o f the num ber o f young
    w eek                       2         2%              1         1%             people expected to participate in program m es during
    1 Session p e r                                                                the year.
    w eek                      16        14%            14       14%                       Despite the relatively m odest size o f awards
                                                                                   made by the Fund (4 2 % w ere fo r amounts under
    2 -5 Sessions
                                                                                   £ 2 .0 0 0 and 7 7 % fo r amounts under £ 5 ,0 0 0 ), the
    p er w eek                46         41%            42       43%
                                                                                   figures show th a t the awards contribute to generating
    6 -1 0 Sessions
                                                                                   substantial resources fo r w o rk in g w ith young
    per w eek                 24         22%            28       28%
                                                                                   offenders.
    M ore th a n 10                                                                        Table 13 gives fu rth e r inform a tion on the
    Sessions p e r                                                                 capacity o f schemes developed w ith the assistance o f
    w eek                      23        21%            14       1 4%              grant-aid fro m the Fund; the m ajority o f projects
                                                        99      1 00%               provide at least 2 sessions per week. Taken together
    TOTALS                    111       10 0 %
                                                                                   w ith the fig ures in table 12 this demonstrates the
    A oleaftei
    whSession rsno
                 do
                  en
                   fionrea
                         dw
                          ah
                           soe
                             li
                              eth
                                ee
                                 vr    g. morning,a
                                  enainwhole
                                                                                   value fo r money provided by the voluntary bodies
                                                                                   supported.



                                                                          -   21   -
       Tables 14 and 15 give a breakdown o f the                           Table 14: T a rg e t Groups — Age
anticipated users o f the program m es developed
th ro ug h Fund awards. A significant feature o f the age                                                1 9 8 6 /8 7                 1 9 8 7 /8 8
profile is the num ber o f projects supported which                        A ge                      No. o f      % of            No. o f      % of
make provision fo r young people over the age o f 16                                                                                     1         1%
                                                                           1 0-13 only                     4         4%
years. The Fund’s upper age lim it is 17 years, related
                                                                           13-16 only                     12        1 1%                 4         4%
to the ju ris d ic tio n o f the juvenile courts, b ut it is
                                                                           1 6 + only                      2         2%                  7         7%
 interesting to note th a t the type o f su pp ort provided to
                                                                           1 0-16 only                    12        11%                 11        11%
the juvenile age-group is also often appropriate to the
                                                                           1 3 -1 6 + only                29        26%                 32        32%
 needs o f older teenagers.
       Table 15 shows th a t 4 awards w ere made in the                    1 0 -1 6 +                     32        46%                 44        43%
year fo r projects providing exclusively fo r girls, and it                                            111        100 %                 99       100%
                                                                           TOTALS
 is encouraging to note also an increase in the
 awareness o f the p roject organisers o f the value o f
 making separate provision fo r g irls and boys in some
 cases to ensure th a t girls' needs are appropriately met.                Table 15: T a rg e t Groups - Gender
        In supporting voluntary organisations to provide
 resources fo r young people in trou ble w ith the law the                                              1 9 8 6 /8 7           1 9 8 7 /8 8
  Fund aims to fo ste r partnerships w ith the s ta tu to ry               G ender                  No. o f      % of       No. o f     % of  |
 agencies, to encourage the involvem ent o f the w id e r                                         P ro je cts P ro je cts P rojects P rojects
 com m unity and to assist the developm ent o f
                                                                           Boys only                   S          4%                3            3%
  complem entary facilities.
        Table 16 shows the high level o f involvem ent o f                 G irls only                 1          1%                4            4%
  voluntary organisations w ith the range o f sta tu to ry                 B o th Boys &
  agencies concerned w ith ju v e n ile offenders.                         Girls                    10S         95%               92         93%
                                                                           TOTALS                   111        100%               99         100%


 Table 16: Referrals
                                                                             1 9 8 6 /8 7                                  1 9 8 7 /8 8
                                                              No. o f                     % of                  No. o f                   % of
 Source o f Referral
                                                             Projects                   P rojects              P rojects                P rojects

 No s p e cific re fe rra ls                                           8                     7%                    3                       5%
 Social Services D e p a rtm e n ts                                  100                    90%                   84                      85%
 Education D e p a rtm e n ts                                         62                    36%                   53                      54%
                                                                      77                    69%                   53                      56%
 P ro b a tio n Service
                                                                      13                    12%                   24                      24%
 Police
                                                                      37                    31%                   44                      44%
 S elf
                                                                      38                    34%                   22                      22%
 O th e r
                                                                      *                       *                    *                         *
  TOTALS

    Thesetotalsexceed100%asseveralprojectsreceivereferralsfrommorethanonesource.




                                                                 -    22    -
                                                                          P         r         o         j        e         c          t

                             M o n i t o r i n g :
                                         P r o j e c t s                S u p p o r t e d                    19 8 6 -             19 8 7


                he Fund has always                                                                  o rg a n is e d , w e ll e s ta b lis h e d


 T              g ive n c o n s id e ra b le
                tim e to m o n ito rin g
                the effect o f grants
d is b u r s e d . O u r a i m o f
“ encouraging com m unity
                                                                                                    organisations, perhaps covering
                                                                                                    a w h o le c o u n ty , t o s m a ll
                                                                                                    inform al and localised groupings
                                                                                                    o f residents. Program m es range
                                                                                                    fro m intensive daily w o rk on an
involvement in seeking solutions                                                                    in d iv id u a l b asis, to w e e k ly
to the p ro b le m s o f ju v e n ile                                                               football train in g open to anyone
c r i m e " s im p ly c a n n o t be                                                                fro m an area in which young
a c h ie v e d t h r o u g h o n e - o f f                                                          people are a t particular risk o f
contacts w ith projects when they                                                                   being drawn into crime.
a r e in n e e d o f f in a n e e .                                                                         To design a questionnaire
E n c o u r a g in g co m m u n i t y                                                               which asks relevant questions o f
involvem ent m ust be a sustained                                                                   all the projects is never easy.
process. Our m onitoring system                                                                     H o w e v e r, th e th o u g h t o f a
is therefore vital to the Fund —                                                                    system w ith several d iffe re n t
rt is the principal means th rough                                                                  q u e s tio n n a ire s f o r d if fe r e n t
Which we remain in touch w ith                                                                      projects is n ot attractive, since
developments in the field, and                                                                      although it w ould yield, perhaps,
aware o f emerging needs and                                                                        richer inform a tion fro m some
tr e n d s . T h e in f o r m a tio n                                                               projects, the ability to look at
gathered tells us w he th er the                                                                    themes across the w hole field
F u n d 's c r it e r ia f o r m a k in g                                                           w ould be diminished. We have
awards remain relevant to the                                                                       th e re fo re decided to keep a
development o f i.T. by voluntary                                                                   single questionnaire as the basic
 bodies.                                                                                            means o f m o n ito rin g p ro je c t
         M o n ito rin g has fu r t h e r          C o m m itte e visits a u g m e n t th e          progress, b ut to supplem ent this
a d v a n ta g e s : in c o n s id e rin g              m o n ito rin g procedures                  in various ways.
 applications to the Fund we are                                                                             A high response rate is a
 able to tran sfe r o the r projects' experiences, w hether                critical factor if any general trends and developments
 good o r bad, to assist the developm ent o f applicants.                  are to be identified accurately. Last year we sent o u t
 Our m onitoring system is also our means o f accounting                   9 8 fo rm s and received 71 replies. O f the rem aining 27
 to central governm ent fo r the funds we disburse on                      projects, 12 subm itted basic inform a tion covering the
 th e ir behalf, and o f dem onstrating the resources which                expenditure o f the grant, and we had some o th e r fo rm
 th e se fu n d s g e n e ra te . T he tw o processes o f                  o f contact w ith a fu rth e r 13 projects. Only 2 projects
 encouraging new applications and m on itoring fo rm e r                   (w ith grants totalling £5,850) failed to respond to all
 o n e s a re in e s c a p a b ly lin k e d ; th e c o n tin u e d         correspondence. We also invited local authorities to
 e ffe c tiv e n e s s o f th e fo r m e r dep en ds on th e               com m ent on a project's development, and 4 9 o f them
 inform ation gathered th ro ug h the latter.                              did so. Overall, th erefore, we have inform a tion fro m at
         Voluntary groups are expected to respond to the                   least one source on 9 8 % o f the projects included in the
 changing needs o f young people and to changes in                         m onitoring system.
 central and local governm ent th inking on these needs.                           C ontinuing to pursue the last 2 % is likely to
 The m onitoring reported here covers grants made                          involve disproportionate e ffo rt: a more fru itfu l line o f
  between April 1986 and March 1987: the results w ere                     enquiry w ould probably be to tr y to fu rth e r improve
  collected about a year a fte r the grants w ere made, so                 the quality o f the inform a tion gathered, particularly
  the period included in the m onitoring runs fro m A pril                 fro m those projects which do n ot return the
  1986 to April 1988. The three-year funding awarded                       questionnaire b u t send an alternative fo rm o f
  to projects under the DHSS LAC(83)3 initiative was                        response. We shall therefore be giving careful th o u g h t
  coming to an end th ro u g h o u t this period, and the                  to how o u r requests fo r various types o f inform a tion
  influences o f the Home Office Cautioning C ircular and                   m ig h t be m ore clearly expressed, and, m ost
  o f the new Crown Prosecution Service w ere becoming                      particularly, n ot add to the adm inistrative burdens o f
  m o re n o tice a b le . T he m o n ito r in g re p lie s give            fully-stretched projects o r detract unnecessarily fro m
  indications o f how the voluntary sector responded to                    tim e given to delivering services.
  these and o the r stim uli, and this inform a tion can be fed
  back as and when a ppropriate both to projects
  w o rkin g in the field and to sta tu to ry agencies.
          Our main m on itoring tool is a questionnaire                     ► The Results
  which asks a range o f questions designed to give a
   general picture o f the project's developm ent over the
  year. The projects we deal w ith range fro m highly                       The responses confirm ed th a t there was a great deal o f



                                                                   -   23     -
                                                                                                                                                     I




activity and development in the vo lu ntary sector                        additional benefits, such as improved volunteer morale,
th ro u g h o u t this period. M ajor setbacks w ere n ot                 an ability to increase services o r places, an increased
encountered on a widespread scale, and the overall                        confidence in th e ir service on the p a rt o f the s ta tu to ry
impression is one o f a diverse and flourishing area o f                  agencies, and an increased ability to a ttra c t additional
voluntary and com m unity action. W ithin this healthy                    funding and support.
picture, the detailed comments received show the
problem s which individual projects face. The m ost                       3 . Did th e g ra n t help you to a ttra c t funds fro m
prevalent problem is a lack o f financial security                        o th e r sources?
resulting fro m a shortage o f continuation funding,                      Yes       fro m Trusts                      23%
which inhibits development, reduces morale, and can                                  fro m local a uth ority          20%
give fu tu re planning an a ir o f unreality. Funding o f                            fro m central governm ent         6%
salaries is particularly critical. If a local a u th o rity is not                   fro m o th e r sources            9%
able to continue funding a project co -o rd in a to r’s                   No                                         46% *
salary, the effectiveness o f th a t co -o rd ina tor often               (* additional funds are n o t always required by projects
falls, since the tim e spent      raising funds fo r his own              applying to the Fund).
salary       is necessarily  n ot spent co-ordinating the                 (Percentages exceed 100 because some projects
project. Lack o f financial security can also become a                    a ttracted funds from m ore than one source).
m ajor im pedim ent to recruiting staff.
                                                                                                                                                6
        Some o f the questions fro m the questionnaire                    £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 o f o u r annua! g ra n t depends on o u r
w ith summaries o f the responses are set o u t below.                    attracting a matching am ount fro m Charitable Trusts.
                                                                          This result gave the Fund evidence th a t the T ru s t
1. Did you spend th e g ra n t in full fo r th e purposes                 w o rld is in fact co ntribu ting well in excess o f
specified in your application?                                            £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 annually, since only a p ro p o rtio n o f the
Yes       86%                                                             2 3 % w ho reported receiving grants fro m Trusts w ere
No        14%                                                             counted tow ards our to ta l claim o f £ 1 2 0 ,0 0 0 .
                                                                                  The fa ct th a t o n e -fifth th o u g h t th a t o u r g ra n t
We do n o t w a it a year before asking this question.                    had helped them secure local a u th o rity funding is also
Projects in fact receive a sh o rt financial m on itoring                 encouraging. As local governm ent tightens its belt still
fo rm between 3 and 6 m onths a fte r receiving th e ir                   fu rth e r it has become less w illing to contribute to
g ra n t asking them fo r confirm ation th a t the money has              projects which have n ot ye t shown th e ir w o rth : the
been spent, and rem inding them th a t we need to see                     Fund by providing pum p-prim ing finance helps bridge
receipts.
        An element o f risk is inevitable in supporting new
w o rk . We visit a significant p ro p o rtio n o f projects to
discuss th e ir applications, and also consult the local
social services departm ent as w ell as o th e r sta tu to ry
agencies w o rkin g in our sphere. Nevertheless some
projects do h it unanticipated obstacles when they tr y
and tu rn plans into action. These can range fro m the
departure o f a key m em ber o f s ta ff o r a key volunteer,
to m ajor structural defects being discovered in th e ir
premises. The finding th a t 8 6 % o f projects spent th e ir
grants m ore o r less exactly as set o u t in th e ir
application fo rm is an encouraging one. 8 projects,
w ith our agreement, made m inor changes to the way
th e ir g ra nt was used, and 5 had an am ount unspent at
the end o f the year. As soon as it becomes apparent
th a t a project has no imm ediate plans fo r spending a
remaining portion o f a grant, discussions about
recovering th a t p ortion are instigated. W ithdraw al o f
an award o r a portion o f it does n ot necessarily pre­
em pt a fu rth e r application, b ut ensures th a t available
funds are applied to achieving action ra th e r than lying
on account in anticipation o f action.

2. Did th e g ra n t enable you to achieve w h a t was
stated in your application fo rm ?

H alf the projects responding said th a t th e ir g ra n t not
only achieved th e ir objectives, b u t also b ro u g h t



                                                                -    24   -
the gap between setting up and showing signs o f                        num ber o f young people participating. The role o f
success. Our te rm s o f reference lim it us to awarding                volunteers had expanded in several projects, and in
revenue grants only in a pro je ct’s fir s t year, and only             some cases they had taken responsibility fo r new
w here the p roject has found another fu nd er w ho w ill               activities developed during the course o f the year.
take over this revenue funding when the Fund g ra nt                    Changes in the way a project was managed were
runs out. In m ost cases, the local a u th o rity is the m ost          usually as a result o f an ad hoc group becoming more
likely source o f this continuation funding, so gaining                 form alised, o r an expansion o f the advisory or
th e ir su p p o rt is often vital to the survival o f projects.        management group as local interest b u ilt up. The vast
                                                                        m a jo rity o f changes under the various headings had
4. W h a t changes have you m ade to your project?                      one aspect in common: they w ere changes in an
Changed the w ay the project is managed 9 %                             upw ard or expansionary direction.
Changed o u r objectives                    6%
Changed the project program m e o r the                                 5. Do young people fro m th e follow ing categories
w ay we w o rk w ith young people          23%                          a tte n d your project?
The type o f young people participating                                 Alternative to custody or care        1 7%
changed                                    13%                          O ther know n offenders               46%
The num ber o f young people                                            Diversion fro m c o u rt              28%
participating changed                      43%                          Prevention: individual referrals o f
Changed the use o f s ta ff o r volunteers 38%                          those particularly a t risk           54%
Made no changes                            25%                          Prevention: no specific referrals     46%
                                                                        General yo uth                        28%
Changes occurring in-year are a good indication o f
w h a t type o f developments are taking place, and since               The grants analysis shows th a t applications fro m
the Fund's role is to su pp ort p roject developm ent this              projects indicate th a t the whole range o f young people
question is an im p o rta n t one. It produced an                       in trouble and a t risk w ill be supported. The
interesting and very mixed bag o f responses. Three                     m on itoring replies confirm th a t projects have been
quarters o f projects had changed in some way; the                      able to a ttra c t and w o rk w ith as w ide a range as they
m ost significant change being an increase in the                       had expected to. Particularly noticeable is the sizeable



                                                              -    25   -
                                                                                                                                          $




                                                                              Volunteers are o f course often a project's
                                                                        greatest resource, and are recognised as such. They
                                                                        bring w ith them a w ide range o f skills, and a d iffe re n t
                                                                        perspective fro m th a t o f professional w orkers.
                                                                        Projects are increasingly aware th a t volunteers need
                                                                        support: when asked about this, over h alf the projects
                                                                        recognised th a t volunteers needed training, and
                                                                        another q u a rte r had identified o th e r types o f support
                                                                        as im p orta nt.

                                                                        7. W hich o f th e fo llo w in g agencies    do you liaise
                                                                        w ith ?
                                                                        Social services                               89%
                                                                        Probation                                     65%
                                                                        Police                                        45%
                                                                        Education                                     60%
                                                                        Youth service                                 40%
                                                                        Courts                                         6%           fjp
                                                                        O ther (local voluntary groups, etc.)         43%

                                                                        This gives a m ost healthy picture o f projects being well
                                                                        integrated w ith the sta tu tory services in th e ir area.
                                                                        Alternatives to custody obviously cannot operate in
                                                                        isolation, b u t this result shows th a t the preventive
                                                                        schemes, some o f which do not have many referrals
                                                                        fro m the s ta tu to ry agencies, are nevertheless w o rk in g
                                                                        in co-operation w ith these agencies.

                                                                        8 . Have you m e t any unexpected constraints on
                                                                        your d e v e l o p m e n t ?
                                                                        Yes           57%
                                                                        No            43%
p ro po rtio n o f projects w hich are w o rkin g a t the 'heavy
end' o f the spectrum w ith young offenders w ho w ould                 The Fund's Com m ittee is w ell aware th a t developing a
otherw ise be in custody. And w o rkin g successfully,                  new project relying largely on charitable funding and
since m agistrates w ould n ot continue to refer                        voluntary help is likely to involve a certain am ount o f
offenders to projects which did n ot m eet the high                     risk, i t is th erefore useful to know how many groups
standards expected o f alternatives to custody and the                  do run into unanticipated difficulties, and w h a t these
responsibilities o f the magistracy, o r have the                       d ifficulties are. The num ber o f projects meeting such
confidence o f the com m unity.                                         constraints was higher than in past years (in the
                                                                        previous year only          4 0 % reported    constraining
6. W h o w o rk s fo r you r project?                                   factors), reflecting the g row ing difficulties     o f the
Full-tim e s ta ff                              55%                     situation in w hich projects are operating. However,
P art-tim e s ta ff                             69%                     although a high num ber            did face    unexpected
MSC s ta ff                                     14%                     constraints, in virtua lly all cases these w ere n ot o f a
Volunteers fro m the general public             82%                     sufficiently serious nature as to to ta lly underm ine a
Professional volunteers i.e. social                                     project's plans. The range o f replies included problems
w orkers, probation officers, police,                                   w ith premises, volunteers moving on, MSC rules, lack
etc. w o rk in g on a vo lu ntary basis         43%                     o f comm unication w ith in the project, and illness or
                                                                        injury o f s ta ff members.
A tren d noticeable over the past five years has been the
grow ing need to employ paid staff. A relatively small                  9. W h a t are your fu tu re plans?
num ber o f projects are able to operate solely w ith                   Consolidation                                 43%
volunteers. It is usually necessary to have a t least one               Expansion o f existing activities             35%
p a rt-tim e s ta ff m em ber w ho has the tim e to liaise w ith        Development o f new activities                25%
the s ta tu to ry agencies and management comm ittee,                   Repetition elsewhere                           6%
co-ordinate the planning o f the activities, and organise
and su pp ort the volunteers. S ta ff members also re p o rt            Question 4 drew a picture o f projects w hich are not
spending considerable tim e raising funds to secure the                 static, b ut are constantly changing and evolving as local
continuation o f the project.                                           needs and perceptions o f needs change. This picture is


                                                              -    26   -
I




     confirm ed here, w ith over h alf o f the respondents                   w h ich are e m e rg ing w h ic h w a rra n t fu rth e r
     saying they plan some fo rm o f expansion. However,                     investigation, b u t it cannot be used to undertake these
     the prospects fo r such a dynamic situation continuing                  investigations. The m on itoring system fo r grants made
     m ust be in doubt w hen the reply to the next question is               in 1 9 8 7 -8 8 w ill th erefore be expanded in various
     considered.                                                             ways.
                                                                                     Firstly, w e shall v is it a p ro po rtio n o f projects
     1 0. Is your funding secure?                                            which the C om m ittee o r s ta ff ide ntify as being o f
     A quarter o f projects, a t the tim e o f responding, did               particular interest and which w ill have lessons to
     n o t have a year's secure funding. A fu rth e r q u a rte r            dem onstrate. This interest m ig h t arise a t various
     w hile basically secure needed staff, equipm ent o r                    stages: the Com m ittee m ig h t single o u t an unusual
     running costs if they w ere to develop in any way.                      application w hen they make an award and ask fo r
              By the very nature o f charitable and local                    detailed m onitoring, o r w e m ig h t hear o f an interesting
     auth ority funding, it is d iffic u lt fo r any project to feel         developm ent during the course o f the year, o r the
     to ta lly secure. However, the fin ding th a t fo r half o f the        project's reply to the m on itoring questionnaire m ig ht
     projects, security does n o t even stretch to a year, is a              suggest an area fo r fu rth e r discussion.
     m atter o f m ajor concern to any funding body.                                 We also intend to look a t projects which fall into
                                                                             particular categories, w ith a view to developing our
    j j l l . Have you encountered any difficu lties In                      th in kin g on, and o u r responses to , various themes.
    I p t t r a c t in g o r w o rk in g w ith young people w h o            These m ig h t include a loo k a t projects w ith a certain
       have been referred to your project?                                   management structure, o r projects w hich have reacted
       Yes              45%                                                  to sim ilar local situations in very d iffe re n t ways.
       No               55%                                                  Alternatively w e m ig h t look a t a num ber o f projects
                                                                             w ith a sim ilar program m e content, such as music o r
     The m ajority o f d ifficulties w ere encountered in                    bikes. The increasing technical sophistication o f
     development o f direct w o rk w ith young people rath er
     than in attracting the young people. W ith a notoriously
     d iffic u lt client group, it w ould be surprising if problem s
     w ere n ot encountered, ft m ust be rem em bered th a t
     these projects are w o rk in g w ith young people w ho
     may have little respect fo r the law o r indeed fo r any
     fo rm o f authority, or, in a sense, fo r themselves.
             Some projects are rem arkably candid about the
     issues they have faced and w h a t they themselves have
     learned. For example:
              "We have learned fro m the youngsters th a t
     presentation and style are all im portant. An
      unpalatable message becomes acceptable i f presented
     in the way they w ant to hear i t We started w ith the
     best o f intentions b u t w ith a tendency to preach. We
     have learned th a t fo rm a lity and a patronising attitu de
     do n o t w ork. A relaxed atmosphere and an a b ility to
      listen firs t have b ro u g h t much b e tte r results. "

     Another recounted a d iffe re n t lesson they had learned
     the hard way:
            “ It is realised that the project m ust develop a
      'structure' which can exist alm ost independently o f the
     w o rk e r so th at the w o rk w ill n o t come to an end
     should he leave."



      ► Future Monitoring

      The last tw o o r three years' results have pointed to
      developments which we cannot investigate th ro ug h-a
      questionnaire. The questionnaire gives a sketch o f th a t
      area o f the voluntary sector w ith which we are
      concerned. It also gives indications o f critical themes



                                                                   -    27   -
projects, particularly those using computers, video and               projects w ill be invited to provide the base fo r detailed
music, suggests we need to look more closely at                       case studies, w ith Fund s ta ff visiting on a regular basis.
successful projects in o rd e r to b e tte r understand and                 Future reports w ill look a t how these three
advise fu tu re applicants. The fir s t such them e could             developments have been implemented, and the
well be the evolution o f Youth Trusts.                               findings and quality o f inform a tion gathered fro m each
        The Fund has no wish to a tte m p t to tu rn these            approach w ill be shared th ro ug h fu tu re publications.
necessarily lim ited studies into research projects, which
w ould be beyond o u r capabilities in te rm s o f tim e, and
outside o u r rem it. They w ill how ever be an im p o rta n t
vehicle fo r draw ing to g e th e r the inform ation we have
gathered over the years on various issues, and fo r
supplementing this w ith discussions w ith projects
which are involved in these issues today.
        The th ird direction in which we plan to extend the
m onitoring system arises fro m the increasingly
d iffic u lt financial climate surrounding local a uth ority
and charitable funding. Voluntary groups are becoming
more and more aware o f the importance o f being able
to prove th a t they are successful. Around h alf the
projects m onitored had carried o u t some fo rm o f
w ritte n assessment — a percentage w e w ould like to
see increased. We th e re fo re intend to look a t the ways
in which projects are m on itoring th e ir own progress
w ith a view to passing this inform a tion to projects fo r
w hom sim ilar approaches m ig ht be useful. Selected



                                                            -    28   -
                                           A               R e g i o n a l
                                                                                     V        i       e        w         :

                                                                    I . T . in C o u n t y D u r h a m

Peter W arburton, Chief Probation
O fficer fo r Durham, and Tony                                                  S^slSI
T h o m p s o n J.P., Y o u t h
C om m unity Services, are
members of the              I.T.
Com mittee. They comment,
the national perspective of
Com m ittee, on the I.T. Fund’s
contribution to the development o f a
coherent strategy fo r juvenile justice
in Durham and its support to a wide
range o f community-based resources
fo r I.T. and preventive w ork.              Peter W a rb u rto n                        Tony Thom pson



4‘A
                    s m embers o f the I.T. Fund Com mittee           LAC(8 3 )3 and so provide the structure fo r introducing
                    we gain an overview o f the Fund's role           alternative to custody and care facilities th ro u g h o u t
                    th ro u g h o u t England and Wales in            the county. Secondly, as bodies made up o f local
 stim ulating and supporting voluntary-based initiatives              representatives, they are able to draw on the resources
 to provide resources fo r I.T. program m es, and social              o f the com m unity to su pp ort the needs o f youngsters
 crim e prevention schemes in neighbourhoods w here                   in trouble, w ith o u t unnecessarily labelling them.
juvenile crim e is a particular problem .                                     "The YDGs, over 6 years, have spawned a range
         "W hen w e s it on the national Com m ittee w e have         o f imaginative facilities to complem ent the provision
 to weigh each application fo r g ra n t aid individually, and        made by the s ta tu to ry agencies, drawing on the
 balance the need fo r expansion funding w ith grants to              resources o f the I.T. Fund to assist developments. As
 those parts o f the country particularly beset w ith                 well as th e ir involvem ent in ACC w o rk , these bodies
 se rio u s social p ro b le m s , and w h e re th e re are           provide an invaluable mechanism fo r linking the
 inadequate resources fo r I.T.                                       s ta tu to ry agencies w ith local com m unity development
         "T hrough its developm ent role, the I.T. Fund has           concerned w ith addressing the issues arising fro m
 been instrum ental in several areas in creating a                   juvenile crime. Examples o f projects supported by the
 comprehensive range o f comm unity-based facilities fo r             YDGs are given overleaf.
juvenile offenders, and has contributed in many cases
 to effective inter-agency strategies fo r juvenile justice
 w o rk , th ro u g h its emphasis on fo rg in g partnerships.
                                                                                                                             ifwistm
         "Indeed, before either o f us became Com mittee
 members, th e present level o f collaborative e ffo rt
 between s ta tu to ry and voluntary sectors in juvenile
 offending w o rk in Durham was actually stim ulated by
 an I.T.F. initiative.
          "In 1982, when the Fund firs t visited Durham as
 p a rt o f its new developm ent initiative, there were
  relatively fe w resources com m itted to w o rk w ith
juvenile offenders in the com m unity, and provision was
  not fu lly co-ordinated. Although both social services
  and probation w ere involved in I.T. provision, there
 was n ot a coherent strategy fo r managing juvenile
  delinquency.
          “ Following a specially arranged visit fo r Lord
  H unt (then Chairman o f .the I.T. Fund) to meet
  Councillors, Magistrates, Officials and representatives
  o f voluntary agencies, an initiative emerged which
  resulted in the fo rm a tio n o f 7 m ulti-agency Youth
  Development Groups (one in each co u rt division), and
  the County Youth Development T ru s t was launched,
  w ith a senior police o ffice r as its fir s t Chairman.
          "T h e Y o u th D e v e lo p m e n t G ro u p s (YDGs)
  p e rfo rm e d tw o im p o rta n t functions in advancing
  developments in the county. Firstly, they w ere able to
  act as “ designated bodies" under the DHSS circular


                                                              — 29 —
                                                                                                                                                     #




            M O O R SIDE           GREENHOUSE                      AND               S p ecia list c o m p u te r p ro g ra m m e s are used
            HORTICULTURE PROJECT w a s developed                                     in d e te r m in in g        s u ita b le    p ro g r a m m e
            by D e rw e n ts id e Y o u th D e v e lo p m e n t G roup               c o m p o n e n ts f o r , y o u n g p eo ple a n d in
            in c o n ju n c tio n w ith a local, c o m m u n ity                     c o n fr o n tin g   o ffe n d in g b e h a v io u r. The
            associatio n. Y o u n g people a tte n d in g th e                       c o m p u te rs a re also u sed fo r re m e d ia l
            P r o je c t w ill u n d e r ta k e          r e p a ir a n d            e d u c a tio n a nd fo r g e n e ra l re cre a tio n .
            re n o v a tio n o f a g re e n h o u s e w h ic h has been
            b a d ly va nd alised , a nd w ill th e n c u ltiv a te
            v e g e ta b le s a n d p la n ts fo r use a nd                          N EW BRANCEPETH YOUTH CLUB . w as
            d is trib u tio n a t a local lu n che on c lu b fo r                    s ta rte d b y th e 'C ity ;'o f D u rh a m Y o u th
            e ld e rly p eople.                                                      D e v e lo p m e n t G roup in an area w ith a
                                                                                     re la tiv e ly h ig h level o f ju v e n ile c rim e . The
            A s w e ll as th e o p p o rtu n ity to le a rn a ran ge                 c lu b is s u p p o rte d b y a n u m b e r o f
            o f p ra c tic a l skills, th e P ro je c t w ill p ro vid e             v o lu n te e rs a nd pro vid es a s tru c tu re d
            in v o lv e m e n t in service to th e c o m m u n ity ,                 p ro g ra m m e o f a c tiv itie s as w e ll as an
            a n d a im s t o e n co u ra g e a sense o f                             in fo rm a l m e e tin g place fo r local y o u n g
            o w n e rs h ip o f th e g re e n h o u s e a m o n g s t                people.
            p ro g ra m m e p a rtic ip a n ts .
                                                                                     T h ro u g h its close lin ks w ith th e       s ta tu to r y
                                                                                     agencies and its e ffo rts to                   d ra w in
            CHESTER-LE-STREET COMPUTER GROUP                                         d is a d va n ta g e d yo u n g people,        th e club
            w a s developed by m e m b e rs o f th e local                           m a d e an im m e d ia te im p a c t on         re d u c in g
            Y o u th D e v e lo p m e n t G ro u p to          a s s is t            local va nd alism .
            e x is tin g w o r k w ith y o u n g people by
            p ro v id in g an a s s e s s m e n t fa c ility .




                                                                                         “W
                                                                                                         hen 1jo in e d Durham Social Services as
                                                                                                         Deputy D irector in 1984, 7 Youth
                                                                                                         Development Groups, each coterm inus
                                                                                     w ith a D istrict Council adm inistrative area in the
                                                                                     county, had been established since 1982. These had
                                                                                     sprung fro m the County Interm ediate Treatm ent Co­
                                                                                     ordinating C om m ittee w hich had provided a fo ru m fo r
                                                                                     the developm ent o f low intensity interm ediate
                                                                                     tre a tm e n t in local areas in response to perceived
                                                                                     trends in juve nile offending.
                                                                                              "The County body had proved to be insufficiently
                                                                                     flexible to respond to local needs, and the development
                                                                                     o f the 7 YDGs provided fo r a much m ore flexible
                                                                                     response. They succeeded in adapting attitudes locally
                                                                                     tow ards offending behaviour and, th rough th e ir own
                                                                                     innovative services, helped my own D epartm ent to
                                                                                     adjust the w ay in which it complemented local activity.
                                                                                     The real strength o f the YDGs was th e ir ability to
                                                                                      reinforce the responsibility o f local communities fo r
                                                                                     the offending behaviour o f local youngsters, and to
                                                       istwst                        achieve a grass roots response which drew on support
                                                                                     o f local com m unity interests including magistrates,
                                                   M   lillls il
                                                                                     church leaders and elected members. M ost o f the
 SlllPptls®                                                                           groups w ere registered as charities and w ere able to
 IS * * ®                                                                             a ttra c t e xternal fu n d in g — including substantial
                                                                                      support fro m the I.T. Fund - fo r the development o f
                                                                                      th e ir diversionary activities.
Peter Kemp, D irecto r of Social Services for Durham,                                         "A t the tim e o f my arrival in the County the
adds a personal view of recent developments:                                          Durham County Youth Development T ru s t had been



                                                                            -   30   -
9




      established to stim ulate initiatives in the field o f                  o ut fo r consultation w ith a wide range o f s ta tu to ry and
      a lte rn a tive s to care and custody, and to make                      voluntary agencies.
      applications fo r grants to fund such projects. The T ru st                    “ During the same period, police, probation and
      succeeded in securing grants to fund 6 intensive                        social services s ta ff in each Petty Sessional Division had
       Interm ediate T re a tm e nt projects each corresponding               begun to come together to look a t police referrals o f
      w ith a Petty Sessional Division in the County. 193                     children w ho had com m itted offences w ith a view to
      places w ere available in these centres whose methods                   making recommendations about fu rth e r action. These
      v a rie d fr o m tr a d itio n a l ce n tre -b a se d w o r k to        panels have had a significant impact on the cautioning
       “ tra ckin g " and outreach activity w ith in the young                rates w ith in the county and on the num ber o f cases
      person's home com m unity.                                              w here no fu rth e r action is taken. A ttitudes o f s ta ff in
              “ Through th e ir lifetim e all 6 o f the intensive             local areas in term s o f an appropriate response to a
      Interm ediate T reatm ent projects w ere managed by                     particular offence had varied enorm ously and the initial
      local management comm ittees, the overview being                        absence o f jo in tly agreed policies and perhaps more
      provided by the County Youth Development Trust.                         im p orta ntly the lack o f any coherent tra in in g and
      W h ils t so m e local a u th o r itie s used v o lu n ta r y           development strategy on an inter-agency basis had
      organisations as a convenient way o f processing th e ir                resulted in a relatively disparate response to sim ilar
      application fo r central governm ent funding o f intensive              offences across the county.
    -in te rm e d ia te Treatm ent, Durham C ounty’s history o f                     " T h e C o u n ty Y o u th D e v e lo p m e n t T r u s t
     |§Jl)luntary involvem ent ensured th a t the partnership                 com m issioned an independent evaluation o f the
      was a genuine one.                                                      effectiveness o f intensive Interm ediate T re a tm e nt
              “ In some ways it w ould have been b etter to have              between July 198 4 and April 1 9 8 6 and this was
      developed an inter-agency juvenile justice policy as the
      bedrock o f any subsequent resource development. In
      the real w orld, however, such developments rarely
      take place in optim um order and the final drive                              SPRINGBOARD offers a viab le s e n te n c in g
      tow ards an agreed inter-agency policy is only ju s t                        .option fo r ju v e n ile s to th ree petty sessional
       coming to fru itio n . In late 1985 my D epartm ent                               3ns :n th e south or th e co un ty.
                                                                                       :-:V ' :
       produced an internal juvenile justice policy in an
      a tte m p t to fuel the debate, and the subsequent jo in t                     The p rogram m e enco m p asse s successful
       conference organised by the probation and social                             -.elem en ts fr o m   o o th t r a c i n g anc
      services departm ents, and attended by representatives                         groupw ork       m od els   — how ever,
       o f the sta tu tory and voluntary sectors, identified areas                                                                    p ra c tise s
       o f agreement and disagreem ent and thus enabled
      fu rth e r w o rk to proceed, in the autum n o f 198 6 the
       Probation and Social Services C om m ittee agreed a jo in t
                                                                                      T h e P ro g ra m m e
       policy statem ent and this has now been expanded to
                                                                                    ; O u tre a ch .w o rk ’(tra c k in g ) -occurs w ith in -the.;
       include a jo in t juvenile justice policy which is cu rren tly
                                                                                  . y o u n g p e rs o n ’s c o m m u n ity and includes::. ;«■:
                                                                                      1.—c o n s tr u c tiv e    use o f le is u re tim      . e

                                                                                           young-iaeFSoh’s fiu d g e t;...             ................
                                                                                     2 . - o n e -to -o n e co u n s e llin g c o n c e n tra tin g
                                                                                           on th e in d iv id u a l’s p a rtic u la r o ffe n d in g
                                                                                           p ro b le m ;
                                                                                     3 .—close liaison w ith school ( if y o u n g ,
                                                                                                                           36);
                                                                                                                       e m p lo y m e n t ( if .
                                                                                         school leaver);
                                                                                     5 .—re c o g n itio n a nd p ra c tic a l h elp fo r
                                                                                         special needs, i.e., a c c o m m o d a tio n , :
                                                                                         fa m ily p ro b le m s , etc.

                                                                                     G ro u p w o rk o ccurs w e e k ly a t th e p ro je c t
                                                                                     c e n tre . T he sessions a re a im e d to w a rd s
                                                                                     c o n fro n tin g th e y o u n g p e rs o n ’s o ffe n d in g
                                                                                     b e h a vio u r, e lic itin g a nd c h a n g in g values
                                                                                     and b u ild in g u p o n p o s itiv e a sp e cts o f th e
                                                                                     y o u n g p e rs o n ’s p e rs o n a lity .




                                                                    -    31   -
                                                                                                                                                 i



                                                                               T he CHALLENGE P ro je c t p ro vid e s five
                                                                               c o u rts in th e n o r th o f C o u n ty D u rh a m w ith
                                                                               an a lte rn a tiv e to ca re and c u s to d y fo r
                                                                               y o u n g p e o ple a ge d 1 4 -1 6 years. C hallenge
                                                                               o ffe rs th e c o u rts a p o s itiv e a lte rn a tiv e
                                                                               b a s e d o n in te n s iv e          g ro u p w o rk and
                                                                               in d i v id u a l   counselling             where        the
                                                                               y o u n g s te rs    r e m a in     a t hom e und er
                                                                               supervision in th e ir co m m u n ity g o in g to
                                                                               school o r w o rk . U nlike th e tra d itio n a l
                                                                               c u s to d y/c a re o p tio n s th e fu n d a m e n ta l aim
                                                                               o f th e Project is to challenge, in d iv id u a lly
                                                                               and in s m a ll g ro u p s itu a tio n s , a ttitu d e s
                                                                               a n d b e lie fs w h ic h          have c o n tr ib u te d
                                                                               to w a rd s o ffe n d in g in a w a y t h a t is re le v a n t
                                                                               and a p p lica b le to th e y o u n g p e rs o n ’s
                                                                               e veryday livin g s itu a tio n .


                                                                               P ro g ra m m e C o n te n t
                                                                               F ollow ing a sse ssm e n t. C hallenge o ffe rs
                                                                               fo u r o r e ig h t m o n th p ro g ra m m e s as an
                                                                               a lte rn a tiv e t o c u s to d y o r care.

 undertaken by CONTRACT, a consultancy service on                              A p ro g ra m m e a t C hallenge c o n ta in s th re e
juve nileju stice issues funded by Save the Children Fund                      m a in e le m e n ts :
 (SCF). This independent evaluation was o f particular                         ► g ro u p w o rk n ig h t:
 importance since the expectation was th a t the local                         ► s k ills /lite ra c y /re p a ra tio n n ig h t;
 a uth ority w ould assume the funding o f these schemes                       ► c o m m u n ity c o n ta c t (learning a b o u t
 once governm ent funding had expired. A t a tim e o f low                             a nd h e lp in g in c lie n ts ’ h o m e loca litie s).
 overall g ro w th and budget retrenchm ent, sound
 argum ents w ere needed to persuade elected members
 to provide continuation funding.
        "Despite the continued resistance o f one o r tw o                 Services Committees to amalgamate the functions o f
 courts in particular Petty Sessional Divisions to using                   the 6 schemes, and to jo in tly fund 100 places in 2
 intensive Interm ediate T reatm ent facilities the num ber                centres, one serving the n orth o f the county and one
 o f r e fe r r a ls a ttr a c te d and th e c o rre s p o n d in g        serving the south. The Challenge project in the n orth
 assignments to projects which w ere made ju s tifie d the                 was a well-established facility, occupying the same
 num ber o f places applied fo r.                                          campus as Durham Training Enterprise, a progressive
         "T h e e valua tion d e m o n stra te d the p ositive             youth training fa cility w ith its own retail outlet. Its
 e ffe cts o f intensive In te rm e d ia te T re a tm e n t on             outstanding success in diverting young people fro m
  individual patterns o f offending both in te rm s o f                    care and custody has been documented, elsewhere and
 frequency and severity o f offences. Sim ilar positive                    in addition to its centre-based facilities it was now
  effects w ere identified in reducing the need fo r fu rth e r            expected to provide outreach w o rk in the adjoining
  periods in care and custody and o the r changes in                        Petty Sessional Divisions fo r young people w ho m it
  behaviour and attitudes w ere encouraging (in contrast                   w ould be inappropriate to bus in. The Springboard
  to the effect o f custodial disposals). Although the                      project in the south o f the County had been equally
  intensive Interm ediate T reatm ent projects had some                     successful th ro u g h the provision o f an intensive
  success in changing tre n d s in d e te n tio n centre                    "tra ckin g ” fa cility involving the use o f sessionally paid
  sentencing and youth custody sentencing, th e ir m ajor                  w orkers, allocated on a one to one basis to youngsters
  impact was on use o f care in crim inal proceedings. Up                   w ith a secure home base b u t on the verge o f care o r
  until June 1 98 6 intensive Interm ediate T reatm ent                     custody.
  projects had prevented 2 4 placements in residential                             "The decision o f the County Council and the
  care and it was anticipated th a t continuation o f such                  Probation Committee to assume the jo in t funding o f
   alternative to care facilities w ould remove the care                    the alternative to care and custody schemes placed the
   ord er fo r juvenile offending fro m the sentencing ta r iff             relationship between the vo lu ntary and s ta tu to ry
   by 1990.                                                                 sectors under considerable pressure. The County
          "F o llo w in g extensive consultation w ith in the               C ou ncil had been u n w illin g to fu n d th e tw o
   county it was agreed by the Probation and Social                         replacement schemes by means o f a g ra n t to the local



                                                                 -    32   -
%




     m a n a g e m e n t c o m m itte e s and e ffe c tiv e ly th e               to be a p o te n t fo rc e in th e dissem ination and
    Springboard scheme came under the management o f                              developm ent o f good practice across the county.
    the local Social Services D istrict Management system,                                "T h e d e v e lo p m e n t o f w o r k w ith ju v e n ile
    and Challenge was jo in tly managed by Social Services                        offenders in County Durham has taken an evolutionary
    and Durham Training Enterprise.                                               rather than a revolutionary path. Any inter-agency
              "Conscious o f the dem oralising effect o f this                    strategy w hich has at its core a policy which is jo in tly
     rapid change in the m anagem ent o f alternative to care                     owned has usually been hammered o u t over a lengthy
    and custody schemes, and aware o f the crucial need fo r                      period as a m utual understanding o f objectives is
     leadership and drive to re-establish relationships w ith                     achieved. W hilst the lim itation on available resources in
    the voluntary sector, the Chief Probation O fficer and 1                      the county has fo r all o f us a t one tim e o r another
     pushed very hard to develop a central strategy group                         seemed to threaten the very existence o f key facilities,
     involving the d irect mem bership o f the Chief Executive,                   is has also forced those o f us in juve nileju stice w o rk to
    the Chief Probation O fficer, the Chief Constable and                         th in k much m ore positively about p riorities and the
    the County Education O fficer and myself, as a signal                         range o f alternative resourcing (both in financial and
    fo r the renewed co m m itm ent to inter-agency w o rk .                      human resources term s) w hich m ig h t be available both
    The strategy group also includes a representative fro m                       nationally and in o u r local communities. 1 believe th a t
     each o f the n orthern and southern sector co-ordinating                     County Durham has come a long w ay over the past
            m ittees and the Youth Developm ent Groups,                           three years in developing a coherent juvenile justice
            ough in its infancy this group w ill, I am sure, give                 strategy which w ill in the fullness o f tim e be adopted
    the necessary leadership on policy m atters and begin to                      across all th e m e m b e r agencies. D espite real
     a d d re ss issues r e la tin g to c rim e p re v e n tio n ,                differences o f opinion between the voluntary and
     decarceration, and bail su pp ort program m es, and w ill                    s ta tu to ry sectors about the management o f resources
     corporately tackle policy m atters arising fro m new                         it has been possible to create opportunities fro m the
     circulars and legislation.                                                   very situations which seem to threaten the years o f
              "The tw o sector co-ordinating committees in the                    hard w o rk which have gone into building up those
     n o rth and the south have an im p o rta n t role in ensuring                relationships. The s ta tu to ry agencies have, quite rig h tly
     th a t the to ta l n e tw o rk o f juvenile justice activity is co­           1 b e lie ve , a tte m p te d to d iffe r e n tia te b etw e en
     ordinated to w ards achieving the objectives identified in                    Interm ediate T reatm ent as an aspect o f social w o rk
     o u r policy statem ent. These tw o co-ordinating groups                     w ith young offenders and social group w o rk in the
     encompass the local Youth Development Groups, all o f                        com m unity w ith those people w ho may be at risk o f
     which have continued to develop an identity in th e ir                       offending. This la tte r focus has been accepted and
     local areas, focusing upon early preventive w o rk                           developed by the voluntary sector and th e ir local
     th rough the stim ulation o f ‘norm al’ youth activities in                  success in such ventures w ill remain crucial in reducing
     an a tte m p t to d iv e rt young people fro m activities                    the numbers o f young people w ho come to the
     which may draw them unhelpfully into the juvenile                             attention o f the police fo r offending behaviour."
    justice net. One local group is fo r instance beginning to
     examine the phenomenon o f stree t violence in its
      particular area involving as it does a prearranged
      'fix tu re list' o f gang fig h ts. Such w o rk has included an
      intensive leafleting campaign to parents in the areas
      affected, counselling w o rk in comprehensive schools,
      and local com m unity meetings to enlist com m unity
      support. Youth Development Groups have responded
     w ith in the northern and southern sectors to the
      challenge o f providing p a rt o f the n e tw o rk o f services
      to com plem ent the sta tu to ry activity by probation and
      social services w ith adjudicated offenders; w ith o u t
      th e ir co ntribu tion the lim ited Interm ediate Treatm ent
      resources available w ou ld have d iffic u lty in coping w ith
      the demand fo r services.
               "One im p o rta n t s p in -o ff fro m the involvem ent o f
      the SCF organisation is the establishm ent o f Practice
       Development Groups in the n orth and the south o f the
      county; SCF has taken the lead in prom oting in te r­
      agency s ta ff tra in in g and developm ent activities
       intended to enhance skill levels, and a m ore consciously
       m ethodological approach in w o rk in g w ith young
       offenders across those agencies involved w ith this
       im p o rta n t w o rk . These groups are regarded as
       extrem ely valuable by the participants and have proved


                                                                        -    33   -
                                                              P r o j e c t s
                                                                                                                                          $
                                                                             F           u       n          d        e         d

                                             19                     8 7 -                             19                  8 8
A rea 1 — N o rth                            Aston Manor Coaching Centre, Birmingham         A rea 9 - South East
Grove Community Association Outdoor          Cwm Camping, Peterchurch, Hereford &
                                                                                             Surrey Pre-Employment Scheme, Woking,
    Pursuits Group, Consett, Co. Durham         Worcester
                                                                                                Surrey
Gilley Law Young People's Project,           Wem Youth Club, Wem, Salop
                                                                                             Thanet Canoe Club, Margate, Kent
    Sunderland, Tyne & Wear                  Kingswell Befriending Project, Oswestry,
                                                                                             Saturday Youth Action, Ashford, Kent
Chester-le-Street Computer Group, Co.           Salop
                                             Community Befriending Scheme, Shrewsbury,       Dartford and Swanley Young People's
    Durham                                                                                      Befriending Scheme, Kent
Brinkburn Independent I.T. Water                Salop
                                                                                             Outward Bound Richmond House Project,
    Activities Project, South Shields,       Pendeford Girls’ Club, Pendeford,
                                                                                                Brighton, Sussex
    Tyne & Wear                                 Wolverhampton
Norcar, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Tyne & Wear     Telford Community Activities Project,
Millbank Youth Club, West Auckland. Co.         Telford, Salop                               A rea 10 — Wessex
    Durham                                   Young Persons' Video and Social
                                                                                             Beacon Centre Youth Club, Poole, Dorset
Witherwack Neighbourhood Play Scheme            Development Project, Walsall
    Association, Sunderland, Tyne & Wear
Friends o f Ingleby Greenhow,                                                                A rea 11 — South W est
    Middlesbrough, Cleveland                 A rea 5 — East Midlands                         Drake Fellowship, St. Paul's, Bristol.
Bishop Auckland Boys Club, Amateur Boxing    The Arkwright Walk Project, Nottingham             Avon
    Club. Co. Durham                         Northampton Wheels, Northampton                 Exeter Exploit Adventure/Expedition
Old Fold Girls' Group, Gateshead, Tyne       Gainsborough Project for Computer                  Group, Exeter, Devon
    & Wear                                      Literacy, Gainsborough, Lincolnshire         Knowle West Community Association
South Hetton Community Association Youth     Manor Drive Play Area, Loughborough,            Gymnasium Project, Bristol, Avon
    Club, Co. Durham                            Leicestershire                               The Music Project, Ilfracombe. North
Blakelaw Young People's Project,             Juvenile Support Agency, Newark,                   Devon
    Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Tyne & Wear            Nottinghamshire                              Grass Routes Charity, Bristol, Avon
After Four Project, Barrow-in-Furness.                                                       Avon Motor Project, Bristol, Avon
    Cumbria                                                                                  Hesters Way I.T. Project, Cheltenham,
New Brancepeth Youth Club, Durham            A rea 6 — East Anglia                              Gloucestershire
Triangle Project, Sunderland. Tyne & Wear    Peterborough Youth Trust Motor Vehicle          Scope Project, Coleford. Gloucestershire
                                                Project, Cambridgeshire                      Bristol Central Youth Drama Project.
                                             Ely Expeditions, Ely, Cambridgeshire               Bristol, Avon
A rea 2 — Yorkshire and                                                                      Woodspring Adolescent Support Project,
                                             Outdoor Pursuits Group. Huntingdon,
   Humberside                                   Cambridgeshire                                  Weston-Super-Mare, Avon
Furness Youth Club on Wheels, Ovenden,       West Suffolk Alternative to Care and            Treneere Estate Project, Penzance,
   Halifax, West Yorkshire                      Custody, Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk              Cornwall
Proper Job Theatre Company. Huddersfield,    Young Concern, Harlow. Essex                    Somerset Probation and Community
   West Yorkshire                                                                                Enterprises (SPACES), Yeovil, Somerset
Knaresborough Road Estate Community
   Association, Harrogate. North Yorkshire   A rea 7 — Tham es Valley                        A rea 12   —   Wales
Baktrac. Cottingham, North Humberside
                                             Sopwell Music Studio Project, St. Albans,       Cam Ymlaen Motorcycle Training Project,
Juvenile Activities Centre, Keighley,
                                                Hertfordshire                                   Cardiff, South Glamorgan
   West Yorkshire
                                                                                             Rhyl Adventure Playground. Rhyl, Clwyd
                                                                                             Glyntaff Farm Estate Tenants' and
A rea 3 — N o rth W est                      A rea 8 — G reater London                          Residents' Association Youth Project,
Aidans Young People's Project, Beswick.      The Winchester Project Motorbike                   Pontypridd, Mid Glamorgan
   Manchester                                    Workshop, London NW3                        Wrexham Adventure Playground
Merseysport. Liverpool                       Hillingdon Alternative to Custody                  Association. Wrexham, Ciywd
Boughton Hall I.T. Centre. Chester,              Project, West Drayton, Middlesex            Plas Madoc Youth Activity Group,
   Cheshire                                  The Schoolhouse Alternative Education              Wrexham, Clwyd
Liverpool Watersports Centre, Liverpool           Project London SE8                         The Guiding Hand Association, Swansea,
The Bleak House, Burnley. Lancashire         Highgate Newtown Youth Club. London N19            West Glamorgan
Moss Side Boxing and Athletic Club,          Sixteen Plus Project, Hounslow. Middlesex       Clwyd Outward Group, Wrexham, Clwyd
   Manchester                                Project Solo, London NW6'                       City Centre Youth Project, Cardiff,
                                             Studio Three, Dagenham, Essex                      South Glamorgan
                                             The Archway Project, Thamesmead,
A rea 4 — W est Midlands                          London SE2
South Aston Community Project, Birmingham    Basement Youth Project, London SW5
Piston Ring Youth Motorcycle Club,           Work and School Project, London SE15
    Nuneaton, Warwickshire                   Westminster Auto Sport Project,
St. Paul’s Community Project, Birmingham          London SW1
St. Luke's Community Project,                Battersea Basement Studios, London SW11
    Kingstanding, Birmingham                 The Bush Project, London W12
Wolverhampton Caravan Project,               The Poynders Project, London SW4
    Wolverhampton                            Bangladesh Youth Movement, London E1
Sam Sharpe Project, Wolverhampton            Bede Adventure Project, London SE16
Oak Street Wheels Project, Oswestry,         Beauchamp Lodge Narrow Boat Project,
    Salop                                         London W2



                                                                -   34   -
§                                    I n f o r m a t i o n
                                                 about                   the          Fund                and           P u b l i c a t i o n s



      I.T. Fund                                                                        Applications
     The l.T. Fund (serving England and Wales) was set up                              Applications which satisfy the Fund's criteria are
     in 197 8 to encourage com m unity involvem ent in                                 considered a t q uarterly meetings o f the Fund's
     seeking solutions to the problem s o fju ve n ile crime.                          Com m ittee in April, July, October and January.
              It is funded by the DHSS and adm inistered by the                        Applications m ust reach the Fund a m onth before the
     Rainer Foundation th ro u g h a nationally representative                         date set fo r C om m ittee meetings.
     com m ittee o f people concerned w ith young people and
     th e ir involvem ent in crim e. (The Rainer Foundation,
     whose specialised w o rk in pioneering services fo r                              How to apply
     young delinquents dates fro m 1876, continues to be                               Contact the Fund fo r an application fo rm . Where
     one o f the fo re m o s t agencies in the co un try addressing                    fu rth e r in form a tion is required the Fund s ta ff w ill v isit
     these issues. It is not, however, a grant-m aking body                            o r correspond w ith the project concerned.
     its e lf and does n ot b en efit fro m the resources o f the
     l.T. Fund).
                                                                                       Publications
                                                                                       The fo llo w in g may be obtained fro m the l.T. Fund on
     The l.T. Fund aims to:                                                            request:
          n a b le     m e m b e rs       o f th e        c o m m u n ity to           IT F in fo rm atio n leaflet and application fo rm
    yfgP     c o n trib u te th e ir tim e , ta le n ts and skills to                  Guidance to applicants on the main conditions
             w o r k w ith y o u n g p eo ple in tro u b le o r a t ris k to           governing the award o f grants fro m the Fund to
             re d u ce th e lik e lih o o d o f th e ir o ffe n d in g o r re ­        voluntary l.T. projects.
             o ffe n d in g
      ► e n c o u ra g e       and         p r o m o te       p a r tn e r s h ip s    IT F U p date
             b e tw e e n     c o m m u n ity g ro u p s a nd local                    S hort articles in a newspaper fo rm a t which describe
             a u th o r ity d e p a rtm e n ts as p a r t o f a cohesive               d iffe re n t community-based l.T. projects. Some o f the
             s tra te g y fo r ta c k iin g ju v e n ile c rim e                       successes and problem s o f running projects are
      ► e n co u ra g e th e in v o lv e m e n t o f v o lu n te e rs in               highlighted w ith examples o f the processes o r
             I.T. p ro je c ts , m a in ta in in g a balance and a                     netw orks which enabled them to build positively on
             ra n g e o f s kills in p ro je c ts and ke ep in g th em                 th e ir experience.
             close to th e c o m m u n ity                                                 L e t’s G e t l.T . C le a r
      ► e n su re t h a t th e n eeds o f all y o u n g people w h o                       A reference guide fo r:
             could b e n e fit fr o m I.T. are m e t e q u ita b ly on a                   ► th o s e c o n te m p la tin g w o rk in g as a v o lu n te e r
             n o n -d is c rim in a to ry basis.                                                   in an I.T. p ro je c t
                                                                                           ► l.T. g ro u p s p la n n in g n e w in itia tiv e s w h ic h w ill
                                                                                                   re q u ire fu n d in g
      Grants                                                                               ^ e s ta b lis h e d       p ro je c ts        c o n s id e rin g   b o th
      The Fund provides grants to voluntary l.T. projects to                                       e x p a n s io n   o f e x is tin g w o r k a n d n e w
      cover capi t al     re q u ire m e n ts , and in c e rta in                                  d e ve lo p m e n ts.
      circumstances to m eet p a rt o f the fir s t year's running                                  T o p ic s c o v e re d      in c lu d e e s ta b lis h in g    a
      costs o f a NEW project.                                                             m a n a g e m e n t c o m m itte e , insu ra nce , p re m ise s,
            Voluntary organisations, com m unity groups,                                   e m p lo y in g s ta ff, fu n d -ra is in g and re g is te rin g as a
      inform al groups o f volunteers and registered charities                             c h a rity .
      may apply fo r a g ra n t fro m the l.T. Fund.
                                                                                           I.T . Fund I Oth A n niversary B ulletin
             If you are n ot certain w he th er y o u r project is
      eligible o r you w ould like to discuss any aspect o f y o u r                       Covers the Fund's 10 year record, the developm ent o f
      project — please contact us.                                                         the Fund's role, and the im portance o f the voluntary
                                                                                           sector's contribution to l.T.



      We w ould like to th a n k the fo llo w in g projects w ho have kindly supplied photographs o f th e ir w o rk fo r use in this
      Report:
      Hounslow Drama W orkshop, Avon M o to r Project, The Guiding Hand Association, W itherw ack Neighbourhood
      Playscheme Association, The G lyn taff Farm Estate Tenants and Residents Association Youth Project, The Winchester
      Project, Sunderland Youth Development Group, Exeter Youth Support Team, Newcastle Children's Adventure
      Group, Old Fold G irls' Group, Somerset Probation and Com m unity Enterprises (SPACE), Bracknell Children's
      Project, Liverpool W atersports Centre, Juvenile Support Agency, The Fairbridge Drake Society, The A rk w rig h t
      Project Youth Club. Boughton Hall, Plas Madoc Youth Activity Group. The Poynders Project, Birchills C.E. Schools
      Com m unity Association, Clywd O utw ard Group, Pendeford Girls Club, South Aston C om m unity Project, The Music
      Project Ilfracom be, City Centre Youth Project C ardiff, Challenge Project Durham.



                                                                                 -    35    -
