180N/BN/MT




Note of a meeting held on 25 May to discuss Hillsborough; Cost of
investigations by West Midlands Police

Present:     Lord Ferrers            Cllr Ablett - Chairman
             Mr Addison              Cllr Carless - Vice-Chairman
             Mr Nagler               Cllr Sir Neville Bosworth
             Ms Ransford             Mr W E Jarvis
             Miss Nicholson          Mr Dear - Chief Constable
                                     Mr Barnfield - Solicitor
                                     Mr Williams - Treasurer
                                     Mr Tomlinson - Assistant Clerk


Having thanked Lord Ferrers for the meeting Cllr Ablett explained
that the reason for seeking the meeting was to try and resolve the
quandary his Authority was in over the financial implications of
the investigations into the Hillsborough disaster. This matter he
had to be sorted out and it had to be made clear, at the earliest
opportunity/ where the costs involved should fall. If the
ratepayers of West Midlands were liable it had been estimated that
the loss of interest in capital would be about £400K. His view
though was that as the investigation had been initiated by the
Home Office (Sir Richard Barrett having contacted Mr Dear) the
costs should fall to the Home Office. Mr Ablett then handed the
meeting over to Mr Dear so that he could give an account of the
events which led the West Midlands Police Authority being involved.

 2.   Mr Dear explained that on the Sunday following the tragedy he
 had been contacted by Sir Richard Barrett by 'phone and had been
 asked whether he would agree to being the assessor or the chief
 constable leading the investigation - or both (it had transpired
 later that he could not be the assessor). Mr Dear subsequently
 contacted Peter Wright (Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police)
 that afternoon to confirm the situation. Mr Dear mentioned that
 he had asked Mr Wright specifically whether he had understood that
 he was reporting to the enquiry to which Mr Wright replied that he
 did. Mr Dear added that it was his hope that in reporting
 directly to Lord Justice Taylor any suggestion of a police cover
 up could be countered. He then referred to telephone calls which
 he had made to the Home Office in the light of the statement which
‘the Home Secretary was making to the House on Monday 17 April. He



                                         /said that he had
said that he had not been happy with the text of the draft
statement and had made it clear at that time that he would not
work to 2 masters but only to Lord Justice Taylor. He said that
the draft had been amended, not exactly as he would have wished,
but enough to have satisfied him. Because of his concern about
this matter he had sought a meeting with Lord Justice Taylor at
which it had been confirmed that there was only one enquiry. As
regards the enquiry itself Mr Dear refered to the various
investigtions which were taking place, eg, into the construction
of the ground and who paid the stewards simply because
Lord Justice Taylor wanted a thorough investigation. Given these
circumstances Mr Dear said that he was absolutely certain that he
was working for Lord Justice Taylor; that he was under his control
completely and that therefore mutual aid could not be a matter for
consideration.

 3.   Lord Ferrers said that he fully appreciated the concerns which
 had been expressed but that as he understood it, the decision to
 request the assistance of the West Midland's was because Mr Wright
 believed that South Yorkshire were too close to the incident and
 that another force should be called in. This had led to
 Mr Wright's contacting Sir Richard who then contacted Mr Dear. In
/response to this Mr Dear said that South Yorkshire's involvement
|in the decision had not been mentioned by Sir Richard. Mr Addison
 was able to advise Mr Dear that there was nothing unusual in
 this: the Inspectorate often liaised between forces in this way
 when they were asked to advise on the possiblity that an
 investigation should be conducted by an outside force.

5. Mr Addison referred to his recent meeting with officers of the
South Yorkshire Authority, who, he said had accepted that the
initiative had come from their Chief Constable. It was not
surprising therefore that there should be some confusion although
having heard what Mr Dear had to say he wholeheartedly accepted
his account of his part in the events. The matter was clearly
open to interpretation and it was quite possible that the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire had a different recollection. Mr
Dear referred to the immense pressure which had been placed upon
Mr Wright at the time and which had led him to contact
Sir Richard. Noting Mr Dear's comments Mr Addison said that it
was quite understandable that the invitation may have appeared to
have come from the Home Office, but this was not the case. As far
as the Home Office were concerned the distinction between the Lord
Justice Taylor enquiry and the South Yorkshire investigation had
always been recognised.

6. Lord Ferrers referred to the Home Secretary's letter to Roger
King MP (copy attached) in which it was made clear that additional
-eosts would not be met by the West Midlands. It also had to be
remembered, he said, that in practice, with the Home Office paying



                                         /51% generally through.
* E.R.

      51% generally through police specific grant, taken with the Rate
      Support Grant, the Government would in effect be paying roughly
      70% towards the costs of the enquiry. Mr Ablett, while
                            existence of the communication referred to by
     guarantee618 S         th3t thS Authority had received no direct

      7    Mr Ablett referred to the bills which the Authority were now
      Itc    He9sfid tha?          aS|-?cco™Jodation and telecommunications
      etc. He said that since section 14 of the Police Act 1964 did noi-
      fnP -T * x Authority (remaining of the view that they had not been
      invited by South Yorkshire to conduct the investigation) Sad no
                  J° Eay the bills‘ Moreover there was, in their vieS



 JH
     doubt about whether they could have lawfully paid for items such
     as accommodation even under section 14. They had b e L alvisld of
                          their legal adviser Mr Barnfield who confirmed
       w k     !>.WaS indeed his understanding. Asked by Lord Ferrers
                         consulted with South Yorkshire about this aspect
     Mr Abiett replied that they had not. This he said was simp?y
     because no request had been made by South Yorkshire and this was
     not in any event covered by section 14 which dealt only wi£h
     mutual aid given on resource grounds. As matters stood Mr Ablett
     thlt hi^1Ani-h!Jr^i-haVin?/inK authority to Pay, the result might be
           u    Authority would be forced to no longer retain buildinqs
     which were being used for the purposes of the investigation.
     Invited by Lord Ferrers to comment Mr Addison said that the
     assistance given did not in his view fall strictly under
     Section 14, but that it was analogous. Moreover it was not
     unknown for one police force to invite another to conduct an
                    ? ?n.lts behalf. The most obvious example was in the
            °f complaints and discipline enquiries but there had been
     Home O f f i c ^ l e g a ^ a d v i s e r s .thS P° intS rai8ed C°Uld be S°Ught from

     8.  Mr Williams (Treasurer) estimated that the cost of the
                       far Was c ?2 million Per month. This accounted
    » n n nnn J f M n? accommodation - the accommodation coming to about
             h • S I""- J the Auth°rity were not reimbursed on a
           y fS1?      had calculated that the interest charges per
    month would be somewhere in the region of £50 K.

        LS£?i-F®frerS £eiJ-erated the state of play as he understood
    it. That it was South Yorkshire who had recommended that another
    force conduct the investigation and that therefore it had always
    been accpeted by the Home Office reimbursement would be a matter
    between forces in the first instance, as was the case in mutual
          d   was further understood that the investigation was to look
    into the policing of South Yorkshire. Lord Justice Taylor's
    enquiry although in some ways connected was a separate matter.
    Having said this though Lord Ferrers said that he accepted that



                                                        /West Midlands had

                                             -   3-
* E.R.

         West Midlands had drawn quite a different conclusion. He referred
         again to the Home Secretary's letter to Mr King in which assurance
         was given that the West Midlands would not be expected to meet
         additional costs.

         10. In drawing the meeting to a close Lord Ferrers undertook to
         consider at the earliest and to write to the Authority advising
         them of what action they should take with regard to bills. He
         also promised to consider the cash-flow difficulties, to get clear
         what had transpired when asking the West Midlands Police to become
         involved and the extent to which the work was being undertaken by
         West Midlands was not specific to the South Yorkshire policing
         enquiry.




                                   BARBARA NICHOLSON
                              Assistant Private Secretary



     30 May 1989

     Private Office, QAG.



     cc     Mr Walters
            Mr Yates
            Mr Chilcot
            HMCIC
            Mr Woodcock
            Mr Brownlow
            Mr Boys Smith
            Mr Malone-Lee
            Ms Edwards, LAB
            Mr Addison
            Mr Sandiford
            Mr Nagler/
            Mr Whalley
            Ms Ransford
            Mr Lidington
                                                 QUEEN ANNE'S CATE LONDON SW1H 9AT


                                                                      27 April 1989




          We have spoken in the House about the costs incurred by                      Vest
Midlands police in their inquiries following the Hillsborough disaster.                You
and other West Midlands MPs are understandably anxious that these should not
fall on the Vest Midlands police authority.


          It   seems   to me   quite   clear that,   wherever   the    costs   fall,   they
should not and do not fall to the West Midlands.          The Chief Constable of the
West Midlands was initially invited by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
to review all aspects of the police operation.              And subsequently it was
agreed that the results of these inquiries should be made available to the
public inquiry which I announced on 24 April to be conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor.


          It will take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the
West Midlands police should be reimbursed.           But I can guarantee now that at
the end of the day no additional costs will be b o m e by the West Midlands.




                                                                          /




Roger King, Esq., MP
