MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:        28 October 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach material from the South Yorkshire police, the Cheshire police, the Family Support
Group, and Yorkshire Television.


South Yorkshire police

2.    We have four letters, two dated 23 October and two dated 24 October. The 23
October letters cover

        a)      statements from Taylor (fan), and ambulancemen Edwards, Flack and Howes;
                 and

        b)      the exhibit lists for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquests.

3.      The 24 October letters are about videos. One of them sets out what South Yorkshire
have been able to find out about the videos which went to Yorkshire TV. YTV wanted the
tapes for a ‘First Tuesday’ documentary, which they made with police co-operation (for more
on this see YTV’s letter, described below). The police have sent us a video of the
documentary, which you will wish to see.

4.      The other 24 October letter covers a video of the Coroner showing his jury tape C539
(the extracts from camera 5 taken from TB2). I don’t think you need to see this, but I
will.


Cheshire police

5.      Cheshire police have sent us a fax listing all the material left behind by Mervyn Jones.

6.      I am tempted to ask them to send us some of this - albeit that South Yorkshire ought
to have copies too. What I have in mind are boxes 4 (containing what appears to be all the
video evidence of events on the day, bar the BBC’s), 14 (videos of interviews with police
officers including Murray, Marshall, Jackson and Duckenfield), and 22 (which has more


G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\Q26.DOC
videos including what is called ‘compilation video tape ASM1’ and ‘compilation tape Dr
Popper’) /''! have flagged the relevant parts of the fax.

7.      We could get these three boxes brought down here easily enough (I could get a car to
do it) while the rest went to Sheffield. Would you like to see any of this material?       ,'fU^   c



Family Support Group

8.     The Support Group have sent you a copy of their waiver - this seems fine to me
(assuming thatHytner and King were instructed on behalf of the ‘Hillsborough Inquest
Group’ - as I believe they were).



Yorkshire TV

9.     YTV say they have sent their tapes down to us by courier (though they have not
materialised yet). There are two interesting things I can see here. First, they say they
 wrrowed the tapes from the police (and hence presumably gave them back after making their
copies) - which may be why South Yorkshire are struggling to find any documentation.

10.     Second, we will when we go through these videos (which we can only do in the studio
downstairs since they aren’t on the usual VHS system) have to look especially at tape PI Part
2. This contains footage of zoom shots on the (presumably Leppings Lane) terrace which is
ascribed to Camera 2. I think this is really a reference to Camera 5, and that these are the
shots which Trevor Hicks found so significant in this YTV material (and which were on TB2
all along). But I must check.

11.   I think it makes sense for me to get on with checking the YTV tapes
independently and let you know if there is anything new on them. Are you content with
that? \ /




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\026.DOC
