                                                                                5 k > & l5 b




Gillian Merron encloses correspondence from                 in support of a new inquiry
into the Hillsborough disaster.

The Home Secretary is currently considgrmg-whether there are sufficient grounds to
order a new inquiry into the HiUsbefSugh disaster in view of the issues raised in the
Granada television drama ‘TJilK^orough” last year, and the subsequent campaign by the
Hillsborough Family Sapfjort Group.

                      ? Drafts to P/S of M of S as within



                         \k x A tu \J
                      MWard
                      10 June 1997




The Home Secretary informed the House on 30 June that an independent scrutiny into
the Hillsborough disaster was to be carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. A copy of
the Home Secretary’s statement is enclosed to be sent with the reply.

                      ? Drafts to P/S of M of S as within




                      MWaid
                      10 July 1997



                              14   »    1997
                        MINISTER OF STATB « " > * *
                                                                     H   ome   O   f f ic e

                                                                    QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                    LONDON SW1H 9AT




Gillian Merron MP                                Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2 1 80 /5 0
House of Commons                                            PO 8554/97
LONDON
SW 1A 0A A                                                      A

                                                                                   /99 7      ~




Thank you for your letter of 24 May to Jack Straw, enclosing one from
                                                      in support of recent calls
for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

As you know, the Home Secretary has been considering whether there is a
case for a further public inquiry into the disaster in the light of the many
representations which have been received. Concerns that a number of issues
relating to the disaster remain unresolved received renewed attention following
the Granada television documentary drama "Hillsborough" last December.

The Home Secretary has had the opportunity to consider fully the material which
has been put forward, calling for a new public inquiry. He has decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no
matter of significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. As you will
know, he therefore announced in the House on 30 June that there will be an
independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the
Court of Appeal. I enclose for your information a copy of his statement to the
House, which includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's terms of reference. You will
see that he has undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith gives him.

It is our earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to
the uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.                                       y




   *                                                  /fc
Thank you for your letter of 24 May to Jack Straw, enclosing one from
_____________________                                             insupport of recent calls for a new
inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.


As you know, the Home Secretary has been considering whether there is a case for a
further public inquiry into the disaster in the light of the many representations which
have been received. Concerns that a number o f issues relating to the disaster remain
unresolved received renewed attention following the Granada television documentary
drama “Hillsborough” last December.


The Home Secretary has had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has
been put forward, calling for a new public inquiry. He has decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter of
significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. As you will know, he
therefore announced in the House on 30 June that there will be an independent
scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. I
enclose for your information a copy of his statement to the House, which includes
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that he has undertaken to
make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives him.


It is our earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.
                                                                  H   ome   O   f f ic e

                                                                 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                 LONDON SW1H9AT




Ms Gilliam Merron MP                            Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2180/50
House of Commons                                           PO 8554/97
LONDON
SW1A OAA


                                          for    (?ecirevfVcv^    ^^aSe~




Thank you for your letter of 24 May to Jack Straw, enclosing one from
                                                     ] in support of recent calls
for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

The Home Secretary is currently considering the representations which have
been made for a fresh inquiry. He has followed the families campaign for a new
inquiry closely and has also had the opportunity to meet some of the members
of the Hillsborough Family Support Group since the broadcast of the Granada
television drama last December. He is very aware of the strength of feeling on
this issue and will reach a decision as soon as possible.




                                ALUN MICHAEL
                                                 SV C
Thank you for your letter of 24 May to the Home Oocrata    (,enclosing one from Mr
                                                        support of recent calls for a
new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.


The Home Secretary is currently considering the representations which have been
made for a fresh inquiry. He has followed the families campaign for a new inquiry
closely and has also had the opportunity to meet some of the members of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group since the broadcast of the Granada television
drama last December. H£ is very aware of the strength of feeling on this issue and will
reach a decision as sdon as possible.
                           Divisional File Reference   f c lo R - s fa g o ls p

    HOME OFFICE
    MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

    A d d re s s e d
     Name                      i\V g r ><~o^v fvNP

     Address                      Reference
     Tick on# ik>%
           (3        House of Commons
            □        House of Lords
            □          Other - Insert full postal address


c
    Letter drafted for Signature by

                                   ___________          (Noma of Signatory"


    Enclosures]




    jCopies to be sent To]




                                               (Full odOresses. If nccessary!
                           HOUS E OF COMMON S
                               L O N D O N S W 1A OAA
                                                            Please reply to:

                                                            House of Commons,
                                                            London, SW1A OAA.
                                                            Tel: 0171 219 3000
                                                                 (message service)
24th May 1997

The Rt. Hon. Jack Straw M.P.
Secretary of State ’         q £ \\/E D 8 ^
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                                           \




                        lillsborough Action Group.

My c o n s t i t u e n t , _ a member of the above group, has written to me in the
enclosed terms requesting help concerning the possible re-opening of the enquiry and
the inquest.

           was present on the day of the tragedy, and feels that the facts have not
been examined in their entirety. Could you please write to me with details of any
plans you have regarding the case.

Thank you in advance for your time in this matter, I look forward to your reply.

With best wishes,

Yours sincerely,




GILLIAN MERRON M.P.
LABOUR MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR LINCOLN
Ms. G. Merron MP
c/o Grafton House,
32, Newland,
Lincoln
LN1 1XJ


                                                         3rd May 1997


         Dear Ms. Merron,
                 I am writing to you to illicit your support for the Hillsborough
 Action Group who are asking for the enquiry and/or the inquest to be re­
 opened following the new evidence portrayed in the Yorkshire Television
 documentary. As a lifelong supporter of Liverpool F.C., I was present on that
 fateful day in April 1989, when so many innocent people lost their lives. It is
 not so much that we are seeking to persecute those responsible for the
 tragedy, but only that the truth should prevail. Many lives, most not even
 present at Hillsborough, were destroyed that afternoon, and the subsequent
cover-up, by the South Yorkshire constabulary was contemptible, to say the
 least.
                I was bom and bred in Lincolnshire, and my only association
with Liverpool was my love of football, and my mother, whose origins were
based in Merseyside. I have supported the Labour party, as your canvass
returns will confirm, and I hope that you can find time in your new capacity, to
support a cause which has, until now, brought shame on the ethics of British
justice.
                I did not expect any assistance from your predecessor, who was
part of the Tory bureaucracy, and dare not distance himself from the official
directorate in case he might be called upon to relinquish his ‘title’, but your
good self should be in a position to examine the facts fairly and impartially,
and, if you agree with me, petition the Home Secretary to re-open the
enquiry.

             Thank you for taking the time to review my request, and we
hope that we can rely on your support.


                     Yours sincei
                                                                                 As delivered


      HILLSBOROUGH : ORAL STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY
                                     MONDAY 30 JUNE 1997




 With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
 Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


 2.     Ninety six people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster, which
 happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no one who saw the
news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those terrible events. For those
who lost loved members of their family, the pain is ever-present. Following Hillsborough,
members of this House were united in their determination to do all in their power to
prevent anything like that ever h a p p e n in g   again




(i)    Public Inquiry


3.     Madam Speaker, after the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries and
investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. The most thorough and wide-
ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor. The terms of reference of that Inquiry
encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster itself but also into making
recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.


4.     Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public
hearings during May and June of 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence from
different sources. In his interim report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the
disaster had a number of causes. He did not attribute all blame to a single cause or person,
but in paragraph 278 he made clear that in his view:


       “The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”
5.      In his interim report Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final
report in January 1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which
have taken place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football
matches have been based largely upon those recommendations. Football in this country
has been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to Lord
Taylor’s wide-ranging and soundly based conclusions.


(ii)    Coroner’s Inquest


6.      The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject of inquests
conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


7.      The jury at the Coroner’s inquest, after examining the evidence, found in March
1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was accidental death.


(iii)   West Midlands Police Investigation


8.      A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands Police, supervised by
the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal proceedings, and to consider whether any police officer should be subject to
disciplinary proceedings.


9.      That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the scrutiny of
all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor Inquiry. After that
investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded
that no person should be subject to criminal proceedings.


10.     The Police Complaints Authority did decide that the chief superintendent and
superintendent in charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty. In
the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a ruling by a
disciplinary tribunal. Madam Speaker, under the police discipline rules, a disciplinary



                                             2
hearing cannot proceed when a police officer retires before the     hearing   takes place. The
Police Complaints Authority later decided that disciplinary proceedings against the
superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent
meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not fairly be
heard in the absence of the more senior officer.


(iv)   Continued _calls for further investigations


11.    Madam Speaker, Hon Members will be familiar with the unhappiness of the
families of those who died, about the outcome of the inquest.         They later applied for
judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings. In November 1993 the Divisional Court
ruled that none of the matters raised in the judicial review proceedings justified
intervention by that court in the verdict of the inquest jury.


12.    The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to investigation on
several occasions. But concerns have remained about whether the full facts have yet
emerged. I have met relatives of the Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated
by their belief that there are unresolved issues which should be investigated further.


13.    Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me, to the
Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions. A Granada television
programme in December last year dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues
which, in the view of the programme makers, represented new evidence. This prompted
an adjournment debate led by my Hon Friend, the Member for Liverpool Walton, to
which my predecessor, the Rt Hon and Learned Member for Folkestone and Hythe,
responded. I know how seriously my predecessor the Rt Hon and Learned Member for
Folkestone and Hythe took this matter. Since then further material has been submitted on
behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group. Those representations have related in
particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of death of
the victims.




                                              3
Victims Support Group


14.    Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and the
Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which has been
put forward in recent months.


15.     The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the material so far
presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings. The then Attorney General
the Rt Hon and Learned Member for Bedfordshire North East also took the view, again on
the material presented to him, that any application to the High Court for a new inquest
would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.


16.    Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at
Hillsborough and many others including Hon Members of this House are very concerned
that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no
matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a
full and independent examination of the evidence.


17.    I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the Director of
Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public interest that there should be
an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to
the disaster which was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose. His full terms of
reference are these:


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
       Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


       (a)             To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or
        (b)            To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
                       the purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;
                       or


        (c)            To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                      police disciplinary matters;


        And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
        such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
        Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to
       their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be
        relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
       which should be taken in the public interest.


I am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library of the House.


18.    We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further material which
interested parties wish to submit to him.


19.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold. First to advise me whether any
evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further full public
inquiry. His advice to me will be made available to the House and will be made public.
Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney General and for the Director of Public
Prosecutions and for the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


20.    I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether or not
material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked. If it
has I can assure the House that I will take whatever action is needed. We owe it to
everyone touched by this tragedy, but above all to the families of those who died, to get to
the bottom of this matter once and for all.



                                              5
Ms. G. Merron MP
do Grafton House,
32, Newland,
Lincoln
LN1 1XJ


                                                         3rd May 1997


         Dear Ms. Merron,
                 I am writing to you to illicit your support for the Hillsborough
 Action Group who are asking for the enquiry and/or the inquest to be re­
 opened following the new evidence portrayed in the Yorkshire Television
 documentary. As a lifelong supporter of Liverpool F.C., I was present on that
 fateful day in April 1989, when so many innocent people lost their lives. It is
 not so much that we are seeking to persecute those responsible for the
 tragedy, but only that the truth should prevail. Many lives, most not even
 present at Hillsborough, were destroyed that afternoon, and the subsequent
 cover-up, by the South Yorkshire constabulary was contemptible, to say the
 least.
                I was bom and bred in Lincolnshire, and my only association
with Liverpool was my love of football, and my mother, whose origins were
 based in Merseyside. I have supported the Labour party, as your canvass
returns will confirm, and I hope that you can find time in your new capacity, to
support a cause which has, until now, brought shame on the ethics of British
justice.
                I did not expect any assistance from your predecessor, who was
part of the Tory bureaucracy, and dare not distance himself from the official
directorate in case he might be called upon to relinquish his ‘title’, but your
good self should be in a position to examine the facts fairly and impartially,
and, if you agree with me, petition the Home Secretary to re-open the
enquiry.

             Thank you for taking the time to review my request, and we
hope that we can rely on your support.


                    Yours sincer
