                                                                                                    .'Jr




                                             File Number




                     Related Papers          Subject




                    Date first appeared
                      28/02/1997

                     FOR QRftL/PRIORITY W RinEN/W RtHJEflh ANSWER ON          TUE 04/03/97


                    Party   :   CJoo/Lab/isfl^QtiierXXXX            Parly Number       H 02184
                      2 7 Hr Eddie Loyden            (Liverpool, Garston)
                          To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, if evidence from
            tt!          Dr Ed Walker was offered to The Taylor Inquiry into The Hillsborough
            W            Disaster; for what reasons he was not called to give oral evidence; and
            «
                          if he will make a statement. [18500]
            SB
            D
            55
            w
            £
                  THIS FILE MUST BE RETURNED TO                     MONDAY      03/03/1997

                  PARLIAMENTARY SECTION BY NOON ON

                                Date                                         Minutes
          Send to

    P Pugh                      28/02/!
i
    OP

    QAG




                                            34539-XBD PI528
                                                               Parly No. H 02184




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON
TUESDAY 4 MARCH 1997




Mr Eddie Loyden (Liverpool, Garston): To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, if evidence from Dr Ed Walker was offered to the Taylor
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster; for what reasons he was not called to
give oral evidence; and if he will make a statement.




DRAFT REPLY


Dr Walker did not give evidence to the Taylor inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.
The inquiry was concerned with the events at the Hillsborough stadium. The precise
circumstances in which the victims died were matters for the Coroner’s inquest. A
statement given by Dr Walker to police on 20 July 1989 was made available to the
Coroner’s inquest.
     BACKGROUND NOTE


     Dr Ed Walker, a hospital anaesthetist, claimed in an edition of Hospital News that he
     treated victims of the Hillsborough disaster who were still showing signs o f life after
     3.15 pm. This is significant because at the inquest into the deaths, the Coroner
    concluded that all the victims were dead by that time and that there was no reason to
    hear evidence about events after 3.15 pm.


    2. Dr Walker’s comments have been seized upon by the Hillsborough Family Support
    Group to support their calls for the inquest verdict o f accidental death to be overturned
^ 0 ) and a new inquest held. The Group believes that the decision not to take evidence
    after 3.15 pm denied them the opportunity to submit evidence that the police failed to
    activate its disaster plan in time.


    3. Dr Walker did not give evidence to the Taylor inquiry although he did make a
    statement to the police on 20 July 1989 about the events on the day o f the disaster (15
    April 1989). The inquiry was concerned with the events at the Hillsborough ground
    and it did not concern itself with the time o f death o f the victims.


    4. Dr Walker’s statement was made available to the Coroner’s inquest into the deaths
    but he did not give evidence in person. James Wardrope, the consultant in charge of
    the accident and emergency department of the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield
    gave evidence as to the action and treatment administered by hospital staff. In doing
    so, he was in possession o f all the medical notes supplied by the hospital. Copies o f
    both Dr Walker’s and Mr Wardrope’s statements are attached.
