From: P eter Edm undson                                    cc M r Howarth
      O perational Policing                                   M r Omand
      Policy U n it                                           HM CIC
      Room 527, Q AG                                          Ms Lockyer
      S 273-2621                                              M r Pugh
                                                              M r Butler
         08 January 1999                                      M r Bailey
                                                              M r Owen
                                                              M r Russell



Home Secretary

H ILL SB O R O U G H : LETTER FR O M FRANK FIELD MP


Issue

Frank Field has written to ask you to reconsider his request to place copies of the
material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his Hillsborough scrutiny in
Liverpool Library.

Timing

2.      An early reply would be helpful.

Summary

3.     M r Field made his request that the material be placed in Liverpool Library
in the House on 26 October as a supplementary to a Question from Maria Eagle.
You indicated that you believed this already to be the case and that you would
endeavour to comply with the request.

4.    You later wrote to Mr Field (copy attached) to explain that you had been
mistaken and that, although the material had been placed in the House of
Commons Library and copies of the police statements provided to the Family
Support Group, the material was not being sent to Liverpool Central Library.

Recommendation

5.     That you reply to M r Field as in the attached draft, explaining why you are
not placing the material in Liverpool Library.

Consideration

6.    M r Field indicates that his constituent,                 , and others have
now left the Family Support Group and that they would not find it easy to return


F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O8O9.doc
to the Group to view the documents in its possession. He also suggests that to do so
would give the appearance that the Family Support Group was more powerful and
representative than it actually is. This is because the Group has suffered rifts and
desertions in recent months.

7.     My submission of 30 November (copy attached) dealt with M r Field’s
original request and explained that the police statements, which comprise the bulk
of the material involved, had been returned to the South Yorkshire Police archive
as they remain the property of the force. I explained that it would be a large,
expensive and time-consuming task to recall the one thousand plus statements and
to copy them and the other material. You subsequently wrote to M r Field as I
outlined above. Your letter also pointed out that the material has been placed in the
House of Commons Library and that it remains open to M r Field to arrange for his
constituent to view the material there.

8.     We do not believe that M r Field’s latest representations on behalf of
       provide sufficient reason to alter your earlier decision.

Handling/presentational issues

9.     N o additional issues.




                                PETER E D M U N D SO N




F:\Oppu\COM PLNTS\ADVICE\mp-0809.doc
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE




Rt H on Frank Field MP
House of Commons
London SW1H 9AT




Thank you for your letter of 23 December on behalf of your constituent,
_______ about the publication of material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
in the course of his scrutiny.


I am sorry that you were disappointed by my letter of 7 December indicating that
we were not placing the material in Liverpool Central Library.


In m y statement to the House on 18 February announcing the outcome of the
scrutiny, I undertook to place in the House of Commons Library as much of the
evidence considered by the scrutiny as possible, including all the police statements.
This we have done and the material is available if Members wish to arrange for
their constituents to view it.


A t the same time, in response to a request on their behalf, we provided copies of
the police statements to the Family Support Group. This was possible because
there was minimal additional work and cost involved in producing an extra set of
copies at that stage. Unfortunately, that is no longer the case and it would be a
large and costly exercise to copy all the material again. Also, following the
completion of the scrutiny, the police statements were returned to South Yorkshire
Police, whose property they remain. It would, therefore, be for the Chief Constable
in the first instance to consider whether to release the statements now that the
scrutiny which I established has ended.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O8O9.doc
I realise that M r Burkett would like to have access locally to the statements but we
have tried to be as helpful as possible by placing this material in the House of
Commons Library and providing a copy to the Family Support Group which,
although I recognise does not represent all the families, has been the main body
representing the families. I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful and I can only
advise you to arrange for your constituent to view the material in the Library of the
House.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O8O9.doc
                                                      cc    vk   rtxAjQ/vi^v

                                                            Hn u C A C
                                                            \J\J      W
                                                            U4 ^    6Cx^ l J
                       HOUSE OF COM M ON S
                          L O N D O N SW1A OAA           ffiS L y
Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                   From
                                                         t ) S S S i 2 b!
                                             Rt Hon Frank Field MP
                                        >rd
Secretary o f State                    23r December 1998
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT

                              %!\\i                     '
                             r o f c^olc'icc- o a c (
                                        igvj {J f O iayL fi-



Thank you for writing earlier this month following up the question that I
raised in the House after I had written to you on behalf of my constituent


In the Commons you said that the information which formed the
background to the Hillsborough Inquiry should be made available. You
went on to say that you understood, although you could not be absolutely
certain, that this information was currently being transferred to, or was
already lodged, at the Central Library in Liverpool. You added that if it
were not you would do your best to make sure that the material was
available locally for consultation by those who had relatives who had
died at Hillsborough.

My constituent, like a number of others, was part of the Hillsborough
Support Group. As you probably know, there has been a fair amount of
politicking m the group and he, along with other members, have left the
group.

For them to have to go back to the Hillsborough Support Group would
not only be a humiliating experience, but would give the appearance that
the group was more powerful and more representative than it actually is.

Perhaps I could therefore have a word with you about why it is that you
now feel it is necessary to go back on the answer you gave to me on the
floor o f the House?


                  DECEIVED BY
                        2 4 DEC 1998
