From: Sarah Clifford
Communication Directorate
x2284

11 February 1998


                                                                 cc:Mr Michael
                                                                    Mr O’Brien
                                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                                      Mr Pugh
                                                                Mr Edmundson
                                                                   Mr McBride
                                                                     Mr Bailey
                                                                     Mr Ov

1.MrGranatt

2. Home Secretary


PUBLICATION OF HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY: MEDIA HANDLING


Issue

Media handling of the publication of the Hillsborough Scrutiny and your
response to its recommendations.

Timing

Pressing - the arrangements for the media need to be finalised this week.

Recommendation

That you agree the arrangements outlined below.

Summary

Clearly media handling will mean making the best we can of a very
unwelcome announcement. The families and their associated media -
especially the Liverpool Echo - will see the report as a cover-up of a
whitewash.

The regional media in particular will give you a hard time; the national media
will be more balanced in their approach but may criticise you for raising the
hopes of the families by holding the Scrutiny in the first place.
There will be enormous interest from local and regional media from
Merseyside and Sheffield, and the plans outlined below are aimed at
accommodating their needs - especially the deadlines of the local daily
papers - where we can.

You will be aware that the judge does not wish to give interviews or to have
anything to do with the media beforehand or on the day. He will be alerted to
the possibility that he may be ‘doorstepped’ on the day.

Arrangements

You are seeing the families and local MPs at 2.15-3pm and are due to make
your oral statement at 3.30pm.

CD recommend that:

• you do not do any interviews prior to your statement

• the lobby correspondents from the local papers (Liverpool Echo, Sheffield
  Star, possibly Liverpool Post) are locked in at the HO with the report at
  3pm, on the understanding that they cannot leave or file copy until you
  begin your statement. They could then watch the oral statement on TV
  from here.

• you return here after the statement to brief the lobby correspondents of the
  Liverpool Echo, the Liverpool Post and the Sheffield Star

• you then do broadcast interviews from the HO studio between (say) 5 and
  6pm (dependent on the timing of your statement). CD will contact regional
  TV and radio on the morning of the statement to arrange these NB this
  could mean as many as 8 regional broadcast interviews; national bids can
  be slotted in as necessary

• a news release, based on your oral statement and making clear the
  response to the Ten Questions’ is issued to Merseyside, Sheffield and
  national media - along with copies of the report - once you begin your
  statement, (draft to follow for weekend box)

• that you consider penning an article for the Echo (for Wednesday) and the
  Daily Mirror (for Thursday) (drafts to follow for your weekend box)

If you are content with these arrangements I will contact regional journalists to
discuss logistics tomorrow (Thursday). The Echo may want to produce a
special late edition and it is only fair to warn them in advance of the timing
and logistics.
Sarah Clifford
