       NOTE OF MEETTwr urmn            ^                        Hi*-                     O    ^       h
       OCTOBER            I T H A S S O C I A T I O N ttF C H I E F      P O L I C ^ O P fT   ^   ^




       PreSSnt:                    ^                       Mr    c J    Anderton
                  Mr Whalley                           Mr M George
                  Mr Sweet




      1.    Lora Justice Taylor asked for acpo's                         •
      stadia. ACPO had mixed feelinas       I                                * °n all-«a ter
     experience of all-seater a c c o J o d a ^      °" the llmlted
     had not been particularly successful0"',     C°Ventry experience
     by custom and practice, and were relu t P*Ctat°rs were influenced
     However, ACPO had accepted in              to sit in the rain
     aU-seater stadia should w i t l u T r T                     "      **                                ‘hat
     recognised that developments such a s \ b r o ^ ^    ^     ^
     bigger clubs, but as well as the fina       “ C°“    S6t the Pace for
     attitudes was bound to take some t ■ "°        constraints changing
  •Hort term some restless behaviour J L                        ^             ^                           L
  seats) was bound to arise in seated                           examPle standing on
 that the next generation would
                          w o u l d ^                ‘T 00" * * * 1-             bUt beli- e d
                                                                                 but belie
 discipline of seating                                                                 -


 SaQtants- ^ - ^ a t J L ^ r U fia^

 2-      Lord Justice Taylor a s k ^ <=
°f the safety Certification procLVon'd ''       “ the °Perati°"  T"
°f Sports Grounds Act , 9 7 5 L T         Se°tion 2 °f the Safety
local authority towards s l u t                                          “ “ ““ “ «*• <* the
clubs. Arguments had been put to him th ®r°“ndS * * rU9by lea9ue
could be oppressive or uneven in tH       ^     “C i t i e s
suggesting the need for some kind o f " aPPllCation °f                                    Act,
hy local authorities of their ^ r s               «*                                    exercise
°n occasion the relationship between a                 ,        T       7' * * ° “ * •* that
was either too close or embittered bv                      T           aUthoritr “ <3 a club



— *-— t:re
         n
         t                                                               srn
                                                                          = 9
                                                                            s
                                                                            -
benefit, but there was an inherent dilemma between close
involvement by elected members, which might allow political
factors to encroach, and the rather low level response if matters
were left entirely to local government officials. ACPO were not
in favour however of leaving questions of certification merely to
one or two key expert local authority employees.


Agreements Between Clubs and Police (Interim Recommendation 4 )

3.   Lord Justice Taylor said that interim recommendation 4 had
been meant to give effect to statements of intent, not draft
contracts. ACPO took the view that the recommendation was
acceptable in the broadest sense, but difficulties arose where
clerks to Police Authorities felt the need to seek indemnities
against any civil liabilities which might arise. It was
nevertheless accepted that some formality was needed about the
relative responsibilities of the police and the clubs, and it was
further accepted that if the police were gravely at fault the
existence or absence of an agreement was unlikely to make much
difference to the question of liability. Nevertheless, it was
important for the police to retain their overriding flexibility
to handle emergencies, and to preserve public order. The reality
was that in highly charged football fixtures, club officials and
stewards were inadequate, and the ground commander was the only
one who could manage a serious problem. In such circumstances,
the police had to be clear where they would stand, so they fully
supported statements of intent which allocated functions between
police and clubs. They wished to reach this position without
however giving the clubs the impression that they could rely on
the police's common law duty to preserve order as an excuse for
divesting themselves of their responsibilities. Clubs had
duties, either as occupiers or as invitors, and had a
responsibility for safety, either on their own or through an
agent. There was reluctance to accept change which would allow
them to escape from that responsibility.


4.   On practical questions, the police had presently to tolerate
stewards with a wide variety of ages and abilities, chosen
perhaps because of their interest in football rather than their
ability to control crowds. The police shared the view that clubs
should be encouraged to institute more efficient stewarding
measures, if need be paying them more. However, the reality was
that the majority of spectators took little notice of stewards
and that when in trouble stewards would turn to the police.
Stewarding of seating areas was always easier and more effective
than stewarding of terraced areas. That was in tune with a
package of measures to encourage the return of families to
football matches, to displace unruly and noisy fans, and to make
bad behaviour reprehensible rather than tolerable. ACPO accepted
that giving the stewarding function to an agency could in some
cases bring better results. It might provide more continuity,
better training, and more physically effective stewarding.


5.   In summary, therefore, ACPO's current view was that
paragraph 91 of their submission set out all the practical
arguments tending to place the police in total command at
football matches. They nevertheless would be reluctant to dilute
the principle that football matches were private functions in
which the ultimate responsibility, and cost, of ensuring safety
rested with the promoter of the event. The principle to be
followed was that football was essentially a commercial
enterprise, subject to the overriding common law duty of the
police to maintain public safety and order and protect life and
property.

Alcohol


6.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for ACPO's views on any changes to
the current alcohol provisions. In reply, ACPO said that
alcohol, either inside or outside football grounds, did not
present particular problems separate from those in society as a
whole. Football supporters had come to accept the changes made
by the 1985 Act. They were prepared to be stopped, searched, and
checked on entry to the ground. It was not generally the case
that football supporters tended to drink excessively outside the
ground, although enhanced accessibility to alcohol before the
match might be a cue for the encouragement of greater drinking
and hence more boisterous activity.   On the proposed extension of
the alcohol ban to cover any vehicle proceeding to a match, and
with the longer experience in Scotland of alcohol bans to hand,
(including alcohol in the private areas of clubs) ACPO did not
think that alcohol was a particular problem in relation to
football supporters as against the community as a whole. They
did not however accept the arguments for extending drinking
inside grounds: controlled availability however was acceptable.
In any case, they retained the discretion to close any alcohol
outlet, although they had to bear in mind sensitivities where a
brewery was a large financial sponsor for a club.


Early Kick-Offs

7.   Lord Justice Taylor explored the arguments for challenging
the traditional kick-off time, and in particular the argument
that earlier kick-offs would diminish problems with alcohol
before the match. ACPO noted that changing kick-off times would
alter the whole pattern of policing, in particular the timing of
shifts, which might be resource intensive, although they too took
the view that there was nothing sacrosanct about 3pm kick-offs.
The only variation likely to be of value was a move to Sunday
matches. Anything else was merely likely to displace the
drinking to a later period. In general, the police had learned
to live with the present provisions, and to contain bad behaviour
resulting from excessive drinking.


Ticket Touts

8.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for ACPO's views on legislation
against ticket touts. When the matter had been raised with the
Home Office, ACPO had been asked for evidence about the extent of
the problem, but the returns had been disappointing.
Nevertheless, ticketless fans turning up in their hundreds could,
as Lord Justice Taylor envisaged, cause considerable problems
round turnstiles, and frustrate plans to segregate rival groups.
On the question of the specifics of the offence, ACPO favoured a
general proposition rather than one limited to sales above face
value, on the day of the match, or close to the ground. At
present, the police could deal with touts by lifting them for
obstruction or on suspicion of selling forged tickets.
Nevertheless, the problem of ticket touts for the police was a
complicated one. If touts moved their activities away from
football grounds, they presented a more difficult intelligence
target. The police would, furthermore, be reluctant to be seen
to be asking for powers which some might think intruded upon
business which had its legitimate as well as its illegitimate
aspects, for example where people wanted to return tickets
because they could not use them. Furthermore, the problem of
ticket touts rarely appeared in isolation: it was linked to
policy on the sale of tickets, the handling of spectators
arriving late (whether with or without tickets) and the policy on
all ticket matches. Nevertheless, ACPO could accept the view
that legislation against touts could be part of a package of
measures to secure greater order outside stadia before matches
started, and the best option was one which made touting simply
not worth the financial return.


Exclusion Orders


9.   ACPO did not believe that exclusion orders had been
sufficiently used to make a significant impact on problems of
hooliganism.


Communications


10.   ACPO noted lack of channels, because of the competition for
wave bands, and the need on UHF for a command band channel linked
in with sector commanders to ensure adequate control of public
order situations. ACPO's communications committee were in
constant discussion with the Directorate of Telecommunications
with a view to releasing more space on the spectrum if this was
physically possible. Greater self discipline on the part of the
police could also help.


Police Costs


11. Lord Justice Taylor asked about the pattern of police
charges for their part in stewarding football matches. ACPO
replied that the subject had a complicated history: the present
position had developed haphazardly, and certainly took account of
the extent to which clubs could afford police charges and the
level of policing provided. It was undeniable that much policing
was not fully costed and was provided free to clubs. Many clubs
were in debt, and actions were outstanding: at some grounds, the
police recouped their charges by taking delivery of cash on the
day. ACPO were keen on better financial procedures, based upon
regular payment of agreed rates. These should reflect the true
costs of each officer and the numbers necessary to ensure
adequate policing. There were further difficulties over policing
outside the grounds, where the need for a police presence arose
in a public area but was due solely to the activities of football
clubs. But extensions of this kind would go beyond the pocket of
some clubs. ACPO acknowledged there was much work to be done
with football authorities in this area.


Fences

12. Lord Justice Taylor set out the various positions he had
found: some grounds having had no fencing, some having taken it
down, some having low fencing, and some retaining their fences.
ACPO's impression was that those with fencing by and large wanted
to retain it. Where in place it was accepted as a necessary part
of segregation methods. There was a view that it should be left
to the discretion of the certifying authority, provided the
police were consulted. There were however grounds for resisting
the universal extension of fencing: it had a dramatic effect on
the crowd's perception of their position, and heightened their
feelings of being penned in. ACPO nevertheless recognised that
if it was removed the restraint over bad behaviour could itself
have been thought to have been removed. A compromise would be to
retain just enough fencing to act as a   psychological deterrent,
doing away with Colditz type barriers,   and leaving means of
escape onto the pitch. There was also    an interrelation between
fencing and police resources: manning    of gates in fences was an
extensive resource commitment, whether they were open or closed.
On the point of potential pitch invasions, and action against
clubs by the football authorities, ACPO took the view that pitch
invasions were not now a priority in police terms, albeit they
could be a tactic to abort a game.

13. On the question of gates where fences were retained, ACPO's
views were mixed: ideally, gates should be kept open and flat
back, but some were capable only of partial opening, and there
was a risk of players being injured if they ran off the field of
play. It might be better to have gates closed, unlocked and
manned. Mechanisms for closing gates needed careful attention,
but as with so many aspects of football grounds, the question of
gates and fencing could not be separated out from other measures
to segregate spectators, positive action such as the creation of
family sections, and membership schemes.


Football Spectators Bill

14. Lord Justice Taylor asked for ACPO's views on the principles
in the Bill. ACPO said they could give the Bill qualified
support. On the national membership scheme, they recognised
that, subject to technological solutions, a desired effect was
being sought. But they had doubts about whether the technology
was achievable without lengthy pilot schemes. There were
political difficulties about ACPO passing judgement on the merits
of so controversial a measure, at least until the outlined scheme
and its benefits were clearer. On this basis, therefore, their
reservations were more of practice than of principle.


15.   Discussion focussed on the practical effects on police
resources of the system of amber and red lights. ACPO were aware
that the hard core would seek to defeat the purpose of the Bill
and that it would fall to the police to catch them. Potential
evasions, such as the difficulty of ensuring recognition of
photographs, multi applications for cards, the lack of time for
an individual officer to be away from his post, were all
potential limitations. Much would depend upon whether the Bill
diminished problems of hooliganism as a whole, and only on that
basis could an accurate assessment of the effect on police
resources of the proposed measures be made.
16. Lord Justice Taylor raised the question of extending Part 2
of the Bill to cover domestic matches, giving police power to
detain for the duration of a football match, on the pattern of
attendance centres. ACPO would need to look carefully at the
resource implications. They would not be happy about having
offenders reporting to police stations, because of their
disruptive effect on other business. Chasing up failures to
report would also be, as with bail reportees, an expensive task.
ACPO would need to give further thought to the question of
private security firms manning reporting centres, but would
certainly want the costs of such reporting ultimately to be found
by the clubs.

17. On the need for the Bill as a whole, and the effects it
would bring, ACPO placed much store on the National Football
Intelligence Unit, which it was hoped would come to improve
targetting and intelligence, and enable the worst hooligans to be
dealt with. If so there would be less need for a Bill of this
kind. They nevertheless saw the arguments for toughening up the
exclusion process by empowering magistrates courts to impose a
condition on reporting. Certainly, the scheme seemed likely to
be worthless unless the membership card bore a photograph. A
link had to be made between a card and an individual for there to
be any chance of the system working effectively at the
turnstiles. Furthermore, the police took a realistic view about
the extent of turnstile fraud, and the devices which might be
used at the turnstiles, such as offering money with a card,
irrespective of its validity:   and clubs turned a blind eye to
many of the undesirable practices at turnstiles. There were many
ways of corrupting the system, and the poor state of many
turnstiles was a further problem. It was noted that membership
cards were used in some places for dealing with home supporters.
But technical weakness and the ingenuity of football fans
suggested the need for a couple of years to test the system for
robustness, practicality, and proof against corruption.


Breach of the Peace Provisions in Scotland

18.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for ACPO's views on the Scottish
provisions on breach of the peace. ACPO conceded that some
police forces in England and Wales had been lax on the question
of arrest rather than ejection. Certainly the time taken to
secure arrest at some grounds was a factor. Wide variations had
been reported in the time involved. Big urban forces policing
several football matches on a big day could be particularly
stretched, and in those circumstances Chief Constables and match
commanders need to keep maximum flexibility.

Interim Recommendations


19.   ACPO noted the following points on the interim
recommendations:-

      6.    ACPO wanted particular consideration to be given to
            where further responsibility for training stewards
            should lie. It should basically be a matter for the
            clubs, with assistance from the police.


      7.    There was an argument that gates should be painted
            green, being the internationally recognised colour for
            emergencies.

      8.    As discussed above, the best option was keep gates
            closed but not locked.


      9.    This was accepted, but was manpower intensive, and was
            possibly being applied too rigidly.


      10.   This should be part of the Safety Certificate.


      21.   The ACPO working party was looking at CCTV and the
             technical requirements. Good equipment was expensive:
            the Football Trust could help, but some grounds would
            be penalised by the proper implementation of this
            recommendation.


      26.   The extent of liaison appropriate for each force was
            discussed.
    30.    The need here was for simultaneous information to be
           available both to the police and to the club: it was a
           functional requirement of any police control room.

    32.    A system of land lines should be a requirement in a
           Safety Certificate.


    34.    ACPO did not believe that the use of a simple code of
           hand signals was viable: it was likely to lead to
           confusion and misunderstanding.

     42.   Lord Justice Taylor clarified that he had had in mind
           provision of ambulances from statutory services in
           addition to those from St John and St Andrew.


Discussion with Football Supporters' Clubs

20. ACPO believed that the NFFSC was well intentioned, and that
it represented genuine supporters from football clubs. They
were, however, less sure about the motives of the Football
Supporters' Association and doubted the validity of the culture
they were attempting to foster. ACPO would continue to maintain
contact with such groups, and with other interested bodies,
through the local police representative on advisory groups.
