GENERAL NOTE


The prime areas to be probed are as follows


1.     Degree of pre-planning.


2.     Contrast between this year and last?


        Levels of responsibility and whether they were accepted/understood.
       Who was in charge at the ground, on touchline, at Force Headquarters
        and in Leppings Lane?


4.     Experience of staff in key positions (Hole had been moved
       operationally for lack of leadership and Duckenfield posted into
        uniform from Regional Crime Squad (to be confirmed).   He was,
        therefore, a weak link in the big match context.   What was done to
        reinforce his position, particularly by Chief Constable/Assistant
       Chief Constable?


5.     Liaison between police and club.


6.     Adequacy of police communications.


7.     Major disaster plans - were they adequately, properly exercised?


8.     Lack of adequate equipment etc.


9.     Scope and effectiveness of briefings.
In particular were levels of command and lines of command clearly
identifed or confused, having regard to numerous Force Departments
involved, overlapping ranks etc?
MR JACKSON,   ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE - OPERATIONS


1.     Relationship with Chief Constable.


2.     How specific are his terms of reference       in post.


3.     How long in post.


4.      Previous experience as (a) Assistant Chief Constable (b) Chief
        Superintendent.


        Specific training, experience etc in public order, large scale
        sporting events etc.


6.      Membership of ACPO committees.


7.      Does he have a role in the selection of Chief Superintendents
        and their posts?


8.      Relationship with Assistant Chief Constable (Personnel).


9.     Does he brief Divisional Commanders specifically on public order
        roles?


10.     Does he supervise public order events personally regularly/how often?


11.     How often has he been to Hillsborough in any capacity?


12.     How involved personally is he in the construction of Operational

        Orders.


13.     Does he regularly review Standing Orders and their updating?


14.     Does he attend briefings/de-briefings of large scale events?


 15.    Was he concerned with the substantial change of senior ranks involved
         with the Hillsborough event?




                                         -   3   -
Did he give any special instructions to Superintendent Duckenfield
about his role, particularly about this match?


Did he give any directives to MOLE?


Did he liaise with MOLE?


In the run up to this match did he discuss policing arrangements

in detail with Duckenfield?


Was he aware that the match would be policed differently to the

previous year?.


If so,   was he happy with it, and if not what did he do about it?


Did he   attend last year?


Did he   attend this year?    If so what was he wearing.   Did he
consider wearing uniform?


If he did attend last year did he make any recommendations?


Are there any particular problems concerned with the Hillsborough
Ground which made it unusual and unique?     Are there any special
arrangements to cater for any affirmative points?


Question of 'policing football', does that feature appear in
contingency plans for the Force?


Do Standing Orders refer to A.C.P.O.'s policy?


There were a number of separate Operational Orders throughout the
Force did you consider Headquarters Department co-ordinating to manage

the complete event from one central control.


What would have been achieved had you done so.


Was air support considered.
31.   What   use was made of in-force and inter-force intelligence re this
      match?


32.   What     did it tell you.


33.   Were   you involved in discussions with the Club re allocation of
      tickets, allocation of ground accommodation, club by club.


34.   Why were Liverpool given less accommodation than Nottingham Forest?




                                     -   5   -
  SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD

   1.    What   is your previous police experience been?


   2.    How,   in detail, have you spent the last five years?


   3.    What   is your previous experience relating to large    scale public
          order/sporting events, above the rank of Chief Inspector.


   4.    When did you move into this post?


^ ^ 5.   Did    you receive any specific briefing as to your role in particular at

          Hillsborough.


   6.    Did you discuss Standing Orders/police arrangements, with your

          predecessors?


   7.    How much liaison have you had with Assistant Chief Constable
           (Operations) about this and other games, but specifically about this

          game?


   8.     Explain in detail your liaison and inter-working relationships with
           the Club, particularly stewards and gatemen.


   Policing this particular match


   1.     Did you play a personal part in drawing up the contingency plans?


   2.     What were your   priorities?


    3.    Are you satisfied these priorities were properly communicated to

           junior officers.    If so how?


    4.    Did you depart   from previous policy planning for the ground.


    5.    Were you aware   of any particular problems posed from the fans       either

           from Liverpool or Nottingham Forest?




                                            -   6   -
   6.     What special arrangements did you make for this match over and above

          other matches?


   7.     Did you consider this match to be unduly problematical?


   8.     How did you organise the deployment of police personnel?


   9.     Why were there no filter cordons at the Leppings Lane end?


   10.    Explain liaison with a view to the terrace capacity as the crowd

          builds up?


^ ^ 11.   Explain arrangements for marshals, queues, ensuring even spread on
           terraces.


   12.    Briefing given to senior officer in charge of the touchline and

           Leppings Lane end.


    13.   State in detail events from 2.20 pm onwards.


    14.   Give a general statement of what you did today until you took command

           proper.


    15.   Were you aware of the problem with             crowd congestion in Leppings Lane?


    16.   What   did you do about it?


    17.   Could you assist Superintendent Marshall.


    18.   Did you receive any messages from Superintendent Marshall?


    19.   Did you have   any problems with       the radio system?


    20.   What   options did you consider?


    21.   Were you aware of the imbalance between Pens 3 and 4 and the rest of

           the Western Terrace?




                                             -   7   -
  22.   Could you/should you have     done more about it?


  23.   Did you consider postponing the kick off?


  24.   When were you first aware     of injury/death as a reality on the West
        Terrace?


  25.   What did you do about it?


  26.   What were your actions thereafter, having regard to general safety in
        the ground, evacuation of Western Terrace - implicating procedure.


^^7.    Were   you in command for the whole day, if not, when did command
        change and who to?


  28.   In communication control terms, what was the relationship with the
        football club, ground control, divisional control and force control?


  29-   What   use was made of the public address systems?


  30.   How often?


  31.   For what     purpose?


  32.   What     was the relationshipbetween yourself and   Superintendent Murray
         (control box).


  33.   What   use was made of in-force and inter-force intelligence re this
        match?


  34.   What     did it tell you.


  35.   Were     you involved in discussions withthe Club   re allocation of
         tickets, allocation of ground accommodation club by club.




                                         -   8   -
SUPERINTENDENT MARSHALL



1.     What   jtkyour   previous police experience been?


2.     How, in detail, have you spent the last five years?


3.     What is your previous experience relating to large scale     public
        order/sporting events, above the rank of Chief Inspector.


4.     When did you move into this post?


5.     Did you receive any specific briefing as to your role in particular at
        Hillsborough.


6.     Did you discuss Standing Orders/police arrangements, with your
        predecessors?


7.     How much liaison have you had with Assistant Chief Constable
        (Operations) about this and other games, but specifically about this
        game?


8.     Explain in detail your liaison and inter-working relationships with
        the Club, particularly stewards and gatemen.


9.     What were your specific terms of reference for policing outside the
        ground at Leppings Lane end?         __              ^


10.    How many men did you have, how were they briefed, how deployed any
        specific briefing.


11.    How did you see your role (particularly buried in crowd at one stage
        (bad practice!!!!)


12.    How could you have best discharged your function.


13.    Were you surprised with the volume of late arrivals at the ground?




                                         -   9    -
 14.    What other options were available to you?


  15.   When did you consider the situation as worrying/out   of
        control/dangerous?


  16.   Were you satisfied with the through-put on   theturnstiles?


  17.   Could the mounted officers have done more?


  18.   What communications were available to the officers?


^^9.    Were you keeping in regular contact with Duckenfield.


  20.   Were there any difficulties


  21.   Did^jh&Arequest emergency action e.g. postponement of match, opening

        gates etc?


  22.   What was the response?


  23.   When did     consider opening the gates?


  24.   What instructions, if any, were given regarding ejections inside the

        ground?


  25.   Had the gates been opened on other occasions?


  26.   Did you advice in advance that the gates would   be opened and the
         possible consequences of this action inside?


  27.   On whose authority did you open the gates?




                                       -   10   -
SUPERINTENDENT GREENWOOD



1.     What is your previous police experience been?


2.      How, in detail, have you spent the last five years?


3.     What is your previous experience relating to large scale public
        order/sporting events, above the rank of Chief Inspector.


A.     When did you move into this post?


5.     Did you receive any specific briefing as to your role in particular at
       Hillsborough.


6.     Did you discuss Standing Orders/police arrangements, with your
        predecessors?


7.     How much liaison have you had with Assistant Chief Constable
        (Operations) about this and other games, but specifically about this
       game?


8.     Explain in detail your liaison and inter-working relationships with
        the Club, particularly stewards and gatemen.


9.     What were your specific terms of reference for policing outside the
       ground at Leppings Lane end?                    *


       How many men did you have, how were they briefed, how deployed any
        specific briefing.


       How close were you physically to Duckenfield?


       Where were you positioned at 2.30 pm - 3.15 pm.




                                      -   11   -
SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY



1.     What   is your previous police experience been?


2.     How,   in detail, have you spent the last five years?


3.     What   is your previous experience relating to    large scale public
        order/sporting events, above the rank of Chief Inspector.


4.     When did you move into this post?


5.     Did you receive any specific briefing as to your role in particular at

        Hillsborough.


6.      Did you discuss Standing Orders/police arrangements, with your
        predecessors?


7.     How much liaison have   you had with Assistant    Chief Constable
        (Operations) about this and other games, but specifically about this

        game?


8.      Explain in detail your liaison and inter-working relationships with
        the Club, particularly stewards and gatemen.


9.      What were your specific terms of reference for policing outside the

        ground at Leppings Lane end?


10.     How many men did you have, how were they briefed, how deployed any

         specific briefing.


 11.    To whom did you relate?


 12.    How often and on what points?


 13.    Do you believe your role waseffective?


 14.    When were you first aware of the growing problem in Leppings Lane?


                                        -   12   -
 15.    How was you aware?


 16.    What was the content of the messages?


 17.    What was done about them?


 18.    Was there a consultation/discussion of the problems/options/decisions.
        Similarly, the imbalance in the pens on the Western Terrace.


 19.    Did you seek to take any initiative?


^^0.    What were radio communications like that day?


 21 .   Why was nothing done specifically about the imbalance of fans in   pens.
        Were you in touch with Marshall and/or officers in charge of the

        touchline.     Is so why?


  22.   Was there liaison from 1 pm with the club employees?


  23.   Were there any messages received from Marshall concerning conditions
        outside, same from touchline commander.


  24.   Can you throw any light on the opening of the gates and events
        surrounding it.


  25.   Detailed questions concerning position on the terraces between 2.55 pm

        and 3.15 pm.




                                       -   13   -
