                                                                               27th June 1997.
Dear Sir,
         After a recent conversation with one of your police officers, I was advised to put pen to
paper and voice my opinion. I have just heard on the National News that a new enquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster may be opened in the near future and this has prompted me to write you
this letter.
         I know at the end of the previous enquiry almost all the blame for the disaster was put on
the South Yorkshire Police Dept, and indeed some people lost their jobs because of that. Many
people made huge claims about the disaster who weren’t even present at the scene - Lord Justice
Taylor for one. In my opinion, many of the people who should have been interviewed w eren’t,
resulting in the police having the blame attached solely to them.
         I want you to know that I was at the football match between Liverpool and Forest on that
day, and I saw a very different picture to the one the Nation was led to believe. I was there with a
friend, and we witnessed hundreds, if not thousands, of Liverpool supporters without tickets:
everywhere we went, we were asked for tickets by Liverpool supporters, the majority of whom
were drunk.
         Now, I know this is still a very sensitive issue for many people. However, I can’t help but
feel that if other people like myself and my friend - who were there and saw what we saw - were
interviewed, then the final decision may not have been to blame the police so much. Was it that
certain people had to come up with some sort of answer quickly and had the responsibility to
attach the blame to a particular party - the police being the easiest target?; or was it that it would
have looked too insensitive to actually attach some of the blame to some of the Liverpool
supporters themselves? I don’t know. But what I do know is that there were thousands of
Liverpool supporters present, drunk, and without tickets who were hell-bent on getting into the
ground at any cost. It was very unfortunate that the innocent people who actually had tickets and
were in the ground well before the kick-off were the victims.
         I would like you to know that I think the police were the victims of a terrible injustice.
Perhaps the police force warranted some of the blame, but nowhere near as much as they were
actually given. If an enquiry does open up again on the Hillsborough disaster at any time in the
future, I want you to know that I would be very willing to be interviewed on what I saw on that
that day, and perhaps direct some of the blame away from the South Yorkshire Police Dept.
         I hope this letter is of some reassurance to you and your colleagues. In future, perhaps
certain people responsible for making huge decisions could insist on getting all the correct facts
together, rather than just the ones which seem to cause less heartache at the time!
                                          Yours Sincerely,
