                                                                              1
                                                               ti
                                                    X “   '.



11-1.JS


From:        J L Goddard                   cc     Mr Cogbill C4
             F8 Division                          Mrs Lee I Div
             Ext 3314                             Miss Wooldrige F2
             15 January 1991                      Ms Rex C1




Mr Clavton



BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES


Thank you for your minute of 21 December and for the first
         instructions to Parliamentary Counsel.    I have a number
of comments.


Introduction, scope and extent


2.      I am not sure that your second sentence in paragraph 1.3
quite gives the right flavour as problems with crowd control
are not necessarily proportionate to the numbers attending.               I
would have thought that we could probably delete that sentence
without detriment to the substance of the paragraph, with the
rest of which we are content.     As the matches we wish to
designate would be exactly the same ones as are designated
under the Football Spectators Act 1989 we wondered if it might
be possible simply to refer to that Act rather than go through
the process of designating specifically for the new Act.            But
this matter of legal procedure is, of course, for you.


Ticket Touting


3.      Turning to the draft instructions on ticket touts, I am
still not sure that your paragraph 2.2 quite gets the right
balance.     Taylor's concern was to reduce the potential for
disorder resulting from fans massing outside grounds in the
hope of buying a ticket from a tout and from the possible
subsequent effect on segregation of rival supporters rather
than to prevent the touts from causing obstruction per s e .       I
still prefer the version offered in my note of 21 December.


4.   I have seen Mr Evans's minute of 7 January and, whilst
not dismissive of an offence of "possession with intent to
supply” , I remain unconvinced that such an offence is
necessary in order to prevent public disorder, which is the
subject of our - and Taylor's - concern.      And the difficulty
of proving intention is a strong reason for not taking this
approach.


5.   After further consideration we have decided that the
offence of ticket touting should apply only to public places
oi^^jLaces to which the public have access.    We are
uncomfortable with the idea of restricting a person from
selling a ticket in the confines of his or anyone else's home
and we doubt that such a restriction would     be politically
acceptable.   It is recognised that this would not catch a tout
operating from his home address but our principal concern is
to prevent public disorder from fans massing outside grounds
not to outlaw touting per s e .


6.   If, then, the offence were restricted to public places,
or places to which the public have access, the defence that
the sale was an isolated incident seems no longer required
since it would be a relatively simple matter for the fan
falling ill to sell his ticket on private premises.


7.   In paragraph 2.7, I would prefer to stick with the term
"organisers of the game" which, as I explained before, is
understood in the football world.   The CPS have suggested that
the authority to sell tickets should be a written authority
which should be made available immediately upon request.        This
seems very sensible and would prevent any confusion arising
from oral or implied authority.
8.    In her note of 20 December, Ms Rex suggested that a
maximum fine at level 5 would be appropriate for ticket
touting.    I agree.


9.    I agree with you that it would be unacceptable to search
the premises of a cafe or public house just because a ticket
tout happened to be operating from there.     Paragraph 2.10
should be re-drafted to make it clear that we would not wish
for a power of search in such circumstances.


Other offences


10.   I suggest that the fourth sentence of paragraph 3.3
should be expanded to reflect Taylor's concerns, in paragraph
294^p£ his report, that the offences are not only prevalent at
football matches but, in that context, "they are fraught with
potential disorderly consequences".     For the same reason, I
suggest    that the last sentence of para 3.4 (I   think "really"
must be a typing error) should be replaced by      something along
the lines of:-


      "The offences are not solely public order offences, but
      they may well have public order consequences."


11.   I    cannot see that the final sentence of   3.3 materially
adds to the substance and suggest that it should be deleted.


Throwing missiles


12.   In your first paragraph 3.5 you cite coins as an example
of missiles that may be thrown at matches.     It might be
helpful to add that the coins are sometimes sharpened to
increase the likelihood of injury caused when they hit
someone.


13.   I also wonder whether the Sidley case is sufficiently
germane to be worth quoting.      The throwing of plastic bags
filled with urine, although most offensive, does not seem to
me quite as outrageous to public decency as Sidley relieving
himself before the audience at Covent Garden.


14.      I understand the definitional problems in relation to
missiles causing offence and wonder if we would be better
having a test on similar lines,        mutatis mutandis, to that in
sections 1-3 of the Public Order Act 1986, where a person is
guilty of the offence when the conduct is such as would cause
a "person of reasonable firmness present at the scene....".
What we have in mind is that it would be for the courts to
decide whether, in this case, the act caused or was likely to
cause offence to a reasonable person present at the scene.
This would then allow us considerable simplification, so that
paragraphs 3.8 to 3.11 could be deleted and replaced as
f<^^pws:-


         "3.8   The throwing of items such as lighted fireworks
         ought to be covered by the reference to articles liable
         to cause injury.   The discharging of pellets by catapult
         also ought to be caught by the offence.


         3.9    It will not be sufficient for the proposed offence
         to cover only missiles of a kind capable of causing
         injury (cf. the definition of "violence" in section 8 of
         the Public Order Act 1986).    It should also cover objects
         the throwing of which caused or would be likely to cause
         offence, whether racially or on grounds of public decency
         or otherwise, to a reasonable person present at the
         scene."


15.      I agree with the point made by Mrs Lee in her note of
2 January that the instruction at paragraph 3.12, as currently
drafted, fails to make the point that ethnic minorities and
others may reasonably take offence at the throwing of bananas.
I suggest that the first two sentences should stand but the
rest of the paragraph be replaced by something along the lines
o f :-
      "it is recognised that this activity would not be caught
      by section 18 of the Public Order Act 1986 as the
      intention is not to stir up racial hatred.   The objection
      to this activity lies in the fact that ethnic minorities
      and others, without being unduly sensitive, may
      reasonably take racial offence at an action which,
      certainly in the football context, is an expression of
      hostility or contempt for persons, not as individuals,
      but for their ethnic characteristics".


16.   Reworking the offence along these lines should go some
way to meet Mr Evans's concerns about this offence.


Chanting


17.   We consider that the offence of chanting probably should
include an isolated shout that is racially or otherwise
offensive, as a single shout might well spark off disorder.
If the isolated shout were not caught the offence would apply
to the crowd but not to the individual who started the
chanting.   I therefore suggest that the first two sentences of
paragraph 3.15 (and "Nevertheless" in the next sentence)
should be deleted.


18.   I see the force of Mr Evans's comments on the need to
avoid definitional squabbles.   I suggest that the definition       ©
of the offence should be broad enough to include chanting or
uttering sounds which caused or would be likely to cause
offence to a reasonable person on racial or public decency or
other grounds.


19.   I recognise that there may be difficulty in identifying
and obtaining a conviction for an individual who claims that,
whilst he was moving his lips, no sound was coming forth.      In
paragraph 3.19 could the test be that the individual was an
active part of a group who were collectively committing the
offensive behaviour?
Gestures


20.   On further consideration we have decided not to include
the offence of rude or offensive gestures in the Bill.      It was
not proposed by Taylor and we accept that there would be
considerable difficulties in giving effect to the proposal.


Going onto the pitch


21.   Taylor was concerned that the specific offence of going
onto the pitch should exist so that the perimeter fences could
be removed or lowered for the safety of the fans.   The third
and fourth sentences of paragraph 3.22 should therefore be
deleted.   The reference to Murrayfield is inappropriate as
S<^^Land is outside the scope of the Bill.


22.   The list of those who may authorise individuals to go
onto the pitch in paragraph 3.24 should include the match
organisers; the ground authority; the referee; the police and
the emergency services.


23.   The CPS were concerned that the defence of "without
reasonable excuse" at paragraph 3.25 might open the flood
gates to excuses.   We consider that an exception for an
emergency would be sufficient - it would be for the courts to
decide in each case whether there was an emergency - and that
the last sentence of paragraph 3.25 should be deleted.      Again,
I think that this should cover all the points made by Mr
Evans.


24.   It might perhaps be helpful to Counsel if in paragraph
3.27 we were to point out that the Attorney General has
indicated that he does not wish to be involved in the
prosecution of these offences.   We might also say that the
proposed maximum penalties are much less severe than those
under Part III of the Public Order Act 1986.
25.   In her note of 2 January, Miss Wooldridge suggested that
the powers of search under PACE would be sufficient.     However,
a ticket tout is unlikely to be a danger to himself or others
and the powers under PACE would, therefore, not apply.
Miss Wooldridge has accepted that this is the case.


26.   Turning to the points you made in your covering note, I
agree that the offence of ticket touting should not be
included in Schedule 1 of the Football Spectators Act 1989.


27.   In paragraph 5 of that note you suggest that it would be
difficult to include in the offence throwing missiles from
outside the ground.    I am persuaded and accept that the
proposed offence should only cover behaviour within the
g^pnd.

28.   As to your paragraph 16, where you asked if we intended
to use this Bill to make corrections to the Football
Spectators Act 1989,    I suggest that we might usefully take
the opportunity to amend section 16(2)(b) to include a duty to
report under section 19(3)(a) in addition to the existing duty
to report under section 19(3)(b).    This would be correcting
what was purely a technical drafting error at some stage of
the consideration of the Football Spectators Bill.     As to the
possibility of a 5 year restriction order being imposed
following conviction for a corresponding offence abroad and
sentence to an immediate period of imprisonment, I prefer, on
policy grounds, as well as for the avoidance of needless
controversy, to leave matters as they are.


29.   Perhaps when you have prepared a further draft in the
light of these comments we might meet to discuss it.




                          J. L. GODDARD


                          J L GODDARD
