           A FEW SUGGESTIONS AS TO INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS THAT COULD BE
             INTRODUCED OR CONSIDERED PRIOR TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE
                               NEXT FOOTBALL SEASON




GENERAL

1.       All safety certificates               should be reviewed prior to the commencement

         of     the    next     football        season,    particularly       in     respect      of        crowd

         capacity, points of entry, stewardifig and police responsibility.

I
2.       As an interim measure, .crowd                capacity of terraces as              set out     in the

         safety certificates be reduced.




3.       The    conditions      which     should      be detailed andset       out    in        the     safety

         certificate          should    be     subject    to    an   annual   review,      and the      safety

         certificate should be renewable annually.




4.       That    the   responsibility           for      monitoring of        numbers      and packing        of

         terraces be clearly defined and stated in the safety certificate, and

         details should be included in the certificate as to how these should

         be achieved.



    5.   Wherever      possible,         turnstiles        should      give   access       to    only        one

         enclosure or part of the ground.




6.       Clear    directional          signs     should    be    displayed    to   all     parts       of    the

         ground, both inside and outside the ground.




    7.   Tickets to contain clear and unambiguous information to supporters of

         the turnstile to be used and point of entry to the ground,
8.    A pre-determined         system to be devised to ensure an                                    orderly approach

      to    turnstiles        to       enable          unobstructed            access         and     entry     through

      turnstiles.




9.    Crowd    volume       inside      and       outside         the    ground     to be           monitored      up    to

      kick-off to ensure that turnstiles and points of entry to the ground

^     can     accommodate         those           awaiting             entry   outside,             in     order      that

      alternative       methods             of     entry        or     postponement       of        kick-off can         be

      considered if entry to the ground is to be delayed.




10. As an interim measure, wherever possible, perimeter                                         fences and radial

      gatas      and    points         of        access         should    be   enlarged         or       increased      and

       equipment       be    made           immediately               available    to    effect          entry through

       fences.




COMMUNICATIONS AMD INFORMATION

11.   Consideration          be        given          to        the     provision        of     a        control        room

       sufficiently           large              to        hou3e         police,    ' club           officials           and

       representatives            of        other      emergency           services       with        access to          all

       relevant information and communication and CCTV facilities.




12. An urgent review of communications at football grounds be undertaken

       to     overcome       difficulties                  in     transmitting          and     receiving       due       to

       background noise.
13.   Sufficient        operators    to be employed         in control rooms         to receive all

      transmissions and the use of additional channels to be considered to

      prevent overcrowding of the airways^ .




14.   Land lines with telephone links to parts of the ground, including the

      perimeter areas, to be considered to complement radio communication.




POLICE AND STEWARDS

15.   Police      and    stewards    to be     positioned     in    the     ground    with   the    sole

      responsibility of observing conditions on the terraces,


            /
16.   CCTV to be used           to observe the packing            and monitoring       of    fans   into

      pens,



17.   All   perimeter         and   radial   gates     to    be    manned    bystewards      and/or

      police.



18.   Training to be given to police match commanders                        on      crowd safety and

      control and such training to include crowd dynamics.




19. Each      police       force    should     have    a    designated       senior     officer,      in

      addition to divisional representatives, who will undertake, on behalf

       of   the     Chief      Constable     in    a   police      area,     to   liaise     with     the

      management         of   all   football      clubs,    licensing       authorities      and    other

       statutory -*getU;i«S in respect of the safety and control of crowds and

       conditions relative to the issue of a safety certificate to football

       grounds.
NOTE:

The question of the overall responsibility of crowds in football stadia is

a matter which will have to be resolved.      Tha Groan Guide would appear fr>

place   this   responsibility   on   management   of   football   clubs.   (See

paragraphs 23, 29, 206, 224 atld Annex B.2(i))




                                          4
BOTE FOR THE INQUIRY


1*   Management at the Club

     There is not much evidence so far of a coherent management
     structure.  The Board is responsible for all legal,
     financial and operational activities, and would be expected,
     in the normal way, to delegate execution of its policies to
     designated officers.  It is not clear how this has been
     done.  An organisational chart, extending down to stewards,
     would be useful.  And perhaps the accounts presented to the
     Annual General meeting would shed some light.

2.   Responsibilities for Safety

     The central body appears to be the Officers Working Party.
     It is composed of representatives from the City Council,
     the South Yorkshire Police, the South Yorkshire County Fire
     Service, the South Yorkshire County Council all taken from
     Minutes, 1985);  sometimes representatives of the Club are
     present.  It does not seem to have an appointed Chairman,
     and it is not clear to whom it is accountable.

     Page 27 (Club file) sets out the delegations made by "Area
     Officer Working Parties" in 1976.  Page 29 records a letter
     from the Chief Executive, County Council, to the Chief
     Constable delegating "its responsibilities under the (1975)
     Act to the Fire Service Committee.” There must be a serious
     question as to the effectiveness of the various
     relationships involved.

     Procedures for granting Safety Certificates do not seem to
     work very well, if at all.  It is preposterous that there
     should be a delay of three years (so far) in amending the
     original after the first notice of inadequacy made by the
     City on 5 June 1986.

3.   The Ground

     Evidence has identified many deficiencies, including the
     physical arrangement of turnstiles and their relationship to
     public roads on the one hand and viewing areas on the other,
     signposting, communications, emergency equipment of various
     kinds and, most obviously, emergency evacuation from
     restricted Pens.

     The lay-out of crush barriers departs from the Green Guide
     in only a few areas, but they are critical, and the margins
     of safety in the older barriers are suspect (HSE tests to
     follow).

4.   Crowd Control

     The principal deficiencies include limited preparation for
     the management of crowds assembling outside the Leppings
     Lane turnstiles (particularly inside the boundary fence);1
     virtually no control inside the turnstiles, lack of police-
FIRE SERVICES INSPECTORATE/FEU           06.16.1989 T T T 4 5   HO, 5   P, 4


           steward co-ordination;  inadequate use of CCTV and direct
           surveillance of crowds (influenced not only by conditioning
           for hooliganism but also by the genuine difficulty of
           detecting local disturbances in a large, excited crowd);
           and weak direction from the police Control Box.

           Individual efforts by police officers were of the highest
           order.  Many fans and stewards also showed great courage.

     5•    Supporters1 Behaviour

           It is likely that a proportion of supporters behaved
           irresponsibly.   But it is virtually impossible to quantify
           this effect.   The arrival of large, late influxes - probably
           containing a higher proportion of trouble-makers - should be
           less surprising in the future.

     6.    The Combined Effect

           If any one of the major sources of the disaster had been
           suppressed, the result would probably have been very
           different.  But the combination could not be contained.




                                                LM
                                                14 June 1989
            THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            Queen A nne’s Chambers
            28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
            Telephones   Direct Line   01-210
                         Switchboard   01-210 3000
            Telex 917564        GTN    210
            Fax No. 01-222 6006

                                                      Please qu ote   L89/2117/PP0W
Messrs. Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain,
Chichester House,                                     Your reference
278/282 High Holborn,
                                                      Date     16th June, 1989
London, WC1V 7HA.
 For the Attention of Mr. P. D. Nicholas



    Dear Sir,

                    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry - Dr. W. Eastwood

        As you know I act for the above Inquiry.

        You are already aware of the general criticisms which have been indicated
    against Sheffield Wednesday F.C. in the letter of 9th May, 1989 addressed to
    Davies, Arnold, Cooper, a copy of which is enclosed and which, I understand, you
    have been shown by the Club.

        Since that letter was written, much more information has become available.
    In the light of that information, I consider it appropriate that you should be
    aware of matters which may form the subject of criticism against your client and
    his firm.

        I should make it clear that I am writing you this letter because of Lord
    Justice Taylor's indication at the outset of this Inquiry that, if any criticism
    might be levelled against any person advance notice of it should be given.

        The following are the main general criticisms against your client which
    appear frcm the evidence now available

        1. There are a number of failures to follow the Green Guide reccnrnendations
    in the construction, disposition and height of crush barriers on the West
    Terrace generally and more particularly in Pens 3 and 4, which affected the
    capacity of the pens on the terrace and the flow of spectators.

        Particular consideration should have been given to the effect of the removal
    of Barrier 144 in Pen 3 in 1986.

        2. The construction of the new radial fences in 1981 and of that in 1985
    which created the sterile area behind Gate 5 reduced the capacity of the
    terraces. Your client failed to take proper account of this in his advice to
    the Club and in his dealings with the Local Authority.

         3. Your client ought to have advised the Club of the effect of the
     installation of radial fences generally on capacity and evacuation particularly
     having regard to the narrowness of the gates in the perimeter fencing.

         I should advise you that if, in the light of this letter, your client
     wishes to be represented on Thursday when he gives evidence, Lord Justice Taylor
     has indicated that he will be receptive to such a request.
    I enclose herewith for consideration a copy of a report by Dr. Nicholson of
the Health & Safety Executive dealing with certain factual matters.

    Please make any response to me here, at the Inquiry at the address shown on
the fax covering sheet.



                                  Yours faithfully,




                                     PPO k
                                  for the Treasury Solicitor
