       19/10   '69   16120    S 31 20 761069 BRITCONS AMS NL




                             CC



                                         M.CVw%(<U/

Peter Palmer Esq                  N'.   Svvfi-U'
Consular Department
FCO                                                                295/1
London                                  fa*4
                                                      September 13, 1989

                                          t'lu




FOOTBALL IDENTITY CARD SCHEME - YOUR TEL DISTRESS 004


1.   As reported in our tels 333 and 336, the introduction of the
Football Identity Card Scheme in the Netherlands did not go well.
The experiment has now been discontinued pending a further
meeting with, and agreement on further action by, the mayors of
the seventeen cities which sport first division football clubs,
the Netherlands Football Association (KNVB) and the Minitry of
the Interior - the latter acting as coordinator.


2.   The Identity Card scheme emerged from discussions which took
place in 1986/87 between the interested parties. The report of
these was published in July 1987. In November 1987 the
Government agreed in principle to an experimental membership card
scheme and in November 1988 the details were agreed, including a
contribution by Government of Dfl 600,000 towards the cost of the
scheme which was estimated at Dfl 1 million. The scheme was to
be reviewed after one year in operation.

3.   The Mayor of a city, advised by his Police Commissioner, is
responsible for law and order within a city and for example would
be responsible for cancelling a football match if he thought it
necessary. The cooperation of all 17 Mayors and of course the
Football Clubs was essential to the setting up of the scheme and
the delay in starting the experiment was caused, at least in
part, by their having difficulty in agreeing on the details.

4.   The main point of the scheme was that only the five clubs

                                                                   /with
        19/10 '69 16121      S 31 26 761069 BRITCONS AMS NL




with a history of hooliganism among its supporters would be
involved and passes would be required to obtain tickets for, and
to enter, only the away matches of those clubB. For this to
work, the sale of tickets would have had to be very carefully
controlled. The five clubs were:

     AJAX (Amsterdam), FEIJENOORD (Rotterdam), PSV (Eindhoven)
     FC DEN HAAG (The Hague), FC UTRECHT (Utrecht)

5.   The Ministry of the Interior acted as coordinator but was
anxious to make it clear from the beginning that it was not a
Government scheme but that of the KNVB, whose job it would be to
ensure that it was implemented, and that the Mayors retained
their full responsibilities for law and order.

6.    Each club was to issue its own card (at a cost of Dfl 35).
To help the scheme along the KNVB was also to issue its card to
those who were not supporters of any one team but wished to take
part in the scheme. KNVB cardB were issued only after names had
been checked with the records of the clubs closest to the
applicant's home address (if one of the five) and the State
Police's Football intelligence Unit's central computer. A sample
of the KNVB’s card is enclosed. It is similar to those of the
five clubs. As will be seen, it is similar to a credit card with
a photograph of the holder on the face and with a magnetic strip
and space for a signature on the reverse. The checking of cards
and tickets at the gate was to be manual, at least in the
experimental year, but the card was designed to prevent fraud and
subsequently to be used at automatic turnstiles should it become
necessary.

7.   It was decided that the scheme and the card should as a
"selling" point have a "positive" image. The main inducement to
supporters to obtain cards was that clubs and the KNVB would
offer card holders special concessions at friendly matches,
special facilities to purchase tickets for international matches
and issue newsletters. The intention was to try to establish a
cohesive club atmosphere in which hooliganism would not thrive
and so encourage all the supporters to take up membership cards.
In the event, only some 25,000 cards were issued out of a total
membership of some 50,000 for the five supporters clubs
involved. I am told however that of the 25,000 issued, the vast
majority were not to official supporters but to others who wished
to have the card because of the inducements offered.

8.   The scheme was in place just before the end of the 1988/89

                                                              /season
            19/10 '89 16121      S   31 20 761069   BRITCONS AMS NL         03




    season and could have been tested then. Government, in
    particular would have liked to see it introduced at matches in
    the last two weeks of that season but the football authorities
    opposed this because, they said, the football atmosphere at that
    time was highly charged. It was eventually agreed that the
    scheme should start at the beginning of the 1989/90 season.

    9.   Arranging of football fixtures for the season in the
    Netherlands is done partly by computer and partly manually. It
    was with some astonishment therefore that Government discovered,
    when the 88/89 fixtures were announced, that of the five clubs
^   involved in the schome, two were to be host to two of the others
    on the first week of the season and therefore also of the card
    experiment. Hardly surprisingly, the experimental scheme failed
    its first test. The view is however that had Den Haag FC not
    sold tickets in Amsterdam to non card holders for their match at
    home to Ajax and had the Mayor and the Police Commissioner of
    Utrecht not decided that the 700 to 1,000 supporters of
    Feijenoord who had turned up without tickets should nevertheless
    be admitted to the match, the scheme might have stood a chance,
    perhaps with some modification. A further surprise for the
    authorities was that the supporters of opposing teams joined
    forces, at least temporarily, to defeat the scheme by various
    ticket purchase mechanisms, and in demonstrating.

    10. A recent opinion pell showed that 72% of the general public
    were in favour of the scheme. The football clubs were reluctant
    participants and in the event at least one (FC The Hague) defied
    the rules. The head of Security of the KNVB told me that the
    club will be disciplined. The KNVB are also in favour of the
    schcme in that it is necessary to curb hooliganism. The majority
    of supporters themselves are not in favour of the scheme, as
    cvidcnced by the level of application for cards (see para 7
    above).

    11. Following the shelving of the scheme (para 5 of our tel 333
    refers) the 17 Mayors met on 18 August. They could not agree to
    the scheme continuing, even with modifications, nor could they
    agree on what might take its place.

    12. The Minister has now announced that he will shortly convene
    a meeting of the National Consultative body on Football
    Hooliganism; he added that it was possible that the pass scheme
    would be revived in an improved form. The Government, he said,
    had long favoured a compulsary card for all football supporters.


                                                                      /It
        19/10 ’89 16122       S   31 28 761869   BRITCONS AMS NL




It is thought, however, that this later idea could encounter
ficrcc opposition from the general public because of the Nazi
occupation connotations of compulsary identity documents. Many
agree too that such a scheme would be so expensive (one figure
mentioned is Dfl 100 million) that more effective control would
be possible more cheaply with for example more video cameras and
extra policing.

12. The KNVB are not in favour of a national scheme on the
grounds inter alia that there would be an even greater risk of
violence outside stadiums as fans were kept waiting to be
processed through the turnstiles.

13. I am told that the next round of meetings with Mayors will
take place in November and I will report further developments as
they occur.




                          George Dickson




cc: P J Sullivan, Esq
    The Hague
         (ivooma                  n    .
                                      Yt5Vw   S U 4 j ^ <wecu>
                                      oj-   fCLC» ""      ■fo'V^ jjcM r
                                      'PvJp . M.OCvxV-kcL*'


               With the Compliment
                        of
                    61 DIVISION
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate                     (yoM/     ~       ^r)<W £W^>P
inwnnw
LONDON                                                   J
SW1H 9AT
Telephone 01 273
