1-3.JS


From:        J L Goddard                       cc:   Mr Cogbill
             F8 Division                             Mrs Lee
             Ext. 3314                               Mr Hopley
                                                     Miss Wooldridge
             4 March 1991
                                                     Ms
                                                     Mr Rex
                                                        Ev^jrfSV^




Mr Clavton



B I I ^ O N TAYLOR OFFENCES:   DRAFT INSTRUCTIONS


Thank you for your minute of 1 March.


2.      I agree with your suggestions for revising the first two
paragraphs of the draft instructions.


3.      As to paragraph 3.8 of the draft instructions, I would be
content that the last two sentences should be replaced by the
form of words you now propose provided that after "silly"
", albeit offensive," is inserted.       This makes the point about
the non-applicability of section 18 and the point that the
throwing of bananas is, none the less, offensive.


4.   As respects suggestion 9, I have no further commentss.


5.   As to paragraph 3.21, I am glad that you will omit the
words "those instructing Counsel are aware that".       I remain of
the view that "at times" should replace "well".


6.      As to the proposal in paragraph 3 of my note of
26 January, I see that the scenario you envisage could be
successful in deceiving a court.       However, like you, I think
that such success would be the exception rather than the rule.
As to there being no intended recipient, I did indeed intend
the consequence:     that the person indiscriminately throwing an




                                                                       /
object without an intended recipient would be committing an
offence.   This, I believe, is the intention behind Taylor's
(and Popplewell1s ) recommendations.      As to the defence you
canvassed in your minute of 22 February, I agree with you that
this introduces unwelcome uncertainty.       I would be content for
you to put to Counsel all three possibilities, pointing out
the drawbacks in each, and suggesting, if you agree, that our
preference is for the line I suggested in paragraph 3 of my
note of 26 January.


7.   You will have seen from Mr Dent's minute of 28 February,
copied to you, that Standing Committee C could begin
consideration of Sir John Wheeler's Bill at the beginning of
M a ^ ^ i f the Bill was not transferred to another Committee's
queue.


8.   I look forward to receiving a copy of the instructions
sent to Counsel.




                           j, L GODDARD



                           J L GODDARD
