                                SECURITY REPORT
                         Illegal Entries on Match Days


The Association has long been concerned at the number of illegal entries
to football grounds on match days resulting in risk of injuries or deaths
because of overcrowding and loss of revenue to clubs. Therefore, in 1988
a request was made to the Football Trust for a grant to set up a "flying
squad" of security officers to attend and carry out security checks. The
Football Trust kindly gave a grant of £20,000.00.

All League clubs were notified of the scheme and the first check was carried
out on Saturday, 3rd December. The undemoted is a list of matches attended
by the squad

16   Premier Division matches
 9   First Division matches    (2 cancelled because of weather)
 1   Second Division match
 4   Scottish Cup - Semi-Finals/Final
 4   Full Internationals
 1   "Under 16" International

The following used the services of the squad

9 Premier Division Clubs
5 First Division Clubs
1 Second Division Club

To maintain confidentiality club names are not divulged. Matches under      the
auspices of the Association at HampdenPark are shown in some detail.

Each club is given a written report of    the security checks.    Any actions
against club employees is a matter for    the clubs.

Second Division

One match checked.

Only three turnstiles were checked, out of 6 open, and the result was:-

One correct ie. 174
2 showed meter counts of 94 and 99 against tally checks of 135 and 158 respectively

The attendance was approximately 600.


First Division

Seven matches checked.

Four or five turnstiles were checked at each of these matches and the discrepancies
were:-

32, 90, 95, 114, 81, 66 and 123.

The attendances at these matches ranged from 2,000 to 6,000.
\
                                                -   2
                                                    -




       Premier Division and Scottish Cup Semi-Finals outwith Hampden Park

       Eighteen matches checked.


       w e r e : ? eight turnstiles were checked at each of these matches and the discrepancies


       80, 14, 31, 40, 50, 42, 39, 82, 49, 22 and 62.

      On some occasions clubs did not reveal their meter counts to me therefore
      losses cannot be shown.

      Generally Premier Division clubs have better turnstile supervision althoueh
      on occasions I formed the opinion that some clubs warned the t u r ^ t U e ^ S n d a n t s
      that an Association check was taking place that day. This is unfortunate
      as a covert check would be of more value to the club.

      Scottish Cup/Internationals - Hampden Park


      S a 2 e '^ S i s aCts S 5   S S f 12 secIf i; ty           a t Harpden P ai* fo r A ssociation/
                       •      5 these ^      used for tally count duties and six for

•     internal supervision of sections including meter counts.



     returns.
                        tid<ets are physically counted and checked against the attendants'
                 Cash is similarly checked.

     The undemoted matches were played at Hanpden Paric:-
     08.03.89    Scotland v. France                          Attendance    57,266
     16.04.89    Celtic v. Hibernian                                  II
                                                                           42,153
                 Scottish Cup Semi-Final

     26.04.89    Scotland v. Cyprus                                   II
                                                                           50,691
     20.05.89    Celtic v. Rangers                                    II
                                                                           72,073
                 Scottish Cup Final

     25.05.89    Scotland v. England                                 II
                                                                           60,282
    30.05.89     Scotland v. Chile                                   II
                                                                            7,706
    24.06.89     Scotland v. Saudi Arabia                            II
                                                                           47,674
                 "Under 16" Final


    Scotland v. France


    7° ?iSf l ? T Ci6S *n the tally/meter counts.        However, seven attendants were
    / to 18 tickets short in their returns.

    Celtic v. Hibernian - Semi-Final                             1

    A total of 22 shortages in the tally/meter counts and two attendants were
    11 tickets short in their returns.
                                 -   3
                                     -




Scotland v. Cyprus

A total of 36 shortages in the tally/meter counts and 7 attendantswere
8 to 15 tickets short in their returns.

Celtic v. Rangers

A total of 31 shortages in the tally/meter counts. Eleven attendants were
7 to 15 tickets short and one was 42 short in their returns.

Scotland v. England

No discrepancies in tally/meter counts.   Six attendants were 7 to 12 tickets
short in their returns.

Scotland v. Chile

Only 4 shortages in the tally/meter counts and 2 attendants short of the
cash equivalent of 7 and 13 tickets.

Scotland v. Saudi Arabia

No discrepancies in tally/me ter counts. Nine attendants were short, of
the cash equivalent of 7 to 10 tickets and one short of 21.


Turnstile attendants found to be 7 or more short in their returns and unable
to give a satisfactory explanation are dismissed.

Although every match at Hampden Park shows some shortages there is an undoubted
improvement in illegal entries through the turnstiles and in my opinion
illegal entries through the 46 exit gates/doors have been eliminated.



Methods of Illegal Entry/Fraud

The following is a surrmary of methods of illegal entry and other frauds
which have come to our notice during the checks.

1) 2 for Is - ie. two through on one click of the turnstile. This is common \j
     both in the old style and new, floor to ceiling , turnstiles.

2) jump overs - very common at popular matches, particularly when it is
     all ticket and a sell out.

3) lift overs - about 50% of children under 10 years are lifted over by       u
     their fathers. Females and elderly persons are occasionally lifted
     over.

4) Boys/OAP gate - there is constant misuse of this facility with attendants
     not questioning ages.

5) recycling of season tickets - unusual and only seen at one club.   Steps     v
     have now been taken to stop it.
                                       _   4
                                           _




  6) recycling of tickets - this is operated by the turnstile attendant in
       collusion with a steward/supervisor or a friend entering legitimately
       and picking up tickets. These tickets are then passed outside. This
       is common at grounds that probably do not carry out after match ticket
       counts.

  7) through exit gates   - usually by prior arrangement persons arrive at
       an exit gate and   are acinitted. Payment is sometimes made in a public
       house earlier in   the day or at the gate. Mary hundreds can enter
       by this method.    Most clubs have now taken action to eliminate this
       fraud.

 8) through disabled entrance - many fit and healthy persons use this method.

 9) forged tickets - prevalent at grounds where tickets are in short supply
      and not difficult to forge or copy.

10) collusion - collusion between turnstile attendants and meter readers
      resulting in false returns.

11) interfering with turnstile meters - attendants can stop,usually in the
      older turnstiles, meters from registering.


The subject of illegal entries has been discussed frequently with the police
during the past two years. As a result they are now more aware of the problem
and have taken the necessary steps to improve the vetting procedures of
supporters entering grounds.


Children Lifted Over

Some clubs have a tradition of allowing children, usually five and under,
to be lifted over and enter free of charge. Although this is innocuous
on most occasions, club officials should be aware that in the event of overcrowding
where injuries or deaths occur, they could face criminal charges.

I recommend that specific written instructions are given to all turnstile
attendants and gate stewards laying down their responsibilities in relation
to entry to the ground.


Conclusion

Although it is difficult to quantify the nunber of illegal entries there
is no doubt that the checks have proved successful. Clubs are now aware
of some of their security weaknesses and turnstile attendants/stewards know
that periodic checks are carried out.

Finance is available to continue the scheme for at least the first half
of next season and hopefully all clubs will seek our assistance.




David McLaren,
SECURITY ADVISER.
