E.R.
  From: Mrs P A Lee
        I Division                           .tK .            Ms P Edwards
                                                              Mr Addison
                                                                                     <sj               U/a
        Ext. 3268                                             Mr Bolton
        5th July 1990                                         Mr Cogbill
                                                     1/9      Ms A M Edwards
                                                              Mr Fulton
                                                              Miss Goose
                                                              Mr Grant
                                                              Mr Harnett
                                                              Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                                              Mr McCleland, NIO


                                                                            gsi$k.   L *\-j     |u o

  Mr Goddard                                                             /I*.


  TAYLOR REPORT


  I am sorry to be late in replying to your minute of 22 June.
  This minute merely records the points I made in discussion
  with Mr Rhodes in I Division. We are somewhat uneasy about
  the Taylor Report recommendations; if we were starting to
  address the problem of offensively racialist chanting I do not
  think we would want to start from here! But we recognise your
  political imperatives, and offer these comments in the hope
  that, though they may not address quite the points on which
  you seek views, some of our thinking may be helpful.


, 2. On the choice between a catch-all offence and the Taylor
  proposal for specific offences to act as a deterrent, we are
                  jO r - o V ' / I   \
 ambivalent, providing that someone has "chanted" "racialist"
 abuse> as opposed to shouting something offensive in a crowd
 most of which is chanting, or shouting racialist taunts, may
  be difficult. Perhaps you need an offence which is more
p broadly expressed e.g. "expression of provocative abuse,                                             OJ
^ including racialist and obscene abuse, whether by chanting,                        4     ii   A
  taunting, or other means of crowd expression.

                                                      CtA I

                                         t    'U
                                               ■
    3. We are also fairly unhappy about the idea of legislating to
    tackle the problem only at football grounds. Does one never
^   get racialist shouting/chanting from fans awaiting adission to
    a football ground, or roaming home afterwards? And is there a
    risk that the problem might be displaced to other sports?

    4. We should feel better able to develop a view on this
    proposal if we knew more about how the police use sections
    4 and especially 5 of the Public Order Act to handle incidents
    of racial abuse or harassment, whether amounting to incitement
    of racial hatred (which the police evidently find a
    troublesome offence to prove) or such that they cause fear or
    se^e^le distress. As you know, ACPO were not helpful in their
    response to our questions about Part III, and I gather you
    have little information on Part I. If you are planning to
    make further enquiries about the way these provisions are used
    by the police, I suggest you enquire explicitly about their
    use in a racial context.


    5. Although as you say it may not be easy to show that there
    is a victim when a football crowd chants racial abuse, the
    natural place to have a prohibition of racial chanting would
    be through a widening of one of these sections. Racial
    chanting surely takes place as a rule when there is a black or
    asian player on the field or group in the crowd who may be
    caused distress. Or, if the police are good witnesses, could
    not they be held to feel some distress?  Chanting is
    certainly apt to escalate into other sorts of trouble
    including violence.   An advantage of approaching the problem
    in thiT^wray- would be that it would catch similar activities
    outside a football ground or even cricket matches 1 One might
    merely add words to ensure that the definition of behaviour
    (section 4) or disorderly behaviour (section 5) included
    chanting taunting etc. of a racialist, obscene or other
    strongly provoking nature.
         6. We are very much aware that offenses with a 'race' flavour
         may be seen by the police as "difficult" so that they prefer
         to use an offence without any over tones of race. If the aim
         is to obtain as many convictions as possible, an offence which
         did not mention 'race' and require the racialist intent/words
.   1\
         to be proved could be more successful. But against this it is
    t
         racialist chanting which is a major problem and it would be
         unthinkable, as Miss Edwards says, to try to tackle any of
         these football problems without specifically tackling it, if
         only as a deterrent.


         7    come down in favour of an offence which mentions
         racialist chanting abuse etc, but is widely enough drafted to
         get those who chant in a trouble making way without proving
         that what they said~was racially* offensive.




                                           MRS P A LEE
