                        RESTRICTED AND PERSONAL




'roK;: Sir      Live Whitmore
             January 1SS0                          cc   Ms   Snow
                                                        Ms   Craig
                                                        Ms   Harrison
                                                        Ms   Spencer
                                                        Mr   Moriarty
                                                        Mr   Hammond
                                                        Mr   Chilcot
                                                        Mr   Turney
                                                        Mr   Mower
                                                        Mr   Bolton _ _
                                                        Mr   Goddard g e     IJ?^(
                                                        Mr   Gilbert     3°f o
                                                        Mr   Godfrey
                                                        Mr   Taylor



Mr Walters



TAYLOR REPORT: HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT

I have seen the re-draft of the Home Secretary's Statement
which Mr Turney circulated earlier today.

I offer the attached revision of the closing passage.

On a point of detail, I think that "a leadership" at the
bottom of page 2 should be "the leadership".




                                           JrfM    *




                         RESTRICTED AND PERSONAL
DRAFT




I now come to the proposed Football Membership Scheme.
Lord Justice Taylor examined the Invitation to Tender for a
scheme which was issued by the consultants employed by the
football authorities.   He came to the conclusion that he could
not support a scheme of that kind because he did not believe
the technology would work well enough to avoid the danger of
congestion and disorder.    Instead he proposes the measures to
which I have referred.
                                              >


The Government have decided in the ligfrt of his advice not to
proceed with the establishment of a Football Membership
Authority.   Instead we propose to follow his strategy of
combining certain measures aimed directly at hooligans
together with progress towards all-seating,       improved
accommodation, better facilities, improved arrangements for
crowd control and better training of police and stewards,
which Lord Justice Taylor believes give the best chance of
eliminating or minimising football hooliganism.


In the meantime Part I of the Football Spectators Act will
remain on the statute book and the practical concerns
expressed by Lord Justice Taylor about the type of scheme
envisaged in the Invitation to Tender will be fully explored
in the light of the available advice, including that from the
specialist companies who responded to the Invitation to
Tender.


If hooliganism is not defeated by the alternative strategy
proposed in the Report and if at some future time a workable
membership scheme can be produced, we will then be in a
position to come back to the House and seek the approval of
the House for the scheme.
The right course now is to implement Part II of the Act and to
give effect to Lord Justice Taylor's proposals in the way I
have indicated.   Mr Speaker, we are giving the industry and
the clubs a final opportunity   to put themselves in order.
The public will not forgive them if they do not now act.
