MICHAEL THOMAS SAVOURY




Police Constable 2717




El Hackenthorpe




I commenced duty at 0830 on Saturday 15 April 1989 at El, Hackenthorpe,

where I joined colleagues to form Serial 13, under the direct command of

Police Sergeant 2001 Burman.      We arrived as a serial at Hillsborough

Football Ground at 0930 and attended the general briefing at 1000 hours

given by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.      Meal times for our serial

was set at 1500 hours and we were provided with a snack meal immediately

following briefing.

We made our way to the West Stand to take up our designated positions at

1115 in plenty of time before the opening of the ground to the public at

1200 noon.

Together with Police Constable 10 Mercer, I went to Gangway U in the

West Stand at the Leppings Lane end.      Our position was to the left of

 the goal when looking at the pitch, almost directly above gate 5 in the

 perimeter fence.

 Our duties were to:

 1)   Stop fans climbing over the fence separating the north end of the

      stand from the raised section of terracing (overlooking gates 6 and

      7 in the perimeter fence)

 2)   Prevent fans from throwing items from the stand on to the pitch, or
                               -    2   -




     on to fans below.

3)   Supervise the use of the emergency gate situated at the front corner

     of the North end of the West Stand.           (above gate 6 in the perimeter

     fence).     Two stewards were also near to the gate (one in training).

At this time (and up to phase two) there were only eleven officers

(Serial 13 consisted of 12 officers, plus Sergeant, but it was depleted

by one due to illness) in the West Stand, which has a capacity of about

three thousand five hundred.            At phase two, we were to be relieved by

Serial 16 to go for meal (three o'clock).

The times listed hereafter are as accurate as I can make them, to the

best of my recollection of the events which occurred, but they are

approximations only.

1200    -   Ground opened to the public.

1345    _   Large numbers of Nottingham Forest supporters in their

               allocated enclosures , but only low numbers of Liverpool

               supporters, notably women and families.

 14^0   -      Still relatively low numbers of Liverpool supporters in

               ground.

        —   Visited by Sergeant Burman, who I had not seen since taking up

               position at 1115 *       Comment passed by me to him about the low

               numbers now entering the stand.        Central terracing (rear of

               goal) and stand now substantially filled with supporters.

               North and South ends of terracing relatively empty.        Raised

               area of terracing to the North of the West Stand nearly full.

               Large numbers of youths congregating near to the dividing
                        -   3   -




       fence, apparently with the intention of* climbing over.

       Several aborted attempts made.   Complaints made by female

       members of the crowd in that section of youths urinating in

       the enclosure.   Several youths seen at the rear of the raised

       terracing climbing on to the fencing above the rear entrance

       tunnel and removing the barbed wire.   Moving through the

       crowds at this time, in an effort   to stop those wishing to

       climb over the fence, it was obvious that   large numbers had

       been drinking, some heavily.

       Looking down on to the terracing, it was obvious that the

       centre sections were overcrowded.   Persons were climbing over

       the fencing separating the pen at the rear of the right hand

       side of the goal looking from the stand, to the pen on the

       left hand side of the goal.    This appears to be shown

       incorrectly on the plan provided.    The double row of fencing

       which separates pens 4 and 5 form a gangway from the entrance

        tunnel to a gate in the perimeter fence.

        Officers were standing on the perimeter track supervising

        those fans climbing and preventing them from climbing over

        on to the track.

1501    Fans began climbing over on to the perimeter track and then

        the gate in the pen behind the goal was opened, the fans were

        allowed to walk along the perimeter track and re-enter the

        terracing via gate 6 as shown on plan, which is directly

        below gangway U.
                                    -   4   -




1502    -       Crowd in West Stand stood up.

Ref Y

1503    -       I went to barrier with Police Constable Mercer and looked down

                on the terracing.       I could see fans surging forward in the

                two pens behind the goal.       Fans were now climbing over the

                perimeter fence on to the track, and over the fence separating

                the two pens (single fence).        Large numbers of fans seemed to

                be crushed into the corners of those pens.

1504    -       Obvious that persons were       being crushed at this time, and fans

                were being assisted over the fence by Police Officers.

1505    -       Heavy surge of spectators       towards the front of the terrace,

                but instead of the gap left in the crowd when fans sway

                 forward, the space was immediately filled by other fans.         It

                was now obvious that there were serious problems in the pens,

                 and more and more fans were spilling over the fences and on

                 to the pitch.   Looking at them it was obvious that some were

                 injured.   More Police began to help at the fences and

                 supporters in the stand were now helping those below up into

                 the stand over the front of the balcony.

1506    -       Bolt croppers were requested and request acknowledged.

                 Ambulance requested and acknowledged.       Large numbers of

                 spectators walking and being carried on to the pitch, some

                 lying still.    Numerous officers now giving first aid.

 1510       -   Further request for bolt croppers.        Non forthcoming and fence

                 torn down by hand by Police and spectators.
                             -   5   -




1511    - On to food bar area at rear of stand (upper level).       Assist

          with injured passed up from terracing.       Three placed in

          recovery position, breathing but unconscious.        Ambulance

          requested by me.

          Assistance obtained from medically trained persons in crowd

          to stay with injured until arrival of ambulance.        Approached

          by Doctor and together with Police Constable 10, guided him

          down behind the Police box and made a path through the crowd

          and on to the pitch.       Returned to food bar area.

Ref Z

1519      Approached by Inspector Grace and told to join him in the

          stand to prevent fans causing damage.        On arrival saw that

          fans were tearing hoardings down to use as stretchers.           No

          action taken.

1522    - Return to food bar area.       Injured now removed to ambulance.

          Joined by Police Constable 928 Parkin.        Took up position at
          7/ir            f/r/f&i*- sovi* a*-    y vk-v
          one of— th e a±-oles.    Approached one by one, literally hundreds

          of fans very distressed and needing to know what to do.           All

           they wanted was to be told what to do, as they were incapable

           of making decisions themselves.       Advised them to leave ground

           quietly and make their way home.

           On looking around the bar area I noticed a heap of discarded

           tabbards which stewards had been wearing.       On purposefully

           looking around the stand I realised that there were no

           stewards in sight.
                            -   6   -




       Official announcement of match abandoned.           Maintained station

       supervising fans leaving ground.           Large numbers in a

       truculent and abusive mood, seemingly caused by frustration.

       Mental note that it wouldn't take much to provoke a major

       public order incident.

????   West Stand cleared and serial reformed.           Stand searched for

       items left behind.       Negative result.      During this time I

       noticed two stewards taking tabbards from under coats and

       putting them on again.           I spoke to the Chief Steward, Mr Basil

       Jones and told him what I had seen, he replied, "What do you

       expect them to do if they're going to get thumped".             Heard

       radio message regarding number of places available in

       mortuaries and realised full scale of catastrophe.           Obtained

       details of remaining fans for purposes of taking statements.

????   Return to gymnasium for re-deployment and placed on stand-by

       in North Stand.

       During the time span of the disaster unfolding, I closely

       monitored radio traffic.           The only messages I heard were those

       requesting assistance of one sort or another and where

       appropriate, their acknowledgements.

1930   Off duty El.
