INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370



G I S Hortop Esq
Chief Executive/Secretary
Millwall FC
The Den
Cold Blow Lane                             Date
New Cross
LONDON
SE14 5RH                                     13 September 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


We spoke on the telephone the other day about Lord Justice
Taylor's plans to visit football matches during Part II of his
Inquiry. I mentioned that Lord Justice Taylor thought he would
like to visit Millwall on 23 September to see your match against
Sheffield Wednesday.

As I mentioned, Lord Justice Taylor would like to see the
arrangements made before the match for the arrival of fans,
through the turnstiles and on to the viewing areas. He would
like to watch some of the match (perhaps the first half) from the
terraces. He would like to have a briefing from Club officials
and the police about the arrangements for the safety and control
of the crowd. He would, of course, also like to have the
opportunity to meet your Directors and would be happy to receive
hospitality from them if they felt they would like to offer it to
him.

Lord Justice Taylor will be accompanied either by me or by my
assistant, Mr Sweet.

Perhaps you could let us know what time might be convenient to
arrive, and where we should come.  If car parking passes are
needed, perhaps you could kindly let us have two. , I will be in
touch nearer the time to confirm the arrangements, but please do
not hesitate to get in touch in the meantime if any questions
arise.
We look forward to meeting you and your colleagues on 23
September.                             ^
                                       /
                                       LCTV'tA-y £   \\jiy
                                                         y

                                            RlMWuau.
                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
