                                                    QUBBN ANNE'S OATB LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                        0 3 JAN 1997

David Moores Esq
Chairman
Liverpool Football Club          0~             OX
Anfield Road
LIVERPOOL                             Hv
L4 0TH
                                      Mv5
                                      K / CffO^ycjtk
                                      'tor {^sO<.
                                      HAf UkaA/ic^




Thank you very much for your letter of 30 December about your meeting with
the Hillsborough Family Support Group in which you suggested that there should
be an official review of the outstanding issues that there seem to be in respect
of the Hillsborough disaster.

In the House of Commons on 17 December, I gave an undertaking to consider
carefully the representations that have been made to reopen the inquiry. I
emphasised that I would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly: I
would need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do so.

I explained that in coming to a decision, I would consider whether there is any
new evidence, and if so, whether that evidence appeared to be of such
significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either
the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been
different.

The television programme "Hillsborough" made a specific allegation that a video
camera trained on the central enclosure was working when the Taylor inquiry
was told that this was not the cfese. It was further suggested that this film
might have represented vital evidence. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
has informed me that both the video tape and the transcript of that tape were
made available to the Taylor inquiry. This is a matter that I have promised to
look into. I have specifically asked that South Yorkshire should provide me with
a copy of this videotape.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to provide me with
a detailed report of all the points raised by the programme. I will consider his
report carefully.

 I am pleased that the families to whom you have spoken felt that the
documentary provided some comfort by showing what they had suffered but I
fear that there may remain matters about which we will never be certain. In a
tragedy of such magnitude, I feel it is sadly inevitable, though deeply distressing
for the families, that there will be confusion about some aspects of what
occurred. One factor which I must consider is whether a further inquiry, if it
were to take place, would be able to provide greater certainty about what
happened than we have at present.

I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as I have been
able to consider all those issues. Meanwhile, if you have further meetings with
the families, I hope that you will pass on to them the assurance that my
thoughts are with them and that I will consider all the issues most carefully.

^         \£ k




                                              CnH /



                              MICHAEL (HOWARD
