                                                     —          2 1 APR 1CS3
                                                                  t ^ l o 113 3




From: R R G Watts                                    cc       Miss Adams
      G1 Division                                             Ms Craig
      (2764)                                                  Mr Yates
      19 April 1989                                           Mr Moriarty
                                                              Mr Turney
                                                              Mri. Mower
                                                                   nuwci  y
                                                            ^yifr Goddard/
                                                              Mr Mould
                                                              Mr Stickley, DOW
                                                              Mr Liddington

Mr Mawer


H I L LS B OR O UG H - POSSIBLE INTERIM SAFETY MEASU RE S


We have been considering whether there is any action w h i c h the
Go ve rnment might sensibly take, in advance of the report of the
Taylor inquiry, on the question w hether pitch perimeter fences
should be removed immediately or remain in place at least for
the time being, and on any other particular safety issues.

2.  A note setting out the considerations wh i c h arise on pitch
perimeter fences is attached.    The nub of the issue is that on
the one hand w e do not want to pre-empt Lord Justice Taylor's
report more than is essential: the decision to go ahead w ith the
concept of all seated accommodation (and proceed wit h the
Football Spectators Bill) already limits his room for
manoeuvre.  If w e w ere to act on perimter fences, pressures to
act on other issues now would grow (see next paragraph).     On the
other hand, wou l d the Government consider it right to stand firm
on allowing perimeter fences to remain if there wer e another
accident, however minor, involving crushing against the
perimeter fence, before the end of the present football season?
If not, it might be better to act now.

3.      One other possible interim measure has come to the fore in
the press today, and w e have received enquiries from DOE both
y e s t e r d a y and today about it. This is whether the Home Office
should immediately advise local authorities to impose lower
limits on the m a x i m u m number of spectators than those already in
opera t io n in the safety certificates for football grounds.
Ap ar t fro m the pro bl e m of further pre-empting the Taylor
inquiry, the Home Office Guide on safety already recommends a
m a x i m u m crowd density level.  There is no evidence that this is
unsafe provided the advice recommended in the guide is adhered
to in full.        Moreover, the problem is one of distribution of
spectators; reducing the overall capacity of a terrace would not
automatically reduce the crowd density in a specific enclosure.

4.  W e have concluded that w e do not have a basis on wh i ch to
recommend that the Government should immediately encourage the
removal of perimeter fences or act on other safety issues.
Nevertheless, w e think that the Home Secretary will want to
consider the point.   If he wanted to take some action now we
would put forward proposals for consideration.




                             R R G WATTS
                                                       ANNEX




P I T CH P E RI M ET E R FENCES




1.   There is no legal requirement to instal pitch perimeter
fences.       Th e re is guidance in the Home Office Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds advocating such fences for crowd control purposes
(paras 214-6,       209,   186).     It is likely that the provision of
such a fence is in some cases, but not all,            a requirement of the
local authority safety certificate.


2.    If it w er e decided that the Government should now encourage
their immediate removal,            fresh advice could be given by means of
a Hom e O f f ic e circular to local authorities,       in effect amending
the advice in the Guide.


3.   There are other considerations:
       (i)      Some football clubs,       according to press reports, have
                already decided urgently to remove pitch perimeter
                fences;    and some are consulting the local authority
                who issued the safety certificate.           So the issue is
                already a live, public one wh ic h does not necessarily
                call for Government intervention.           On the other hand,
                other clubs are reported to have said that they could
                not remove the fences because their provision is a
                condition of the safety certificate.           T h e y m a y or may
                not want to keep the fences; their purported ground
                for doing so rest on the certificate requirement,              and
                puts the ball back into the local authority's,             and at
                one remove,       the Government's court.


       (ii)     In the absence of advice from the Taylor inquiry, we
                do not have a sound basis for issuing fresh advice.
             The current football season will be over by the end
             of May.    E ven if the Lord Justice Taylor wer e to give
             interim advice on pitch perimeter fences, he could
             hardly do so before then, given that his ver y first
             task must be to establish the facts of the accident.


     (iii) The immediate removal of the perimeter fences,
             installed for crowd control purposes, could
             conceivably give rise to disorder in the ground and
             invasion of the pitch.      But is the risk of this
             sufficient to justify not removing the possibility of
             another accident on the Hillsborough lines?


      (iv)   If w e w ere to   take action on pitch perimeter fences
             in advance of     the Taylor report, how could w e refuse
             to take other     steps whi c h would inhibit the inquiry
             (eg measures to restrict crowds building up outside
             grounds, or to reduce the number of spectators on
             terraces)?


Conclusion

4.   Because of the need to avoid so far as possible pre-empting
the Taylor inquiry,     and because of the need to have all aspects
of crowd safety and crowd control looked at together instead of
piecemeal, w e conclude that the Government should not take
separate action on pitch perimeter fences in advance of Taylor.
T he r e is a risk of a further accident involving crushing against
the fences; but encouragement to remove the fences,        in the
absence of clear advice on the issue from the Taylor inquiry,
wo ul d lead to increased risk to safety from hooliganism.
