                                                    cc      Sarah Paul
From: K P Wallace
      Emergency Planning Division
      Room 659A QAG

       ©       0171-273-3215

       22 October, 1997



Mr C F I^one                    j a**
Hillsborough Scrutiny

W ORK CONDUCTED BY Prof SCRATON FOR EPD

Your memo of 17 October 1997 refers.

2.      As requested, I attach a copy of the report on the work commissioned
by the Emergency Planning Division (EPD) from Prof Scraton of Edge Hill
University College (EHUC). I think it would be helpful if I were to explain
briefly the functions of EPD and hence the reasons for commissioning this
research.

3.      The Home Office Emergency Planning Division is responsible for a
range of civil protection policies covering local civil protection in England
and Wales, Central Government arrangements including some aspects of
Home Defence, and international policy on behalf of HMG. We are
currently in the final stages of formulating a new strategy for Home Office
civil protection policy, the overall objective of which is:

    To improve community safety and the protection of the public by enabling
    effective multi-agency arrangementsfor the management ofand response to
    thefull spectrum of disasters.

4.      This will be achieved by enhancing arrangements both at Central
Government and at local level, and also by improving the quality of national
civil protection by promoting HM G’s interests in this field at an
international level. We do this in a number of ways. We provides grant to
local authorities to assist with their civil protection activities and our
Emergency Planning College at Easingwold promotes good practice in
emergency preparedness through a comprehensive, multi-disciplinary
programme of residential seminars and workshops. We also issue advice and
guidance on best practice to the civil protection community by means of
various publications including Dealing with Disaster which is seen as the
seminal work in this field. The third edition has just been published and I
enclose a copy.
5.     In addition, most of the functions for co-ordinating Central
Government arrangements in response to a disaster previously discharged by
the Cabinet Office have recently been transferred to EPD. Clearly, this will
further enable EPD to play a pivotal role in improving emergency response
capabilities across Central Government.

6.      In support of civil protection policy development, we commissioned
the above work by Prof Scraton. This work evolved from his initial
research into the aftermath of the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster,
which identified significant issues which require further work. These include
processes for the identification and presentation of the dead, communication
systems, inter-agency conflict, and lack of appropriate crisis support for the
bereaved, survivors and witnesses during the immediate aftermath of a
disaster.

7.     The work commissioned by EPD addresses these issues and compares
and contrasts in particular the immediate aftermath of 3 disasters, i.e.
Lockerbie/Flight 103, Hillsborough and the Marchioness. The research
makes use of official reports, agency statements and in-depth interviews with
the bereaved, survivors and agency personnel.

8.      The findings of the research raise a range of complex and inter-related
issues concerning the organisational and administrative responses to the
immediate aftermath of disasters. In particular, they demonstrate that the
needs of the bereaved, survivors and rescuers, are often neglected and that
this then adds significantly to the personal trauma already present.

9.      EPD are giving careful consideration to the recommendations in the
context of our new strategy. We believe the principle findings of this report
will assist in our on-going efforts to improve inter-agency co-operation and
co-ordination, and hence to facilitate appropriate responses to the needs of
those caught up in disasters.




K P Wallace
