       HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT DEBATE : FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998

                               INDEX

FLAG 1      SPEECH

FLAG 2      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY

FLAG 3      Q & A BRIEFING FOR STATEMENT: GENERAL

FLAG 4      Q & A: VIDEO EVIDENCE

FLAG 5      Q & A: AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

FLAG 6      Q & A: INQUESTS & DISASTERS: GENERAL

FLAG 7      Q & A: INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

FLAG 8      Q & A: SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

FLAG 9      Q & A: HILLSBOROUGH DRAMA & THE 10 UNRESOLVED QS'S

FLAG 10     Q & A;DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

FLAG 11     Q & A: WIDER ISSUES

FLAG 12     Q & A:POLICE DISCIPLINE

l=LAG 13    BACKGROUND

FLAG 14     DOCUMENTS

FLAG 15     DOCUMENTS PLACED IN HOUSE LIBRARIES

FLAG 16     PRESS NOTICE 29/1/98

FLAG 17     PRESS NOTICE 18/2/98

FLAG 18     LETTER MR HOWARTH/MR HICKS 4 /3/98

FLAG 19     NOTE OF MEETING WITH FAMILIES 7/3/98

FLAG 20     PRESS CUTS {INCLUDES LOCAL PRESS)

                      STATEMENT 18/ 2/98

                      STATEMENT 30/6/97

                      ADJOURNMENT DEBATE 17/12/96

   G 24              DISASTERS & INQUESTS WORKING GROUP

FLAG        TAYLOR REPORT
                    ADJOURNMENT DEBATE
                      FRIDAY, 8 MAY 1998
                        HILLSBOROUGH


Madam Speaker,


The disaster at Hillsborough stadium on 15 April 1989
was one of the most appalling events this country has
experienced since the war.


2.        Ninety-six people were killed - many of them


                                                            i




a trauma for the relatives and friends of those killed or
injured^aml-^or-^he-City'OTT^               deaths could
not be explained by some Act of God, by some event of
nature so unforeseen as to be beyond the culpability of

Speech:Hills8my
ShvteiiYie/i-f-
pt’jxM
any human being, instead, from the second that the
Leppings Lane gate was opened, (Everyone know that^
this was a disaster whose root was entirely human,
caused by the error, incompetence, complacency, or
worse, of people entrusted to secure the safety of those
who attend football matches.


4.    The Home secretary of the day, Douglas Hurd, was
therefore entirely right to establish just two days' later
     a full inquiry into the disaster, under one of the most
                               ^   • tv . t ’
senior and respected judges              ilabfe) Lord Taylor of
Gosforth.


5.    Lord Taylor's inquiry took oral evidence from 174
witnesses at public hearings during May and June 1989.
It considered many other statements and over 70 hours
of video evidence. | in his interim report published in
August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a
number of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to
a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he
concluded that "The main cause of the disaster was the
failure of police control".


The inquests


6.   inquests were held by the Coroner for south
Yorkshire to determine the statutory questions as to
     each of the deceased^wis^ and when and how he or
she died, in March 1991, after hearing the evidence of
around 200 witnesses, the inquest jury returned verdicts
of accidental death in respect of all the victims.


The criminal and disciplinary investigation


7.   There was also an investigation, conducted by west
Midlands Police and supervised by the Police Complaints
Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds
for criminal or disciplinary proceedings, a-         j***




                              3
8.   The Director of Public Prosecutions considered the
west Midlands report and took advice from Queen's
Counsel. The DPP's decision was that no-one should face
prosecution as a result of the events that day.      The
Police Complaints Authority, though, decided that Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray
                                                     n*jr
should face disciplinary charges of neglect of duty, ^in
November    1990,      Chief Superintendent   Duckenfield
retired from the force on the grounds of ill health
before disciplinary proceedings could be completed,
under police regulations, a discipline hearing cannot
proceed when a police officer retires.        The Police
Complaints Authority subsequently decided to withdraw
the charge against superintendent Murray because they
considered that it would have been unfair to pursue
what in effect was a joint charge, in the absence of the
more senior officer.


9.   Lord Taylor's inquiry and report was as thorough
and impartial as one would expect of such a great
judicial   figure.       His report   has   led   to   lasting
improvements in the safety of football grounds, in
crowd behaviour and control.


10. But there has been sustained criticism of both the
       t
coroners inquests, and above all of a police discipline
system so defective that no one was brought to book.


11. Concern that the inquests had not properly been
conducted led six of the bereaved families to seek a
judicial review [of-ther^n^jests!| Their application was
heard in 1993.        The Divisional court investigated the
matter     with      great thoroughness,    and   looked    in
particular at the 3.15 pm cut-off point, but it decided
there were no grounds for overturning the 1990
inquest's verdicts


12. However, for many of the families, their sense of
grievance only increased with the passage of time, and
they decided that more should be done to get at the
truth as they saw it of what had happened. (|With the
full co-operation of the Hillsborough Family support
Croup, the author, Jimmy McGovern, decided to prepare
a drama-documentary for Granada Television. Entitled
simply    "Hillsborough"    the    two    hour   programme
broadcast on 5 December 1996 presented a powerful
picture of the tragedy,      it suggested that there was
fresh    evidence   which    had    not    previously   been
considered which called into question the verdicts of
the inquests, and other decisions.


Madam speaker,


13. I declare an interest. For two years before I entered
this House in 1979 I worked on the staff of Granada's
World-in-Action. some of the people I knew then, like lan
McBride, helped put "Hillsborough" together. I knew and
know them to be journalists of great tenacity and
integrity.




                              6
14. Following the programme, my Hon Friend for
Liverpool Walton (Peter Kilfoyle) secured an adjournment
debate on 17 December 1996. I attended that debate,
and listened with care to what my predecessor, the Rt
Hon Gentleman for Folkestone and Hythe, said on
whether any inquiry should be re-opened. [And I know
that my Ministerial colleagues - my Rt Hon Friend, the
Member for Birkenhead, my Hon Friend for Liverpool
Walton, my Hon Friend for Wallasey, and my Hon Friend
for Liverpool wavertree have also followed this matter
                             H'T'Aj           v; i/u
closely— y                        v ,, - ,,          . //.r
            ^ J .A fT Y u .
                        j\s- 0~     Are*/-*'—, ,
15. Within days of coming into office I began a
thorough examination ((wfthiii-^ovemmen? as to whether
there should be any re-opening of this matter.


16. I thought that there w a s t h e        face oT~Tt^
sufficient to warrant a further investigation; but since
there had been a very thorough inquiry by Lord Taylor,
very lengthy inquests, and the west Midlands Police



                            7
o




©
inquiry, I decided that what in the first instance was
needed was a judicial scrutiny of the new claims to
determine whether these formal inquiries themselves
should be re-opened.


17. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as a senior Lord Justice of
the court of Appeal was eminently qualified to conduct
such an independent and thorough scrutiny of the
evidence. The terms of reference which I gave him were
very wide and enabled him to establish conclusively
whether any material evidence had been overlooked and
to recommend appropriate action.           His terms of
reference were:


    “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating
    to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15
    April 1989; which was not available:


    (a)   to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord
          Taylor; or
(b)   to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the
      Attorney      General    for   the      purpose   of
      discharging      their     respective     statutory
      responsibilities; or


(c)   to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police
      in relation to police disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
evidence not previously available is of such
significance as to justify establishment by the
Secretary of State for the Home Department of a
further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c)
to draw to their attention any evidence not
previously considered by them which may be
relevant to their respective duties; and to advise
whether there is any other action which should be
taken in the public interest."




                         9
18. I appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 30 June
1997. I published his report on 18 February 1998. I want
to place on record, again, my thanks to him for the
thoroughness,    and      impartiality,   with   which   he
conducted the scrutiny.


19. Anyone who has read the report through will, I
believe, be bound to come to the same conclusions as
did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, namely that a re-opening
of the inquiries would serve no purpose whatsoever.


20. Let me explain why that has to be so.


21. There is, first, the overriding issue of who was to
blame for the disaster.


22. if blame had not so far been allocated there would,
unquestionably be very good grounds for further
inquiry.




                              10
23. But we have known since Lord Taylor's report that
Sheffield City Council, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
and principally the South Yorkshire police were to
blame.


24. And far from resiling from this judgement - or
taking part in a "whitewash", as some have ludicrously
charged,     Lord Justice     Stuart-Smith     repeated      this
conclusion in the most            strident of terms,       indeed
(paragraph     100    p. 83 a?)     he    referred    to    Chief
Superintendent       Duckenfield     as   having     uttered    a
“disgraceful lie" about Gate C being opened by fans, and
he quoted with approval Lord Taylor's “stinging rebuke"
of South Yorkshire police for failing to concede that
they were in any respect at fault.


25. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also unearthed the fact
that some of the original statements made by individual
police officers had been edited by solicitors acting for
South Yorkshire police.      At appendix 6 he gives one
example. He considered whether these were however
covered by legal professional privilege, and so could not
be made public. He concluded that such privilege did
not apply,   in consequence, I have made every such
statement available to the Hillsborough Family Support
Group, and placed copies in the Library of the House.


26. The new claims put before Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
by the television programme and the Hillsborough
Family Support Group fell principally into two areas -
video evidence, and that relating to the 3.15 pm cut-off
point for the inquest.


27. Let me deal with these in turn.


28. First, there is the question of the missing video
tapes.   Two tapes were stolen.       Their theft - still
unsolved - has understandably heightened concerns
about a “cover-up", which were compounded by the
extra-ordinary and pervasive denial of responsibility by
South Yorkshire police at the time. But the crucial thing
about these tapes is that they contained no material
evidence not otherwise available.      One was entirely
blank as the camera concerned had been pointing at a
wall. The other showed turnstiles 9-16 at the Leppings
Lane end, next to turnstiles A-G, which themselves were
monitored by police CCTV camera 1. What happened on
these turnstiles was recorded on both the police tape
(TB2) and tape RJH2, which consists of camera output
viewed in the club control room.


29. counsel for the Hillsborough Family support Group
made five submissions in relations to video evidence on
behalf of the Group, listed at paragraph 33 on p. 20.


    (i)    That the police blamed their failure to see the
           overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings
           Lane end on camera 5 being defective when
           in fact it was not.
(ii)    That the evidence of the video tapes taken
        from camera 5 was deliberately suppressed
        and concealed.


(iii)   That the coroner deliberately failed properly
        to pursue the question of the “missing video
        evidence".


(iv)    That police officers gave deliberately false
        evidence that camera 5 was not working
        correctly.


(v)     That evidence from Mr Roger Houldsworth, a
        CCTV technician in the club control room, was
        suppressed. Mr Houldsworth, who featured
        so prominently in the Granada Television
        programme, claimed that he could see from
        monitoring police cameras that pens 3 and 4
        were overcrowded and that a dangerous




                         14
          situation was likely to arise because of the
          influx of fans through Gate c.


30. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith goes through each of the
submissions with great care.


31. He describes submission 1 - as “quite untenable"
(paragraph 61) as it was clear that the police could see
what was happening with their own eyes. He describes
submission 2 - as “completely unfounded" (paragraph 77)
as the vital tapes, TB1 and TB2, were at all times,
together with the schedule of their contents, available
to be seen by the legal representatives of the families.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith describes submission 3 -
“unfounded" (paragraph 79) as there never was any
missing footage from the relevant tapes; the two
missing club tapes are not relevant to the issue; and the
coroner dealt perfectly properly with the jury's request
to see the camera of footage of the terraces.         He
describes submission 4 - as “evidence wholly insufficient
to   warrant consideration of criminal proceedings
against any police officers" (paragraph 93) - noting that
even if the extent of any defect in what camera 5 was
showing was exaggerated by the police; it was of no
consequence, and Lord Taylor took no notice of it in his
considerations.


32. As to submission 5, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
emphasises that Mr Houldsworth's existence, and his
evidence, were known both to the Taylor inquiry and to
the Coroner, and that his evidence, even if correct,
would not have had any effect on the previous
proceedings.


33. Lord Justice stuart-smith also deals with the
credibility of Mr Houldsworth.    He said that he was
“unable to accept that his recollection of events now is
accurate",     and adds that “the importance of his
evidence has been exaggerated out of all proportion".
Madam speaker,


34. The second area of new claims related to the
inquests.


Cut-off point


35. At the start of the main inquest, the coroner ruled
that he would cut-off the inquiry at 3.15 pm, the time by
which he considered that all those who died had
received the injuries which caused their deaths.     This
cut-off point has long been a matter of controversy to
the families.


36. Lord Justice stuart-smith found no grounds to
conclude that the conduct of the inquests was flawed.
He says that the cut-off point did not limit the inquiry
undertaken by the inquest and it was never suggested
by the coroner that all those who died did so before
3.15 pm. The inquest jury heard evidence about those
                    v
f\
     t b i i b vTO—

         ji^ 6 \.       lt 3 0 _       /£: J

     _      A ^ k j ^' ^*X V
                                   '"^—
                                      (AXr-    f-'-J* (Tv'-V.
who died after arrival at hospital and of those who were
treated and recovered, it was only in relation to how
and by what means the deceased came to their deaths
that the cut-off time was imposed. Evidence that some
people died after 3.15 pm would not, therefore, effect
the outcome of the inquest.


37. other allegations related to the rescue operation,
and to alleged improper interference with witnesses.
Lord Justice stuart-smith noted that Lord Taylor had
inquired into the rescue operation and criticised the
slow response of the police. Lord Justice stuart-smith
found no evidence of want of care by the emergency or
medical services and, in his view, no purpose would be
served by any further inquiry into this aspect of the
disaster.


38. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith investigated in some
depth       allegations   that   certain   witnesses   were
pressurised by the west Midlands police to change the
evidence which they wished to give. He concludes that
there was no improper attempt to affect their evidence.
As I indicated earlier, he also examined carefully the
statements which the South Yorkshire police obtained
from their own officers, some of which were amended
on the advice of force solicitors. He is satisfied that the
Taylor inquiry and the inquest were not in any way
inhibited or impeded by what took place, in a very few
cases referred to in appendix 7 of the report, what was
excluded was either factual or comment in which factual
matters were implicit and he says that "it would have
been preferable for those matters not to have been
excluded".


39. Against this background, the question is what a
further opening of full inquiries, or inquests, or
disciplinary procedures could achieve.


40. A re-opening of Lord Taylor's inquiry would serve no
purpose, and since I published Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's
report on 18 February I have heard no convincing
argument against that view.      There was no cover-up
either by Lord Taylor or by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as
we know already who was principally to blame - the
police - and thankfully Lord Taylor's recommendations
about the safety of soccer grounds have already been
implemented.


41. when I talk to the bereaved families much of their
anger continues however to focus on the inquests, and
on the police disciplinary procedures.


42. so far as the inquests are concerned, there was no
evidence before Lord Justice stuart-smith which could
result in an application by the Attorney General to set
aside the inquest verdicts, not least since the conduct of
the inquests was so thoroughly examined by the
Divisional Court in 1993.
43. But I accept, as I believe does the whole House, that
inquests of this kind turn the screw on bereaved
families without adding understanding on questions of
culpability.


44. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report underlined the
need to make improvements to the inquest system, in
the case of Hillsborough, it was clearly unsatisfactory
that the families suffered additional distress as a result
of the inquest proceedings and the jury's verdicts of
accidental death when the causes of the disaster had
already been established by the Taylor inquiry and the
DPP had announced that there would not be any
prosecutions.


45. I have made clear that the inquest system, in its
present form, is unsuitable for dealing with disasters
such as Hillsborough. The Home Office working Croup on
Disasters and inquests, which reported in March 1997,
recommended that the role of the inquest should be
limited where a public inquiry has already been held.


46. A comprehensive             public    inquiry    which    also
addressed the questions before an inquest would relieve
the coroner of the need to resume the formal inquest.
The changes recommended by the Home Office working
Party point the right way forward and the Government
will look for a suitable legislative opportunity to amend
the Coroner's Act 1988.


47. it has often been asked of me, if the police were to
blame, why has no police officer been brought to book?
The only answer, very far from satisfactory, is that
police disciplinary procedures have been so defective
that   individual      senior    police   officers     can   utter
"disgraceful   lies"     and     act       with      contemptible
incompetence without penalty.
48. As I said in my statement to the House on 18
February, I fully understand the public disquiet that
those who have been criticised by the inquiries into this
disaster have not been prosecuted or disciplined in
respect of their actions, it is not possible, however, to
turn the clock back and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is
satisfied that there is no new evidence which he
considered which should be put before the Director of
Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority. I
firmly believe, though, that there is a compelling case in
the light of Hillsborough and other cases for reform of
the police disciplinary system.


49. in January the Home Affairs Committee published
its report into police disciplinary and complaints
procedures. The report recommended changes in a
number of key areas and I announced to the House in
March that I was taking steps to implement most of its
recommendations.
50. I have decided that the standard of proof in
discipline cases should be changed from the criminal to
the civil standard and that it should be possible for
officers to face both criminal and disciplinary action on
the same facts. I have also accepted the HAC's
recommendation that we should implement a system of
 fast track' dismissal for use in the most serious cases.


51. in the light of the Hillsborough disaster, I have been
particularly concerned to address the serious defect in
the present practice which allows a police officer to
retire on medical grounds before disciplinary hearings
can be completed. This was quite rightly an issue of the
greatest frustration to the families of the Hillsborough
victims.


52. The procedures will be strengthened so that where
accused officers claim they are unable, through ill
health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters can
be   decided   in   their   absence,   with    appropriate
safeguards.   I am also concerned that the existing
regulations should be rigorously applied so that any
outstanding disciplinary matters have to be completed
before any application for early retirement can be
considered.


53. These, and other changes will come into force in
April 1999.


Conclusion


Madam speaker,


54. Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the
disaster at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. The lives of
many others were and continue to be profoundly
affected by the events that day. None of us can begin
to understand the anguish felt by the families who lost
their loved ones in such tragic circumstances, but we
have shared their determination to establish, to the
CD                               'A   ’'




     \V“ ^       >£■ * ^ d***’ Pf'' ' \>*
                       \X^ \  ^    V r^   Wa-

      f, ~   ^    i* f   Z        S    *   h       O
                                                   r   w—'




             - V             -                 '
fullest extent possible, how and why their relatives died.
The causes of the disaster were clearly identified by
Lord Taylor in his 1989 report, it was right to consider
whether there was any subsequent information which
cast doubt on earlier decisions but I am satisfied that
Lord    Justice   Stuart-Smith         has,   after   rigorous
examination, reached the correct conclusions.


S5. I have taken a very close personal interest in this
tragedy from the start. I believe I was right to establish
the scrutiny, it is also right to accept its conclusions. I
am asked to establish      another inquiry but it is above
all out of concern and compassion for the families that I
                    CO
am unable to do so. To do this would simply be to raise
expectations that there lies evidence not yet uncovered
or actions not yet taken which could comfort them for
their loss, U''


                                                        ,




                   L ^
                                 i'yst. >/
                     ^                 —tj£s\

                (^JiA ^ *•—^ •*—K .^

 Cr^th—                                *'*~j\sJ'~       s/’k jt^ L A           -t/—w - (



                                                C<—     -^      '— L k A - ^       n ^ A a a jU l/ j


 C/t - v £ SJ- - ^              . '—   - y t^ V d S     *   '•— ~ ^ \a ’'— -<-7   J ^ C X -A ^ K a J ^


          Vv               ^vmx _.—                         ^             ^           c

 *-*“—                     fk jjc z -^ ^L jC <-/S s* ^ V d

r^)Vr                                       ^         //^_ ^/ ^A-- lawL/

    ^4^         'C            (A»>1 k'C V '* U ^ r/v        ^ ^ vA       aa.        / I^ ^ A jvJ L VI




                                    A/\ l<^.            ^ A^/^vj1

^v—            ^         "y?(K/sA         t&A                   V A s,   ^C^Aakj^JL

^AvV>            ^ f ‘LxA              Q-Ajv^ _ A t

          ^3WA/ ^®s Ia-/(j£j                                             I lAV~--£L-^
                                               (    D




                   CWi—

                   ( o^JhA            (KjJkJuA- £y                                    L?*~A

     ^vsA.                                                      ^                     ^L         M^/



    f* C,, ^-^*»      ir      5^------ t* r» - u > —k ...—*----Ob biJ0\A /Ji^ fC                 ZJCXa


          —   4 5 c - ^ 4 c $ v C i^                 fcu                              to^gLgU      6t>

    ^ N)

           ^               / cU             ''^ItXJtA.       /fcM'
                                                   o^r- u-»*—‘--'A J;jr>:^ (j^j^ur
        ^{ms—^IrsJj^              ' ^/VA/-~^ C%VN-,L-^            —{^AVt^. ^

    / s^LA/0       ^ aaT cIa> O U .       '^ v .     yJ- rv O vv’ <Aa_                tK-tXLj^

j    +L       VvX-'        A ^ ^ rrN^AA            r^ ^   '^ lfjk f \ .     (JI sjO    UsN^p-4

    tg*~>^KJK^l <l-A

               h^llt^Kryl^            <$Sj \X             C*                           jC^\


    ^l^-' ^tb^JKrJ\^ ^                ^                   J/              / ^ yv^-^A- A
          C*|                lU Y v.                                          /hj.

    £a_aJ '              -Cb^«_A_>Lr                 7"l)    /vTL*

    ftL                                                              * AT-      >S.




                                                     ( •*

/k ^ix .         / nj5hm_a                                             c/K t^
                      / /Vi- • '- - ^ V - £ W'""V^
                            —lo j j'                                   W Ovs_XV

                '\*+ jA+ a             ^                      £\r^)q>^ir             rv--A ^

£ > ^ ’ ■'          17                                      <^ _ ^ K . 'y .

                (^sAVVr-A->Aw                                                'tf rf>j£~
  *>                                    C^j ■* ^ . / ' ^                       <.*" ™
^t^njka^* ^                (AsJlAjl^Va y/ ~__ ~—-_

                                              /'t>v)A^:— ^K.          V jiuO'



AAQ&                       —   Totor



^trH

^                         -t-Nfs^V 4>cK               oW»     / s^> CAk.
                                  vwaaa> *ir*'{

    b\Kj—^Ly<h'tk\                     uh'U /ir       ;k r

           ’O 'l             KaX—-"^      0^/^      ^UULyjfc~

               “^A-N A/V0- '             ^----—
                                              '""'7 /^Ky>Tv4

1          /       ?    f K*^2A.                   UsJ       ^ A\J

           h^AAk         A\j^_                A/) ^/>VAA—^ J H

                                                  //^j ^jC^r-—//six.

                                                               (kt^


           3

                       l\nXL^-—                              IUJL-

U A -^ j
H IL L S B O R O U G H D IS A S T E R : IN D E X O F B R IE F IN G

Chronology o f events

GENERAL ISSUES

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry o f Bloody Sunday
either?

Were the terms o f reference for the scrutiny adequate?

Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
comes to light?


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

What about the video tapes stolen on the day o f the disaster?

What about the new evidence about the state o f the police’s CCTV system?


THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy
o f the emergency care provided to the victims?

What does the scrutiny say about criticisms o f the Coroner’s conduct o f the inquests?
Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

Inquests and disasters general

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time o f
the Hillsborough disaster?


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing
statements about the disaster?


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered before
being submitted as evidence?


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

Why haven’t you published appendix 9 o f the scrutiny?

Is the Home Secretary aware o f complaints o f material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?


WIDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t escape
punishment?
Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?


BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions
H IL L S B O R O U G H D IS A S T E R : IN D E X O F B R IE F IN G

Chronology o f events

GENERAL ISSUES

1. Wasn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

2. Were the terms o f reference for the scrutiny adequate?

3. What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

4. Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the start?

5. Is Lord Justice Stuart Smith a Mason ?

6. Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

7. Why is Hillsborough different to the sinking of the Derbyshire where the Deputy Prime
   Minister has announced the re-opening of the inquiry?

8. Why was the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire given the report before it was published?

9. Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

10. Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

11.Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
   comes to light?


   VIDEO EVIDENCE

12.What about the alleged any new videotape evidence?

13. What about the video tapes stolen on the day o f the disaster?

14.What about the new evidence about the state o f the police’s CCTV system?


   THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

15.Doesn’t the evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards undermine the 3.15
  pm cut-off point?

16.Shouldn’t the inquest verdict be quashed if it is accepted that the police caused the disaster?


F:\OPPU\CQMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
      A
I ncfejx
17.Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

18.How can the Coroner’s 3.15 pm cut-off point be justified?

19.Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy of the
   emergency care provided to the victims?

20. What did the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the inquests?

   Inquests and disasters general

21 .Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

22.What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

23 .What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of the
  Hillsborough disaster?


   INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

24.What about the allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing statements about
   the disaster?


   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

25 .How can it be right for statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers to be altered
    before being submitted as evidence?


   THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’ QUESTIONS

26.What about the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama “Hillsborough”?


   DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

27.Has the Home Secretary published all the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

28.Will The Home Secretary publish appendix 9 of the scrutiny?


   WIDER ISSUES

   POLICE DISCIPLINE


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
29.What changes are you proposing to prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health
   retirement?

30.What other changes to police discipline do you propose?

  COMPENSATION

31.What changes to the civil law on compensation have been proposed by the Law
   Commission?

32.How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions




F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
H IL L S B O R O U G H D ISA ST E R : C H R O N O L O G Y

15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - mini-inquests to identify each of the deceased and
when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk prejudicing police
inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174 witnesses at a
public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their supervision) by
West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating to the
incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief Supt.
Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no longer
subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been dropped
because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the absence of the more
senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard promised to
consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.

18 February 1998:       Home Secretary’s publishes scrutiny report.


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
Supplementary Q & A briefing                                                  Annex A

Is Lord Justice Stuart-Smith a freemason?

This is a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I have no doubt about his integrity. His
report sets out clearly what evidence he considered, his conclusions and the reasons
for those conclusions. I am committed to introducing a voluntary register across the
Criminal Justice System but this is not a matter to be dealt with on an ad hoc basis.

If the police were to blame for the disaster, shouldn’t the inquest verdict of
'accidental death’ be quashed?

It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame and an
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it.

Indeed, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the coroner correctly stated in his
summing up that an accidental death verdict did not mean that the deaths occurred
without fault.

The jury considered the evidence before the inquest and returned a verdict of
accidental death rather than unlawful killing. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no
grounds for recommending that the inquest verdict should be referred back to the
High Court.

Is the range of verdicts available to the coroner's court too narrow to enable the
inquest to reach proper conclusions?

The Coroners Rules suggest a number of standard wordings to be used when
completing the coroner's inquisition. The object is to standardise conclusions as to the
death across the country and to make statistics on inquests more consistent and
reliable. The wordings are not mandatory and coroners and their juries are free to use
alternatives if they wish to do so.

Alternative descriptions of how the deceased came by his or her death must, however,
be factual and not appear to attribute civil blame or criminal liability to a named
person. That would be beyond the remit of the coroner's enquiry.

Why were the families not allowed to present their own medical evidence at the
inquest?

An inquest is an enquiry conducted by the coroner. Only the coroner, not the families
of the deceased, nor any other interested person, has any right to call witnesses. This
is consistent with the inquisitorial nature of the inquest system. It is not a trial, and
there are no issues to be determined between 'parties'.

It is, o f course, open to anyone who believes that they have relevant evidence about a
death to contact the coroner, but that is not to say that the coroner needs to call them




c:\dos\m p-0555_.doc
3
at the inquest - the evidence may be irrelevant to the function of the inquest, or merely
repeat evidence given by others.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found that written statements by prospective witnesses were
available to the coroner, but the witnesses were not called because the issues were
fully dealt with by others. Their evidence had nothing material to add.

Will you publish Appendix 9 of the scrutiny report?

A number o f families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent
evidence of the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases
in appendix 9 of his report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of
evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I decided that it
would be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the families
concerned direct and not include them in the published report.

The Family Support Group have since indicated that they would like appendix 9 to be
published and, subject to receiving confirmation that all the families concerned are so
content, I will place a copy in the Library of the House.

Have the Families received all the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith?

I undertook when I made my statement on 18 February to publish as much of the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible.

Copies of all the original and amended police statements have been placed in the
Library of the House and, in response to a specific request from My H on Friend
for Liverpool W alton [Peter Kilfoyle] copies were also sent to the Hillsborough
Family Support Group on 16 April.

The other evidence considered by the scrutiny is being placed in the Library of the
House.

If required

The Family Support Group have approached us about three police statements which
were apparently missing from those they received. We are obtaining these from South
Yorkshire Police and will supply them as soon as possible.




c:\dos\m p-0555_.doc
H IL L S B O R O U G H : Q & A B R IE F IN G F O R T H E S T A T E M E N T

GENERAL

1. Wasn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

No. LJ Stuart-Smith has carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive report sets
out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his conclusions, with which I
agree.

It is, o f course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish. But there can be
no justification for calling it a whitewash.


2. Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

LJ Stuart-Smith’s terms o f reference were very wide. They tasked him with
establishing whether any material evidence was overlooked in the consideration o f the causes
o f the disaster or the consideration o f criminal or other proceedings. He was also able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I am satisfied that he was able to carry out a thorough scrutiny o f all the evidence which was
submitted by the families and others.

3. What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Following his appointment on 30 June last year, LJ Stuart-Smith examined the evidence from
the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as well as other material from police records.

He visited Hillsborough Stadium and went to Liverpool to meet many of the families o f the
victims.

He received submissions from Counsel for the Family Support Group and others. He also
had meetings with a number of other people who contacted him or who he felt could help him
with his scrutiny.

A list of those whom LJ Stuart-Smith met or received representations from is set out in
Appendix 1 o f his report.

4. Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

LJ Stuart-Smith said, on the record, that he deeply regretted this remark, which he made off-
the-cuff and without any intention for it to be taken seriously or to offend.




F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
5. Is Lord Justice Stuart-Smith a Mason?

The disclosure of whether or not Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is a member o f the Freemasons is
entirely a matter for him but I am entirely satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart Smith has
conducted his scrutiny with the utmost integrity. His report clearly sets out what evidence he
considered, his conclusions and the reasons for those conclusions.

If required

I recently announced the Government’s response to the Home Affairs Select Committee
report, “Freemasonry in the Police and the Judiciary”. I announced that all new
appointments to the judiciary, the police, the legally qualified staff o f the Crown Prosecution
Service, probation and prison services will have to declare their membership of the
Freemasons as a condition o f their service. Any later admission to the Freemasons after
taking up post will also be declarable. In addition, I have now written to the United Grand
Lodge, requesting their members who are already working in these professions to join a
voluntary register. Failure on the part o f those already within these professions to return
information would not, at this stage, be a breach of conditions of employment, and nil returns
would be shown as such on the register.

6. Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

It is inevitable with a disaster o f this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time to time
which has not been aired publicly before.

What the scrutiny had to consider was, not only whether the evidence put forward was new,
but also whether it was credible and of such significance that it would justify a new inquiry,
or some other action. This is what LJ Stuart-Smith has now reported on.

7. Why is Hillsborough different to the sinking of the Derbyshire where the Deputy Prime
Minister has announced the re-opening of the inquiry?

Under the Merchant Shipping Act 1995, the Secretary of State is required to reopen a formal
inquiry if new and important evidence which could not be produced at the original inquiry has
been discovered. The Deputy Prime Minister announced the re-opening of the formal inquiry
into the sinking of the Derbyshire following a survey of the wreck which provided 'new and
important evidence’ about how the ship was lost. It is now for the formal inquiry to come to a
conclusion about why she foundered.

At Hillsborough, the disaster was the subject of an immediate and thorough public inquiry by
Lord Taylor which clearly identified the causes of the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny established that the evidence submitted to him did not add anything significant to the
evidence available to and considered by the earlier Taylor Inquiry.




F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
LJ Stuart-Smith is clear in his report that there was nothing which he considered which added
anything significant to the evidence already considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the
Inquests.

VIDEO EVIDENCE

12. What about the alleged new videotape evidence?

LJ Stuart-Smith has examined all the available video evidence. He concluded that there is no
new video evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner or the
other authorities investigating the disaster.

He established that the 'missing’ footage obtained from Yorkshire Television is taken from
copies o f the police tapes supplied by the force and that the police tapes were made available
to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Coroner and to the legal representatives at the Inquest.

13. What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

The theft o f two video tapes, stolen from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s Control
Room on the day o f the disaster, was investigated by the West Midlands Police. They are
still missing. These were not police tapes but contained pictures from the club’s CCTV
cameras. LJ Stuart-Smith’s view is that the tapes did not contain any significant material.

14. What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?

LJ Stuart Smith has considered the evidence o f the technician (Mr Houldsworth) responsible
for the club and police CCTV systems, and that given by the police officers at the Inquest.

He concluded that there is no evidence o f the police blaming a faulty camera for their failure
to establish overcrowding.

In his report, LJ Stuart-Smith states 'The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is
new and might have an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to submission 5.
[That is to say that Mr Houldsworth could see from monitoring the police cameras that the
central pens were overcrowded and that the influx o f extra spectators through Gate C would
create a dangerous situation.] Lord Justice Stuart-Smith continues 'For the reasons I have
given I am unable to accept that his recollection o f events is now accurate. Even if it was
correct, it would not have any effect on the previous proceedings. It would simply have been
the evidence o f one more person who thought that the central pens were full at 14.52.’

THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

15. Doesn’t the evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards undermine
the 3.15 pm cut-off point?

Dr Walker made a statement which was available at the time (contained in Appendix 5). His
evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not add significantly to that ( C h a p t e r 3 ,
F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
   H-
WiSLO
kx^dQnCic
  5
toeiiwdh

\ru(,uist~
p a r a g r a p h 21). Mr Edwards also gave a statement at the time (Chapter 3, paragraph 34).
His latest statements and evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith add little o f substance to his
previous account ( C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 4 0 ). Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that Mr
Edwards’ criticisms o f the ambulance service are misplaced ( C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 1 0 0 ).

16. Shouldn’t the inquest verdict be quashed if it is accepted that the police caused the
disaster?

That is a matter for the Attorney-General who has the power under S. 13 o f the Coroners Act
1988 to make, or give authority to an application to the High Court to hold a fresh inquest and
to quash the original verdict. LJ Stuart-Smith found no basis to impugn the accidental death
verdict or for the Attorney-General to exercise his powers.

 Counsel for the Family Support Group stated '... it is accepted, eight years and a half years
 after the event, that it is impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh mauesl^ to be    _
.convened. ’ It was argued^though, that the Courts should be invited to quash the verdict o f    j
 accidental death. LJ Stuart-Smith says that the effect o f quashing the verdict without
 substituting any other verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an open verdict
 and that is only appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record any other suggested
 conclusion. In practice, he says, there were two alternative verdicts - unlawful killing or
 accidental death.

17. Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function o f a coroner’s inquest to determine questions o f blame. An accidental
death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the inquest verdict does
not deprive any person o f any civil remedy which otherwise might be available. (As the
Taylor report made clear, the main cause o f the disaster was the failure of control by the
South Yorkshire Police.)

18. How can the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point be justified?

LJ Stuart-Smith found no reason to criticise the use o f the cut-off point. It was never
suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before 3.15pm or that the medical
evidence was to this effect. ( C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 12). The jury heard evidence about
people who did not die until after their arrival at hospital or who regained consciousness after
resuscitation, or who were otherwise treated and recovered ( C h a p t e r 3 p a r a g r a p h s 58,59
a n d 6 0 ). Evidence that some people died after 3.15 would not therefore effect the outcome
o f the inquest.

As the Judge’s report notes, this issue was thoroughly examined by the Divisional Court in
1993 when it refused an application to have the Inquest verdicts quashed.

The use o f the cut-off point at the Inquest applied to the consideration o f how the victims
died, not the other questions before the Inquest. The evidence was that all those who died had
suffered their injuries by 3.15pm. There was no other cause o f death. The use o f the cut-off
point in these circumstances was, therefore, considered reasonable.
F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
19. Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the
adequacy of the emergency care provided to the victims?

The purpose o f an inquest is solely to find out who the deceased was and how, when and
where he or she came to their death. The response o f the emergency services to the disaster
was covered by the Taylor Inquiry and its findings are the set out in that report.

The Taylor Inquiry looked at this extensively. In addition to oral written evidence from many
supporters and police officers, and many written statements, Taylor took oral evidence from:
four St John Ambulance personnel; the deputy chief ambulance officer from South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) who was in charge at the ground; two other
SYMAS officers who were at the ground; two senior ambulance officers from headquarters
control; five fire brigade officers; and five doctors (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h s 79 - 84).

LJ Stuart-Smith has reported that he found no evidence o f lack of care on the part o f the
emergency or medical services and that a further investigation o f this aspect o f the disaster
would be o f little purpose.

20. What did the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the inquests?

LJ Stuart-Smith highlights the exceptionally difficult task which the Coroner, Dr Stefan
Popper, had in conducting the Inquest into this disaster. He did not find any substance to
criticisms about the conduct o f the Inquest or to suggestions o f bias on the part o f the
Coroner.


INQUESTS AND DISASTERS

21. Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an overlap
between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the findings o f a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role o f the coroner after a public
inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report provided the fullest possible
examination o f the causes o f the Hillsborough disaster.

22. What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners o f the need to resume their inquest after the
inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect o f a suitable legislative
opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends to pursue the matter
when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it appropriate
to do so.
F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
'OMlsW
23. What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of
the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to resume
the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional reason for doing
so. The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

24. What about the allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing statements
about the disaster?

LJ Stuart-Smith investigated allegations that investigating officers from West Midlands
Police pressurised certain witnesses into changing their evidence. He interviewed three
witnesses, Derek Bruder, Debra Martin (a former special constable) and Paul Taylor but
concluded in each case that there was no improper attempt to affect their evidence.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

25. How can it be right for statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers to be
altered before being submitted as evidence?

A number o f statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from the
force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was brought to his
attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure was legitimate and that
it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry, the Inquest or the conclusions
o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events o f 15 April 1989, the police officers present at Hillsborough
were required to record their recollections o f the day. The officers’ statements were
subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they were in a suitable form
for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority of cases, no recommendations were made on
the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove comment, hearsay or
inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments o f a similar
nature, without reference to the solicitors.


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
  ¥
Intefer-
  w te ,
WltV\
Wi-fncss
    8
S y \th
sfar-tsyivre
to U c^
S'menfe
As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does not
criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he believes it would
have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made, because what was removed
was either factual or comment where factual matters were implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ Stuart-
Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or other
proceedings.


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’ QUESTIONS

26. What about the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?

LJ Stuart-Smith has addressed each o f the ten questions in appendix 10 o f his report, either by
direct reference to the Taylor report or to the available evidence.

He is satisfied that the answers are quite evident and that they support the main conclusion of
the Taylor Inquiry about the failure o f police control.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

27. Has the Home Secretary published all the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

In my statement to the House on 18 February I said I would publish as much of the evidence
considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as possible.

Much o f the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result o f the
Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. Copies of the police statements, both in their original and
amended form, have been placed in the Library o f the House. I am also placing in the Library
copies o f material which is not already publicly available save where there is good reason for
doing otherwise.

We are still in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to material
which they supplied being placed in the library.

28. Will you publish appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

A number o f families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent evidence of
the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases in appendix 9 o f his
report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I decided that it would
be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the families concerned direct
and not include them in the published report.
F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
 Dniwift
iO % 5
     \o
\&£k$J<L
 41
 HctHaruocl
The families have since indicated that they are content for appendix 9 to be published and,
subject to ensuring that all are so content, I will place a copy in the Library of the House.


WIDER ISSUES

29. What changes are you proposing to prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-
health retirement?

I intend to strengthen the procedures so that where accused officers claim they are unable,
through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in their absence,
with appropriate safeguards. I am also concerned that the existing regulations should be
rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be completed before
any application for early retirement can be considered.

30. What other changes to police discipline do you propose?

I announced to the House in March that I was taking steps to implement most of the
recommendations of the Home Affairs Committee’s report into police disciplinary and
complaints procedures.

I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be changed from the
criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible for officers to face both criminal
and disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also accepted the HAC's recommendation
that we should implement a system of 'fast track1dismissal for use in the most serious cases.

31. What changes to the civil law on compensation have been proposed by the Law
Commission?

Under present law a person who suffers a recognisable psychiatric illness as a result of another’s
death, injury or imperilment cannot recover damages for negligence unless they satisfy three
main requirements:

       that he or she had a close tie of love and affection with the person;

       that he or she was close to the accident in time and space; and

       that he or she directly perceived the accident rather than for example hearing about it
       from a third person.

Some of the relatives of those who died at Hillsborough saw the disaster unfold on television.
They were close to the disaster but did not perceive it with their unaided senses and were unable
to claim for their consequential psychiatric illness.

The Law Commission’s report 'Liability for Psychiatric Illness’ has proposed removing some
of the restrictions under the present law. The requirement for a close tie to the person concerned
F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
    w
'tN/lOU/
 b sv u i
would be retained, but restrictions based on closeness to the accident and direct perception of it
would be removed.




32. How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for any hurt
or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a decision for the
individuals concerned and the courts.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
P O L IC E D IS C IP L IN E

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

As I indicated in my statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police
discipline system.

I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its recommendations
for closely. I hope to respond shortly.


Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

There is the potential for the disciplinary process to be brought into disrepute by the
inappropriate use of medical retirement. I am considering the recommendations o f the
Home Affairs Select Committee for tightening the discipline rules and I will respond
shortly.

The existing police pensions regulations provide for retirement to be held over until
discipline proceedings have been concluded, but where there is no prospect of an
officer recovering his health to face discipline proceedings it is right that he be allowed
to go.


Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for
any hurt or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a
decision for the individuals concerned and the courts.




c:\dos\m p-0462.doc
(ft)UC£
DbonpWie
BACKGROUND


The Taylor Inquiry

•. The terms o f reference for the Inquiry were:

  To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to
  make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.

•. 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

•. 71 hours o f film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the
       BBC.

   Interim Report

•. The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
      stadium on the day of the disaster.

•. The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match arrangements,
      such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield Wednesday’s
      arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It also considered the
      build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of the terraces.

•. Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts, events
      in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for example
      tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency services.

•. A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

   - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
   - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
   - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
   - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
   - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
   - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
   - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

•. On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main reason for
      the disaster was the failure of police control.

•. The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and statements
      attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
0ar^grcurwf
  15
J ock -,
  OfCWU.
\ In the view of South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised in the
      Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
      recommendations being made in respect of eight o f them.

•. In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he considered
       to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could be safely used in
       the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to be carried out with
       immediate effect.

   Final Report

•. The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It concentrated on
      the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of measures to improve
      safety at sports grounds.

•. The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment of all
      seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect of the top
      divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of spikes and
      overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

•. Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number o f spectators to
     be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety Certificate. There
     was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should be reviewed.

•. The report recommended a written statement of intent be agreed between the club and the
      police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control, with
      particular reference to the filling of each pen.

•. There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role of the police and
      the responsibilities of senior officers.

•. The co-ordination of the emergency services and the provision of first aid, medical
      facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations of the final
      report.

•. The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord Justice
      Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or towards the
      pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and going on to the
      pitch without lawful authority or excuse.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
T h e 10 U n re so lv ed Q u estion

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:

1.      Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21 days
before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.      Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build up
outside the Leppings Lane end o f the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the previous
year?

3.      Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it should have
been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans
safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.     Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eye
witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen
minutes before kick-off?

5.     Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.     Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary o f the FA by telling him that
fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order for it to be
opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10 foot
spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch too
small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as to what
was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the ground to help - until
3.30pm?

9.      Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the pitch where
the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical help?

10.     Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
           DOCUMENTSANDOTHEREVIDENCECONSIDEREDBYSCRUTINY


Documents which are already pubic

1.        Taylor Inquiry: interim and final reports.

2.         Transcripts and other documentation from the Taylor Inquiry (to be returned
           to the Public Record Office).

3.        Transcripts of the inquest proceedings.

4.        Judgement of the Divisional Court on the judicial review application,
           November 1993.

5.        Guide to the safety of sports ground, 1986 edition.

6.        Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group, Home Office, 1997.

7.        Various published books about the Hillsborough disaster.

8.        Video tapes of broadcast television programmes about the disaster.

Documents originated bythe FamilySupport Group
1.        Legal Opinion by Alun Jones, QC for the Support Group March 1997, with
           Annexes.

2.        Memorial to the Attorney General on behalf of the families of six of the
          deceased seeking a fresh inquest, April 1992.

3.        Skeleton argument on behalf of those families to the Divisional Court, 1993.

Documents and other evidence not otherwise publicly available which we will
placing inthe Library
1.        Transcripts of interviews with those who gave oral evidence to Lord Justice
           Stuart-Smith.

2.        Other records of the discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
          transcripts were not made.

3.        Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses.

4.        Other written statements consulted at the request of the families (with the
          exception of those provided by Dr Burns and Dr West).


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp059 lpd.doc
OoCOYVJLtvfe
D ocS
5.        Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by Counsel
          and others on behalf of the Family Support Group.

6.        South Yorkshire Police operational orders for the 1998 and 1989 FA Cup
          Semi-Finals at Hillsborough.

7.        Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority in relation to
          complaints against officers of the South Yorkshire Police.

8.        A report produced by David Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of Devon
          and Cornwall, for South Yorkshire Police in August 1990.

9.        Report prepared by Mr Noel Burne on the state of the ground for South
          Yorkshire Police in 1990.

10.       Police tapes TB1, TB2, TB3 and TB4 which contain the records of all material
           recorded by police CCTV cameras on the day of the disaster.

11.       Transcript of the open meeting involving Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
           families on 6 October 1997.

12.       Transcript of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s meeting on 30 September 1997 with
           Counsel for the Support Group.

Documents andotherevidence whichwill not be placed inthe Library
1.        Advice of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birts QC to the Director of Public
           Prosecutions, August 1990. (The Home Secretary has agreed with the
          Attorney General that this legal advice should not be made public because it
          attracts legal professional privilege and it is the firm policy of the DPP not to
           publish such detailed documentation relating to the merits of individual cases
          which have not been before the courts.)

2.        Report of a review of the evidence by the CPS, May 1997. (Same reason
          applies).

3.        West Midlands Police reports to the DPP (23 volumes) (the same reason
          applies).

4.        Appendix 9 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. (This contains details of
          individual cases, and the relevant sections are being sent to the families
          concerned).

5.        Written statements made by Dr James Burns and Dr Ian West.                (They
          concern the case of Kevin Williams only).




f:\oppu\hou\rmsc\pp0591pddoc
6.        Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s private meetings with families and
           submissions made by individual families to him. (Each person has the
           transcript of his/her private meeting.)

7.        "Body files” containing the detailed history of each individual victim. (Each
           family has, or request, been provided with the body file of their relative.)

8.         Police tape VRM2. (This is a video of the mortuary.)

9.         Photographic, documentary, video and other material held in the archive of
           the disaster held by South Yorkshire Police. (This consists of an entire room
           full of material. Much of it is held by the police on behalf of the coroner, and
           access to it is therefore governed by the Coroners’ Rules - that is, copies of
           relevant material is provided on request to those with a legitimate interest,
           including relatives of victims. Other sections of the archive contain copies of
           the material listed in other categories above. The remainder is miscellaneous
           material from many sources. Copies are provided on request by South
           Yorkshire Police, subject to them securing the agreement of the third party if
           the originator of the material is different from the person requesting a copy.)

Documents whose position has yet to be resolved
1.        Copies of all the original statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers
           following the disaster. (We are discussing this with South Yorkshire Police.
           They are concerned thatbecause the statements are                 personal the
           recollections made immediately after the disaster contain emotive, abusive or
           other material which, if made public, would cause offence to the families - for
           example, abusive remarks about the behaviour of supporters. I have asked
           South Yorkshire Police to consider the possibility of making them available in
           anonymised form, so that individual officers would not be identified by name.)

2.         A report on the state of the ground prepared for Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Club by consulting engineers, Sir William Halcrow and Partners,
           August 1990. (This report was originally commissioned by solicitors for the
           Club in anticipation of contribution proceedings to determine the respective
           liabilities for compensation payments of the club, the council and the police.
           The solicitors acting for the club have indicated that in principle they do not
           see much difficulty in making this available, but they will not give firm
           agreement until they have seen the published report by Lord Justice Stuart-
           Smith.)

3.         Nine video tapes containing everything recorded by BBC tv cameras on the
           day of the disaster. (These tapes have been made available to all the official
           proceedings, including the Taylor Inquiry, the inquest and Lord Justice Stuart-
           Smith’s scrutiny, but the BBC are not prepared for them to be made generally
           available because much of it is an horrific record of the deaths of the victims.
           I have asked for their agreement that the tapes could, if requested, be viewed
           by legal representatives of the families.)


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp059lpd.doc
                           Hillsborough - House Libraries

Items sent to the House Libraries

Transcripts o f interviews with those who gave evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

Other records o f discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where transcripts
were not made

Written Evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses

Other written statements consulted at the request o f the fam ilies

Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart Smith by Counsel and
others on behalf o f the Family Support Group

South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders fo r the 1988 and 1989 semi-finals

Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority

Report produced by David Phillips o f Devon & Cornwall Constabulary (Report o f the
police operation at Hillsborough - produced at request o f South Yorkshire Police)

Report by Noel Burne (a structural engineer; he was instructed in July 1989 to report
on and advise the South Yorkshire Police Authority on the safety and structural
aspects o f the Hillsborough ground, in particular with a view to the anticipated civil
proceedings)

Police videotapes TB1,2,3 and 4

Transcripts o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s open meeting on 6 October and meeting
with Counsel on 30 September

South Yorkshire Police Statements




f:\oppu\com plnts\speech\m p-0553.doc
  15
Docs
  UA.
Hcwoe-
Uib'rtirkj
Items still to he sent to the House Libraries

Written Evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by those consulted by the
Judge.

Awaiting agreement to disclosure before sending to the library. The material
concerned is from The Hon Mr Justice Collins, Mr Christopher Dorries (current
Coroner for S Yorkshire), DCS Foster, West Midlands Police, Mr Douglas Fraser, Mr
Benet Hytner QC, Mr Peter Metcalfe (Hammond Suddard Solicitors), Sir David
Parry- Evans (St John Ambulance Brigade), Dr Stefan Popper (former Coroner for S
Yorkshire), Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Steele, Mr James Wardrope, Mr Peter Wells
(St John Ambulance Brigade), Mr Peter Whitehurst, Dr David Williams.

Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart Smith by Counsel and
others on behalf o f the Family Support Group

The material consists of submissions from the Family Support Group at the beginning
o f the Scrutiny, all o f which is therefore in the public domain. Volumes V and VI, a
copy of a memorial submitted to the Attorney-General in 1993 with enclosures, has
already been placed in the Library.




f:\oppu\com plnts\speech\m p-0553.doc
        H o m e O f f ic e                                                     *W*
                                                                                 UK Presidency of the
                                                                                 European U nion



                                                  50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW 1H 9AT
News Release                                      (Night line: 0171 273 4595) Fax: 0171 273 4660
                          043/98
                                                  E'Mail: commdir.ho@gtnet.gov.uk
     29 January 1998                                                 0171 273 4610

           HILLSBOROUGHSCRUTINY: HOMESECRETARYCONSIDERS
                          JUDGE’SREPORT
     Home Secretary Jack Straw today received the report of the Hillsborough
     Scrutiny from Lord Justice Stuart Smith.

     Mr Straw said:

            “I am grateful to Lord Justice Stuart Smith for the enormous amount of
            work he has done carrying out the Scrutiny.

            “I will now carefully consider his report. I hope to be able to publish
            both the report and my response to it shortly

     Notes to Editors
     The Scrutiny was announced by the Home Secretary on 30 June 1997. Its
     terms of reference are:

            To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
            Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

            (a)           To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

            (b)           To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
                          General for the purpose of discharging their respective
                          statutory responsibilities; or

            (c)           To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in
                          relation to police disciplinary matters;

            And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
            available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
            Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
            and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
            previously considered by them which may be relevant to their
            respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
            which should be taken in the public interest.


    Home Office News Releases can be found on: www.coi.gov.uk/coi/depts/GHO/GHO.html
              Home Office homepage can be found on: www.homeoffice.gov.uk/
 \<o
-fe s
IVOHa
QPi(l
                                                                                                    F
        H o m e O ffice                                                           * *
                                                                                  UK Presidency of the
                                                                                  European Union



                                                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London S W 1H 9AT
News Release                                       (Night line: 0171 273 4595) Fax: 0171 273 4660
                                                   E'Mail: commdir.ho@gtnet.gov.uk

    18 February 1998                                                 0171 273 4610


          HOMESECRETARYPUBLISHESHILLSBOROUGHSCRUTINY
    Home Secretary Jack Straw today published the report of the Hillsborough
    Scrutiny carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

    The 120,000 word report examines in detail the evidence which was put to
    the Scrutiny, but concludes that there is no basis for reconsidering previous
    criminal, disciplinary, public inquiry or inquest decisions regarding the
    disaster.

    Mr Straw announced the findings, and the Government’s acceptance of them,
    in an oral statement to Parliament today.

    He also met the Hillsborough families to explain his response and give them
    copies of the Scrutiny report.

    The report looks in detail at allegations about:

           • the suppression of video evidence;

           • the issue of the 3.15 ‘cut-off point set by the Coroner;

           • witnesses being pressured by police officers into changing their
             evidence;

          • evidence from South Yorkshire Police officers being collected in an
            unacceptable manner.

    The main conclusions of the report are that:

          • the conclusions of the Taylor report are still valid and there is
            therefore no basis for a further public inquiry;

          • there is no basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of
            the inquest;




   Home Office News Releases can be found on: www.coi.gov.uk/coi/depts/GHO/GHO.html
             Home Office homepage can be found on: www.homeoffice.gov.uk/
Pmj
MSHce
IS|*.
       • nor is there any material which Director of Public Prosecutions
         (DPP) or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to
         reconsider the decisions they have already taken; and

       • none of the evidence which the Scrutiny was asked to consider
         added anything significant to the evidence which was available to
         Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.

Emphasising his feelings for the plight of the families, Mr Straw said:

       “No-one could have anything but most profound sympathy with all the
       families and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely
       begin to comprehend what they have suffered.

       “I fully understand that those who lost loved ones should feel betrayed
       by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and
       for the state of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
       changes which resulted from the Taylor Inquiry should mean that such a
       disaster will never happen again."

Mr Straw said that the Scrutiny was the latest in a series of lengthy and
detailed examinations of evidence in this case, and that the main reason for
the disaster - the failure of police control - had been identified by Lord Taylor
in his report.

He added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report was thorough and
comprehensive. He said:

       “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence
       which was put to him. This included all the relevant evidence presented
       to the earlier inquiries and inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at
       all the information presented to him, by individuals and official bodies,
       including those representing the families of those who died, and others
       who have acted in support of them.

        “With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course of
       time some new information may become available.

        “But that does not necessarily mean that the outcome of any previous
       inquiries would have been different. What is crucial is not just whether
       the information is new, but also whether it is of such significance - to
       use the phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new inquiry.’’

Adding that the report highlighted the shortcomings of the police disciplinary
system, Mr Straw said:
      “But there is another sense in which the system has failed the
      Hillsborough families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of
      his report,

             “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
             personally been held to account either in a criminal court,
             disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent o f losing their jo b ”.

      “What happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we
      have to improve the current police discipline arrangements, and I will
      be responding fully to the recent recommendations of the Home Affairs
      Select Committee soon."

Mr Straw also commented on the Scrutiny’s finding about the holding of an
inquest when a judicial inquiry into major disaster has already covered the
same ground. He said:

      “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith brings out in his report the exceptionally
      difficult task which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest.

      “It placed an unreasonable, and I think unnecessary, burden on the
      families when the Taylor report had covered substantially the same
      ground.

      “I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the inquest system in its
      present form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this
      kind.

      “In my view, it would be far better, above all for bereaved families, if
      there is one fully comprehensive inquiry into the causes of death and
      the wider circumstances.”

Mr Straw concluded:

      “The entire country is united in sympathy with those who lost loved
      ones at Hillsborough and we cannot take the pain from them. But I
      hope that the families will recognise that this report represents, as I
      promised, a most independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny to
      examine all the evidence which was brought before it.”


NOTES TO EDITORS

1. The Home Secretary announced the Scrutiny on 30 June 1997.

2. It was carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. His terms of reference
were:
       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

       (a)   to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

       (b)   to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for
              the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
              responsibilities; or

       (c)   to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
              disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
              evidence not previously available is of such significance as to
              justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
               Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
              (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
              considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
              duties;

              and to advise whether there is any other action which should be
              taken in the public interest.

3. A summary of the report is attached. Media copies of the Home Secretary’s
statement and the Scutiny report are available from Home Office Press Office
on 0171 273 4610. Non-media copies of the report can be obtained from
HMSO, CM 3878, ISBN 0101387822, price £22.

4. Most of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith either
already in the public domain (eg Taylor inquiry material or transcripts) or is
contained in the Appendices to his report. Other material will be placed in the
House of Commons Library, save that where there are overriding reasons for
doing otherwise. The material to be published will include all the original
statements made by South Yorkshire police officers together with amended
versions.
 CHAPTER 7



 Summary


 1.   In this chapter I summarise the findings which I have made.


 2. Before doing so I must make it clear that anyone who is familiar with the terrible
 events of 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough is bound to have great sympathy with the
 relatives of those who died and the spectators who were injured. I have now spent many
 weeks studying the evidence of what happened and considering the representations and
 submissions made by the families and their legal representatives. I find it difficult to
 imagine anything more horrific than that experienced by those who endured it and
 those who lost their children, relatives and friends.


3. That 96 people, the majority of them young, should set out in high hopes and spirits
on a fine Spring day, and yet within a space of less than half-an-hour suffer crushing
injuries from which they died, is nothing less than appalling. I have the most profound
sympathy with all the families and friends of those who suffered in this way. many of
whom I have met. I also understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
personally been held to account, either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or
even to the extent of losing his or her job.


4. I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them, especially
since they had had their hopes raised that something more could be done. But I cannot
allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and
objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence which had
previously been considered.


5. Having done so, for the reasons I have set out. I have come to the clear conclusion
that there is no basis upon which there should be a further Judicial Inquiry or a
reopening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is no basis for a renewed application to the
Divisional Court or for the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners
Act 1988.1 do not consider that there is any material which should be put before the
Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause
them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. Nor do I consider that there is
any justification for setting up any further inquiry into the performance of the
emergency and hospital services. I have carefully considered the circumstances in which
alterations were made to some of the self-written statements of South Yorkshire Police
officers, but I do not consider that there is any occasion for any further investigation.


6. None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to the
evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests.
Video evidence


7. Chapter 2 of this report deals with video evidence of the disaster. My conclusions
about that are that there is no new video evidence of it or video evidence which was not
available to Lord Taylor, the Coroner, or the other authorities who examined the
disaster at the time.


8 Two video tapes which were stolen on the day of the disaster remain missing. They
were tapes of pictures from CCTV cameras operated by Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club. They were not police tapes and would not have shown anything significant. Their
theft is unsolved. The suggestion that the police tried to blame their failure to spot
overcrowding on the terraces onto faulty CCTV equipment is wrong. They did not
blame the CCTV equipment. The police controllers had a good view over the terraces
from their control box and did not pretend otherwise.


9. The allegation that police hid videotape evidence of the terraces is unfounded, and
the allegation that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of this ‘missing
police footage is equally unfounded. Police officers did not give false evidence about the
state of the police CCTV system at the ground, and I do not accept the evidence of
Roger Houldsworth. video technician at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that he
realised from looking at police CCTV pictures of pens 3 and 4 at about the time Gate C
was opened at 14.52 that these pens were dangerously overcrowded.


The aftermath o f the disaster


10. I deal in Chapter 3 of the report with suggestions that the inquest into the deaths of
those who died in the disaster was seriously flawed, and that there should now be a
public inquiry into what was done, or not done, to help them and others who were
crushed.


11. I do not consider that the Inquest was flawed. Most of the criticisms relate to the
so-called “3.15 cut-off point”. I do not agree with these criticisms. The Coroner
considered the questions of who the deceased were and when and where they died at the
mini-inquests, and this involved consideration of matters long after 3.15. It was only in
relation to the question of how, i.e. by what means, the deceased came to their deaths
that the Coroner imposed a cut-off point of 3.15 pm. He had good reasons for deciding
to limit the inquiry in this way and the cut-off did not limit inquiry into that question.


12. Questions of whether the response of the emergency services was adequate were
not relevant to the task the Coroner had to perform. It was suggested to me that the fact
that D r Walker, Mr Houldsworth, and others were not called as witnesses at the inquest
amounted to fraudulent concealment of their evidence. That suggestion is false and I
regard it as wholly irresponsible.
13. Lord Taylor inquired into the rescue operation and his findings are published in his
report. He made criticisms of the slow response of the police and recommendations for
the future. I cannot see that any useful purpose would be served by having any further
inquiry into the rescue operation. In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by
the emergency or medical services. Any wide-ranging inquiry into this aspect of the
disaster would place huge burdens upon them, but to no purpose.


Interference with witnesses


14. Chapter 4 of this report deals with suggestions that the evidence of witnesses to the
disaster was tampered with, so that the truth did not emerge either at Lord Taylor s
Inquiry or the Inquests. These allegations are of two types - that the West Midlands
Police put pressure on Derek Bruder, Debra Martin, and Paul Taylor which affected the
evidence they wished to give, and that the way in which the South Yorkshire Police went
about collecting evidence from their own officers who were at Hillsborough and
witnessed the disaster was unacceptable. I have interviewed Mr Bruder, Miss Martin,
and Mr Taylor and have come to the conclusion in each case that there was no improper
attempt to affect their evidence.


Mr Bruder


15. So far as Mr Bruder is concerned, I am quite satisfied that the West Midlands
Police, in seeking to confirm details of his statement relating to Kevin Williams, did not
subject him to improper pressure. He told me himself that they did not. His statements
were accurately summarised at the inquest on Kevin Williams and there was no attempt
to discredit him.


Miss Martin


16. I did not find Miss Martin a reliable witness. H er statement about events at
Hillsborough, where she was on duty as a Special Constable, was seriously at variance
with the account of everybody else who was there. She remains plainly - and
understandably - deeply upset by the disaster, and her memories of the day and of
subsequent events relating to it are vague and confused. I think that she gave her
account of Kevin Williams sitting up in her arms and saying “Mom" in good faith. But it
cannot be relied upon. It contradicts Mr Bruder’s evidence and is also contrary to the
pathological findings.


17. I interviewed the West Midlands police officer who Miss Martin claims bullied her.
I found this officer to be an impressive witness. I cannot see that she had any reason to
discredit Miss Martin, and she told me that she did not bully or browbeat her. I accept
her account and prefer it to Miss Martin’s.




                                           105
M r Taylor


18.     A s far as Paul                                      whafhesaw'at Hillsborough


                                                .he contemporary documents. In any even,
he had no reason to put pressure on Mr Taylor.


South Yorkshire Police statements




S T £ S £ r " K = = « " -‘
 a suitable form for submission to Lord Taylor s Inquiry.


 20. The solicitors made no comment on the great majority of these s ta te m e n t and in
 others their advice was confined to clearing up ambiguities an removing           -
 comment or inappropriate language *n ®                              in which factual
                                                       have been preferable for the factual
 matters not to have been excluded, or the comment elucidate .


 91      It was well known to Lord Taylor's Inquiry Team that the statements were being

  sfatements'were^taken fri^w ltn'ess^ w h^ w ^re^ em ptoyed ^y Sheffield Wednesday FC
  or the Ambulance Service.

  ??      Towards the end of May 1989 the South Yorkshire Police team responsible for


  s      x      s    s    s   e     ^     ^     S        S       ^     S       s     s         r



  statement rendered misleading.


  23.     I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was not in*iny™ y m            t “       me

  jTniw o f £ hH f c 'I n q u h ^ r a m f n l d t e e issues and he made findings about them
  which were adverse to the police.



                                                106
24. I am also satisfied that the exclusion of these comments did not affect the outcome
of the Inquests, or the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to bring
criminal charges as a result of the disaster. I do not consider that there is any question of
misconduct either by the solicitor who gave the police advice upon the statements or by
the police officers who suggested alterations to the statements without referring the
statement to the solicitors.


Other issues


Inconsistent evidence


25. It is clear that there is inconsistent evidence about precisely what happened to
some of the people who died at Hillsborough. Such conflicts of evidence are inevitable
given the scale of the disaster. The Coroner did his best to resolve these questions at the
Inquest, and I have tried to get to the bottom of some of those which remain and which
the families of those who died have asked me to look into. I have not been completely
successful in this. W hat is clear however is that no further inquiry involving examination
of the witnesses could help after this lapse of time.


The Inquests


26. The Divisional Court found that the Coroner was not biased and had no conflict of
interest. I see no reason to disagree with that. I can find no evidence to support the
suggestion that Liverpool supporters who gave evidence at the Inquest were given a
difficult time in the witness box.


27. I do not agree with the criticisms which have been made of the Coroner and the
way in which he ran the Inquests. But I endorse the recommendation of the Home
Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests that the role of the Coroner should be
limited in circumstances such as these. I have reached the firm conclusion that is not
satisfactory to have an inquest into the deaths caused by a major disaster when an
Inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge has already covered the same ground.


The police


28. Some of the families of those who died have told me that they have been unable to
obtain copies of documents to which they were entitled from the South Yorkshire Police
archive on the disaster. Two families supplied me with material to enable me to check
on this. In neither case did I think the complaint was justified.


29. The investigation of the disaster by the West Midlands Police was not biased in
favour of the South Yorkshire force.
30. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has on many occasions apologised for the
disaster on behalf of his force.


Examination by doctors confirming death


31. Criticism that doctors who examined bodies at the ground did so in a cursory or
inadequate manner is wholly unsubstantiated.


The state o f the ground


32. There are two questions to do with the state of the Hillsborough football ground
which seem to me to have aspects which were not considered by Lord Taylor’s
otherwise very full Inquiry. These questions are to do with the height of the crush
barriers on the Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster happened and the overall
capacity of that terrace. I do not consider that they give grounds for reopening the
Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.




                                          108
Thank you for your faxed letter of yesterday.

My understanding is that, following his remark, which caused such offence,
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith offered an apology both orally and in a written
statement.

In a letter to the Home Secretary dated 30 November 1997 you stated that:

       “I would point out that this letter is not intended to undermine the
       appointment and/or role of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Indeed, we are
       pleased that he took the time and trouble to meet the families in
       Liverpool and you are aware that we have accepted, admittedly with
       some reservation, his apology for the offensive gaffe about
       latecomers”.

I took it from that letter that you did not wish to veto his continued
involvement.




                          GEORGEHOWARTHMP
                       Knowsley NorthandSefton East

Trevor Hicks
Chairman Hillsborough Family Support Group
  i?
Wic*c4
C&yviiy\&4
LU .S.S .
NOTE OF MEETING BETWEEN THE HOME SECRETARY AND THE HILLSBOROUGH
FAMILIES ON SATURDAY, 7TH MARCH 1998 IN SOUTHPORT FLORAL HALL

Present:

Jack Straw MP
Colin Pickthall MP
Jane Kennedy MP
Andrew Miller MEP
Richard Corbett MEP
Louise Ellman MP
Councillor Jack Spriggs
Ed Owen

Hillsborough Families

John Glover
Joan Trayner
Margaret Aspinall
Patricia Joynes

Trevor Hicks
Ann Adlington




1.     Trevor Hicks thanked the Home Secretary for meeting the group but added that
the Group were outraged by the Home Secretary's decision and repeated the assertion
that his decision and the Scrutiny had been a whitewash and a cover-up.

2.     Mr Hicks raised concerns over the Scrutiny's Terms of Reference particularly on
the definition of 'new' evidence. He accused Lord Justice Stuart Smith of attacking the
families' evidence while glossing over much of the police evidence. He added that the
families did not get what they were promised which was a fair and just hearing. They
did not want to re-run Taylor or re-run the inquests although he said that was now being
used against the families. He said that the group had not wanted these re-run because
they wanted to be seen as reasonable.

3.    He described Lord Justice Stuart Smith as using legal purism which failed to
address the real issues. He accepted that the Scrutiny was detailed and thorough but
had not been independent and even-handed.
 3 |3 J
4<UvWl/U.i
4.      Mr Hicks said that on some accounts the Judge was factually wrong and he
particularly raised the issue of the theft of the tapes. Mr Hicks said what was important
was not the content but the theft itself and that this was an example of the police
establishment covering up. He added that the Coroner had lied to the jury about the
tapes.

5.    Mr Hicks also pointed to the fact that the police had altered statements which he
described as disgraceful.

6.     Mr Hicks also raised the point that the families were denied access to the Report
before it was published on the grounds that to allow the families access would be a
breach of Parliamentary privilege. Yet he complained that the South Yorkshire Police
obtained the Report more than a week before the Home Secretary's statement. Again,
this was an example of unjust treatment, he said.

7.     Mr Hicks said that the Home Secretary had trapped himself by not consulting the
families before making his final decisions.

8.   Mr Hicks concluded that the families, the public and the Labour Party in
Merseyside rejected his decision.

9.     In reply the Home Secretary said that there was no basis whatsoever for
describing what had happened as a cover-up. He said that setting up the Scrutiny was
one of the first things he had done after the election. Many people, he said, had
advised him to leave the issue alone, that it would only raise hopes. But he had seen
the Granada TV programme and recognised concerns and decided that he had to
establish a scrutiny of the evidence.

10.    Mr Straw said a full inquiry would have been premature. Taylor had been
thorough. The Coroner's decisions had been looked at by a Divisional Court and the
police had been investigated by the West Midlands Police so that all appeal processes
had been covered. The Scrutiny however had been set up with wide references and
headed by a senior judge.

11.    He defended the Terms of Reference of the Scrutiny and added that the no-one
had ever doubted there may be new evidence. The issue was whether that evidence
was significant. He added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith was bound to test any evidence
that came forward but that did not mean that he was biased. He also added that police
witness statements are being published despite arguments over legal professional
privilege.

12.    The Home Secretary then talked about Mr Hicks' accusation about the new
video evidence. The Home Secretary said that this was for him the crucial trigger for
setting up the scrutiny but he pointed to the inconsistencies between Hicks' account
and the families' Counsel on whether the content of the tapes was important. He added
that the evidence on the tapes did not alter the fact that Taylor and Stuart Smith had
pinned the main blame for the disaster on the police.
13.    The Home Secretary admitted that there had been a lot wrong with the initial
investigation by the police but that the crucial point remained that it was the failure of
police control that led to the disaster, regardless of what might be on the tapes.

14.    Trevor Hicks admitted that he was grateful for the Home Secretary setting up the
Scrutiny.

15.                added that what she found most upsetting about the whole episode
was that the police were allowed to lie, steal and withhold evidence and that a Labour
Government was allowing it to happen.

16.    The Home Secretary made a couple of extra points. He refuted the idea that he
could have consulted the families before making his final decision. He said this would
have dragged the inquiry on. He also said that he was not happy about South Yorkshire
Police having the Report a week before anyone else. He then went on to say that he
went to football matches with his children and that he had been outraged by the fact
that guilty people were able to get off scot-free. He did not think it was OK for officers
to do this. "It is outrageous", he said, for Duckenfield to be getting off in this way. But
he added that we cannot put the clock back. His priority was to ensure that the system
was changed for the future.

17.                then came in again and said that the Home Secretary was the only
person in authority who had dealt with the families who had shown even a glimmer of
humanity, and added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith had simply not listened.

18.   The Home Secretary added that he was prepared to arrange to meet the families
in Merseyside again but added that he would not pretend that he will in any way
change his decision. The meeting was being adjourned until that time, he said.

19.   Colin Pickthall added that Ann Taylor had said in the House last Thursday that
she would like to find time for a debate on Hillsborough.




EdOwen
Special Adviser
9th March 1998




                                            3
GO MERSEYSIDE                                                     f f +015*2246470,                              06/05 '98 15:45 0 :02/02
                                                              +01512246470



                              '''             '                   '*V


                                       ....................                                           ^     ^    ._         '        , ■   j.   ^ _ ’.:ii. hlj,i'd^,^f'-'^ ' V ] ''^'/rW^-



                                                                                                                                                                                              s
      -   Support group prepare for a crucial trip                                                                                                                                           mjl




               DEBATE
      IN 1 IE HOUSE
      MO H E than 30 members of th e
      H i lls b o r o u g h F a m ily Support
      (.•roup a r e e x p e c te d to m a k e the
      jo u r n e y to W estm inster on F r i ­
                                                                         By Ian Kirby, political
                                                                             corespondent
                                                                                                                families p r e f u t e d to Lord .Justice
                                                                                                                Stuart Smith.
                                                                                                                    M r S tr a w will he nucKt.ioned
                                                                                                                closely A bout the re p o rt and w ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■i
                                                                                                                                                                                                    :i



      d a y to hear th e full Common*                                                                           ha ve to justify Lord Ju stic e Stuart
                                                                te li     i>eoi>U> a b o u t our- o w n         Smith's dectnion to reject tunny o f
      d eb ate on t h e disaster.                               <itiesr,ioiw."                                  the faitiilteft' dem ands fo r juxtictj.
        T h e Huppon srouu wan today di«>                           He suid the group linn Injen work               I I « w exoei’ i.od to strtWK 1h iu t l l i ­
     cUHHinpr mIhiir to stive their key <moi-                   intr ha rd 1,0 analyse the full content,n       re port. d id condem n S outh Y o rk
     tions to McrKtjys-iilw Ml's in raixc                       o f L o n l JunMce S tu a rt S m ith's          shire Police, fo r th e ir fa ilu re at.
     w ith Ilum t; Secretary .lack Si,raw.                      report. juiiJ ha* Httent weeks t r jin g        U llls lio ro iiirh , u n co v e riiiK new e v i­
        T h e k ro u p ’s (-hairnmn, T riiv n r                 to get hold o f ill! the police witiHiKN        dence i»bout JilUjred police .state'
     I Ticks. Kjiirl th e y hud not yt>t:                       s fa u jm e n ts w hich M r Straw Kidd he       ir u iin .s u n d l i e s          told         under
     received letters formnlly inviting                         would (lubllmh.                                 te s tim o n y ,
     them to London,                                              The debute is <;xpnei:ed to Include               B u t he w ill u'o on 10 c la im fh :it
        Bnr he addt»<l: "Wi,> ^xricci t<> l>e                   a re-examination of critical new evi­           there is now 110 letial twisiw fo r a re(-
     thtnv i.o m;ikt! our presence felr ;ui«l                   dence    isIt’ll the nnisboHHig'h               r(is).ifcfivc ]ironec\)tioii n f the |i«»ljee
                                                                                                                                     officers ;if. the ground
                                                                                                                                      - 1'ecaunc they have
                                                                                                                                     a Iready            t t s e a i»t;d
                                                                                                                                     juxticc.
                                                                                                                                        Merseyside M Ps w ill
                                                                                                                                     tra v e l bu ck from L iv -
                                                                                                                                     erpool fo r th e debute
                                                                                                                                     a fte r ro r iiu r ro w ’s local
                                                                                                                                     e le c tio n e a rn tm liin * .
                                                                                                                                     and wi ll be jo ine d by
                                                                                                                                     MPs fro m elsewhere
                                                                                                                                                Charter
                                                                                                                                      Most, are exjieet^is
                                                                                                                                   to speak          a lth o u g h
                                                                                                                                   m em ber* o f the g o v ­
                                                                                                                                   e rn m e n t   in c lu d ititx
                                                                                                                                   Peter K ilfo j-li), |-'riink
                                                                                                                                   F ield. ,-\ isnt-isl F.jigly
                                                                                                                                   and Jane K ennedy
                                                                                                                                   w ill n o t he allowed io
                                                                                                                                   eriticise M r St.ruw,
                                                                                                                                   • L i v e r p o o l ’*                   L ord
                                                                                                                                   Mayor, (.'Hr Margaret
                                                                                                                                   Clarke, » » giving her
                                                                                                                                   public backing 1.0 (he
                                                                                                                                   H’illN lio ro tig h F a m ily
                                                                                                                                   S u p p o r t i;roui> Iiy
                                                                                                                                   signing the Hills!hir-

     • Sign of support. . . Lord Mayor CJIr Margaret Clarke and Phil Hammond                                                       to'i'iV.’             <fc 1




                                                                   N J \C ifL
6^ko
O j5
/0 5 '98 WED 10:10 FAX 0161 236 9443                          *                                              @002

                                 0161 236 9443




                                                                                      Central Office of Information
                                                                                      The com m unication agency




                                       MPs plan strategy
                                       for H’boro defeats
                                                 S »» *«>s. -V.- .

                                        MERSEYSIDE MPs have met to
                                        plan their strategy for next Friday’s
                                        Common’s debate on the Hillsbor­
                                        ough disaster.
                                          All Merseyside MPs are expected to
                                        attend the five-hour debate which will be
                                        led by W est Lancs MP and North-West
                                        parliam entary group chairm an Colin
                                        Pickthall and Merseyside MPs Louise Ell-
                                        man. Eddie O’Hara arid Maria Eagle.
                                          Weaver Vale MP Derek Twigs, who was
                                        at Hillsborough, is also expected to play a
                                        significant part.
                                          Home Secretary Jack Straw will answer
                                        questions and be accompanied by his col­
                                        league and Knowsley North MP George
                                        Howarth.
                                          Birkenhead MP and Minister for Wel­
                                        fare Reform. Frank Field, m ay ask to
                                        speak.

                                  """        (         e r f <<s'    °




   HHQ02
6 gko
 l|6
*456/05 '98 WED 13:44 FAX 0161 236 9443                                                                             EiOOl




                                                                                               0        /
                                                                                   Central Office of Inform ation
             FAX M ESSAG E                       FAX M ESSAG E                 i
                                                                                   27* Floor, Sunley Tower
                                                                                   Piccadilly P iajs
                                                                                   M anchester M l 4SD
                                                                                   Tel: 0161 952 45M
                                                                                   Direct Line: 0161 9524504
       TO;        Sarah Clifford, Home      fr o m :      B arb ara W e b b
                  Office Press Office

       DATE:      6 May 1998

       PAGES:     1                         (Including this one)


       SUBJECT:   HILLBOROUGH CUTTING

       YOUR NO;   0171 273 4660            OUR NO:        0161 236 9443

       M ESSAGE



       This was in last night's Liverpool Echo: I couldn't find anything In the Daily Post this
       morning.


                                                  -                            \

                                          VIPs sign
                                          new H’boro
                                          charter
                                                By Keith Gladdis       f   ^
                                           COUNCIL chiefs and
                                           Hillsborough Family
                                           S u p p ort m em bers
                                           are launching a new
                                           charter.
                                                T he H illsb o r o u g h
                                             Justice Charter will be a
                                             statem ent o f intent for
                                             Its future campaigning
                                             backed b y signatures
                                             from 96 ‘p ublic figures.
                                                L iv e r p o o l’s L ord
                                             Mayor Margaret Clarke
                                           . will be first to sign the
                                             charter a t a ceremony
                                             a t th e T ow n H a ll
                                             tomorrow.
                                                Phil Hammond from
                                            ■ the Hillsborough Fam*
                                          ■ ily Support Group said:
                                              "We think this is an
                                             excellent -way to keep
                                             our cam paign in the
                                             public eye and to keep
                                              the pressure on the
                                              authorities."
£ t4 to
6 |©
                                         LETTERS YOUR VIEW
Sympathetic to MPs’ requests
I MUST take Issue with David
Rose's story whicb appeared on
the front of Fri day's Daily Post
(Hillsborough: Straw Gives In).
Far from opposing an open debate
in Parliament on Hillsborough, I
liave always been sympathetic to
 the requests of Merseyside MPs
 that there should be such a debate,
as I made clear in my comments to
 the House of Commons on
 February 18. My colleague Ann
 Taylor-w ho is responsible for
 scheduling parliamentary
 business - shares these concerns
 which is why stoe has arranged the
 debate for May 8.
     I am only too aware of the strong
  feelings on Merseyside about the
  terrible events of Hillsborough
  find 1 will continue to respond
  openly and directly to questions
  raised by the families and local
  MPs, whether inside Parliament
  or outside. 1 wiD.be opening the
  debate on May 8 as I always
   intended to do.
                     JackStraw MP,
                     Home Secretary



                                           lu   fW   z o lw t
wpo61


3 o /« f
C.O.I.NORTHWEST         A                   NO.039        P.3/6
     44+0161 228 0025




                                               Central Office of Information
                                               the communication agency




P                              North
                               West
n9

       NEW CALL FOR DISASTER JUSTICE

       A formal charter demanding justice for
       the Hillsborough victims and their
       families has been officially launched.

       Liverpool’s Lord Mayor Margaret Clarke
       was the first of 96 prominent people to
       lend her signature to the campaign.

       The charter says scrutiny by Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith failed to answer
       satisfactorily outstanding questions
       about the 1989 disaster.               1/2_
           Regional news 331       Sport 170
            TV PLUS HAS ALL THE GOSSIP p i 10



                    Teletext     333 May 6 15:00:07

                               North
                               West


       NEW CALL FOR DISASTER JUSTICE

      A charter calling for justice for the
      victims of the Hillsborough disaster
      and their families has been launched.

      The charter, which was initiated by
      Liverpool’s Lord Mayor, will be handed
      over to Home Secretary Jack Straw on
      completion.

      The launch comes two days before a full
      Commons debate on the FA Cup semi-final
      clash disaster.
                                              2 /2~ ~
          Regional news 331       Sport 170
          WHAT'S ON AT THE CINEMA? p460 C4
Teudk*
 e>lb
r
  Liverpool Daily Post
  24 April 1998
  Page 1


    HILLSBOROUGH:
    STRAW GIVES IN
Commons will
debate refusal                                                                      ;
of new inquiry                                                                      i
                                                                                   )'   •



                                                                          “Surely this should auto­
                                                                        matically have led to a ver-
HOME Secretary Jack Straw has                                           diet of unlawful killing. If
finally bowed to pressure by Mersey­                                    there was nothing wrong
side MPs and in a sudden turnaround                                     with the Hillsborough ver­
                                                                        dict why have they changed
last night he gave new hope to the fam­                                 the police disciplinary sys­
ilies of the Hillsborough victims.                                      tem and why there have
                                                                        been so many changes to
  In a shock move he                     By David Rose                  the infrastructure of foot­
agreed to open a Com­                                                   ball?” he said.
                                        and Anne Benson                   He said the fam ilies
m ons debate on h is                                                    would like to think that the
refusal to reopen the                 Mr Hicks has vowed that the
                                   campaign for justice for the         debate could lead the way
i n q u i r y into the             Hillsborough w ill carry on          to a re-opening of the
disaster.                          and has not ruled out private        inquiry.
   B u t c h a ir m a n o f th e   prosecutions.                          “It would be good if it
Hillsborough Family Support           “We hope the debate will not      was an opportunity for
Group, Trevor Hicks, warned        be just words - a sham. We are       Jack Straw to change his
that it had better not be just     hopeful it w ill be a genuine        mind but if it is just going
an empty debate which did          opportunity for us to raise          to be a talking shop it will
notallow MPs to take part in a     m any issu es that w e are           be a waste of time. We
free vote at the end.              unhappy about w ith th e             would like a free vote at the
   Commons Leader Ann Tay­         report,” said Mr Hicks.              end of the debate.
lor announced in the Com­            He said the group were plan­         “We have been let down
mons last night that Friday,       ning a meeting with Mersey­          so badly already by the
May 8 had been set aside for a     side MPs to discuss th eir           Labour Party but we do live
debate on Hillsborough.            concerns.                            in hope. Each time our
   The debate w ill give Mer­        “We have strong reserva­           hopes fade a little bit more.
seyside MPs the opportunity        tions about the impartiality of      The only thing remaining is
to ask Mr Straw to reconsider      the report and we think it has       our determination to . see
h is d e c isio n , w h ich h as   got some things wrong,” said         this matter through to its
angered the fam ilies of the 96    Mr Hicks.                            co n clu sio n ,” added Mr
fans who died.                       He said am ong m e q u e» n        Hicks.
                                   tions he w ould lik e asked o f tl
                                   Mr Straw w ould be w hy he.;-
                                   used th e term “gross negli­
                                   gence” in com m ents he had"
                                   made.




                                                                                                        Z\
3aily Post, Thursday. Aprii 16,1998

           mxmrmm
                                                         THE N IN T H ANNIV ERSA RY OF HILLSBOROUGH   5
                                                                                                      1

     , memories      a
message for Jack Straw
We’re never giving up
             By Jan e H aase
              Daily Post Staff


EFTANT Hillsborough campaign­
’s yesterday vowed to bring down
ome Secretary Jack Straw and
ew Labour if they will not give
em justice,
As 4,000 pe op le ga there d a t A a fie ld to
a rk th e n in th anniversary o f th e d ia ­
ler-, T re v o r H ic k s la un ched ' a b lis te r--'
g a tta c k on th e G o ve rn m e n t fo r fa il-
                                                                 si
                                                                                          I   ft


g to o rd e r a new inquiry In to the
igedy.
The chairm an o f the Hillsborough Family




                                                                                                          The Communication Agency
pport Group said: “ We are prepared to
Jipalgn against and even bring down
•aw and New la b o u r i f we cannot get them                         k s ll
 fu lfil the things they readily promised
ien in opposition,
We are essentially a non-
itic a i body and prefer to
la in th a t way, but i f push     □ AN H E LD
les to shove we will force         THOUGHTS*
 issue,*'                          F lora!
he group has already said          trib u te s a re
                                                                               1 1 .1 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.6/04
                                           (Jam^




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ’ 98
I t Is prepared to Held candi­    laid in the
dates In the next general elec­




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      THU
tio n and vice-chairman Phil      goalmouth
Hammond has pledget! lo           yesterday
                                  when Trevor




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 0 :1 6
lake on George Howarth for
his Knowsley North seat           Hicks, far
   Mr H ic ta said: "June 30      right
saw us a t the Hom e of Com­      launched his




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FAX
mons listening to Jack Straw,     attack.
the new Labour Home Secro-                                                                                                                                                                          mew?.-
tary, announce the Scrutiny        "get to the ’bottom o f th is once   and the funds " After thank­ result all right, but it was not




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0161
                                                                                                                                                Diana, Princess of Wales, As
 and its terms o f reference,      and for alT’.                        ing a ll those who had assisted the one we wanted, we lost
 February 18 tbis year saw the                                                                                                                  Diana spared a thought fo r
                                     MrHicks added: “ As you a ll       the campaign, M r H icks who 86-niL .                                   our grief so we reciprocate
 announcement by M r Straw         know, we have not got to the         lost his two daughters Sarah         *'I know I speak for many of       and send ours to Prince W il­




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ?3 6
 of M s decision not to reopen
                             bottom o f this matter and, on             and Victoria to the tragedy, the families when I say - we               lia m and Harry."
 an in qu iry.               behalf o f all the families, we            spoke of the grief the rela­ don't only see the result, we,                 And he added: "1 said ear­                                              so
        Whitewash            have (old Jack Straw that he               tives fe lt as they remembered ■ ■ reel it, we smell it, we taste it.   lier that today Is about
                             has failed us and the memory               their loved ones.                                                       remembering the 95 and how
   •'At the press conference ofthose who died.                             "O u r purpose today Is to                   Diana
                                                                                                                                                we wish things could be dif­
ifterwards I used the phrase    “We a re definitely not                 remember the 96 men,                   “Day after day we want           ferent                   ' -
New Labour, new white­ going away and we repeat                         women and children who what we cannot have, we                           ■ “We know we cannot get
wash’, and 1 aland by that that we will do everything                   died at Hillsborough nine want them back."                               them back, we try to under­
itatement," ' •              necessary to conclude this                 years ago today," he said.           Mr Hicks said: “ Some of            stand, we seek answers,
  He quoted Jack Straw's unfinished business. That                         “They went to Sheffield to you will recall that at last              explanations, the truth, Jus­
>wn words when he launched indndes private prosecutions                  enjoy themselves, seeing Liv­ year’s service I proudly read             tice, Nothing more than we
 he scrutiny and promised to II necessary. We have the w ill            erpool get a result. "We got a the fax we had received from              and ou r 96 dead deserve.



                                                                        A silent prayer for justice
                                                                                                                                                                        Bishop Packer, •vyho w as a priest in
                                                                         MORE tlian 4,000 people stood
                                                                         together In silence, some with arm s           Claire Donnelly                               Sheffield when the tragedy happened,
                                                                                                                                                                      recalled his feelings In the days that
                                                                         locked, yesterday to remember the
                                                                         terrible moments on an April after­           joined the thousands                           followed the tragedy.
                                                                                                                                                                        " I spent most of that fateful week
                                                                         noon when 98 football fans died.
                                                                            Flinching in the bitter wind, they
                                                                                                                       who paid their                                 meeting with Liverpool fans, meet­
                                                                         gathered on the Kop for the ninth
                                                                        . anniversary o f the Hillsborough
                                                                                                                       respects at a sombre,                          ing, I do not doubt, with some o f
                                                                                                                                                                      you,” he said. “ I know then some­
                                                                         disaster. ..
                                                                            And at exactly 8.06pm, a minute’s
                                                                                                                       chilly Anfield                                 thing of the bravery shown by fami­
                                                                                                                                                                      lies who came across and their deter­
                                                                         silence was observed.                                                                        mination that the terrible events
                                                                            As always, I t w as a time to show         And ho watched as two actors, Scot             would not be in vain.”
  3 SILENT •'                                                             sorrow and anger but m ost o f all a Williams and Christopher Ecclestone,                                 Evidence
                                                                         binding faith that their calls for jus­ •l i t 96 red candles, each symbolising a
   1ESPECT: A                                                             tice will e v e n tu a lly be heard.                                                            Charles M cD ongal, director of
                                                                                                                  life lost in the disa ste r.
   ombre                                                                                                               Then ministers read the names of               "Hillsborough" and Dr Ed Walker,          S'
  jiteve                                                                                     Candles                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                  the dead.                                           who controversially was n o t called to   3
   IcManaman                                                                Earlier, members of the Family Sup­        W hen the final name, that of Gra­             present his medical evidence a t the      c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
   t                                                                     port Group laid flowers before the ham W rig h t, was heard, the congre­                     original inquiry, read Bible passages
   esterday’s                                                             goal, before Joining the congregation g a tio n stood and bowed their heads                 to the silent crowd.                       B
                                                                          and players from the c u rre n t Liver­ for the minute’s silence.                             Trevor Hicks, F a m ily Support          oD
                                                                          pool squad to pay their respects.            The Inter-denominational service               Group chairman, then ca lle d on the
   .cture:                                                                   Among them was Jimmy McGov­ had sta rte d with an address from the                       co n g reg ate to Join The Love and       m >              g>
   mm,                                                                    ern, w riter of the TV drama- I t Kev John Packer, Bishop of                                Joy Gospel Choir in the sin g in g of     03               ©
   3USHUN-                                                                documentary Hillsborough,               Warrington.                                         "You’ll Never Walk Alone,”                                 ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 K5
i nuisuay, April 16, 1998     ^

    Carrflyaign chairman’s vow as 5,TOO mark ninth anniversary of Hillsborough-
                                                                                                                       CD




    WE WON’T GO AWAY
                                                                                                                       <20



                                                                                                                       3




                ByPaul Kennefif                                                                                        fc
                                                                                                                        O
     M E IlUJsboi'ougli cam paign for                                                                                   H*
                                                                                                                        0>
     justice today entered Its 10th
     y e a r with families o f victim s
     vow )hk to m arch forward w ith                                                                                    |S5
     renewed vigour.                                                                                                    05
       More than 5,000 peoiile Riled the                                                                                SD
     fam ous Anfielrt K op uii the ninth
     tmnlveretu-y o f the fc t s t e r to                                                                                s£*
     remember th e        lives tot, oh the
     LeppliiGK tn a e terrace.
      S u p p o rters stood stand der to
    Hlioiiktev with Uverpooi jfeyers and
     directoi'H for th e ti$enu»tM new ice,
     nm oiif! th e m te e n a g e E n g la n d
     striker Michael Owen, wfc w as just
     nine yours old on ilie day of the ill-                                                         m
     filled F A Cud semi-fiuul, .
        Families of the (lend iiuid floral
     triliiita? behind the goal Swfore the
     Kt Kev John PncUor, Bishop of
     Wnrringloti, welcomed e«wyot»e to
     th e se rv ic e. Utahan Factor was a
              priest in Kheffield mi the time
     of tlie (liHitster.
                   S ilence
       O ne display o f m i rosea carried
     the niesange: " In menus? of the
     needless, tragic loss of DS- precious                                                              • :.ys
     lives. The Tight will cany on until                                                                It
     Justice is done,"
         A t Si.OOpni, tl»e Ivop vows to their
     feet t o o b se r v e nn taspeeeable
     m lm ite’n silence In memory of those
     who died.                                      "T h a t Includes p rivate prosecu­
         CrtiidJes were lit by actors who        tions i f nccessary. W e Imvu the w ill
     starred in the acclaimed drama-             and we have the fumlft."
     doeuiaeiibur HitlsiRmnigh,. written            A fte r th e hoiir-iontf fierviee, durlns
     by Liverpudlian J im m y MeGoveni.          w h ich the names o f nil the victims
        Mr McGovern said: “Tottey is n,          were read o u t, M r H id e s said th e
     k;i <1 da.v for the families sad a, sad     n e s t move fro m the fa m ilie s will be     m
     day for the country as a whole.”            to ta k e legal w iv lc e ,
        Campaign chairman T r e w Hicks            B e said: “ W e have suffered n to t o f
     w\i<l in his speech: “We ftrejfcfliiituly   kn o cks but the NtreniUh o f the fam ­
     not Koing away and we re*»al that           ily group la Hi at when .someone is
     we will (lo everything » e « s w y to       dow n, someone else is there to p ick
     conclude tills unfinished butatoesB.        the m up."                                                      ESI
                                                                                                                               g»
                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                               Its?
G cho
1085                                                       18 F E B R U A R Y 1998                  Hillsborough                        1086


                       H illsbo ro u gh                                     The main causes of the disaster have long been clear.
                                                                         They were identified by LerJ Taylor in his interim report
                                                                         in August 1989. Lord Justice Taylor did not attribute all
3.31 pm                                                                  the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph
   The Secretary of State for the H om e Department                      278 o f his report he made it clear that
(Mr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam Speaker.                        "the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control".
I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
stadium disaster.                                                        Both Lord Taylor, and now Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
                                                                         have been damning in their condemnation o f the senior
   Few events in recent years have touched the lives o f so              officer in charge that afternoon, the then Chief
many people. The families and friends o f the 96 Liverpool               Superintendent Dui.kenfield. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
fans who died at Hillsborough              have suffered
                                                                         refers in his report to
immeasurably. The whole nation has been profoundly
disturbed by what occurred that day. Although almost                     "Mr. Duckenfield's disgraceful lie"
nine years have now passed, many o f the families and
                                                                         about one o f the gates at Hillsborough—
others felt very strongly indeed that new evidence was
available that would cast new light on the events. As                    "Gate C being forced open by tans".
Home Secretary, I was determined to do all that I could
                                                                           The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the
to establish whether that was indeed the case.
                                                                         main share o f responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield
   On coming into office in May last year, I gave that                   Wednesday football club and the local authority were also
question intense and urgent consideration, and on 30 June,               criticised by Lord Taylor.
I announced to the House that the Attorney-General and
                                                                           With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that,
I had decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
                                                                         over time, some new information may become available,
a senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal, to conduct
an independent scrutiny o f the matter. His terms of                     but that does not necessarily mean that the outcome o f
                                                                         any previous inquiries would have been different. What is
reference were
                                                                         crucial is not just whether the information is new, but
  “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster     whether it is o f such significance— to use the phrase in
at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not
                                                                         the terms o f reference— as to justify a new inquiry.
available:
(a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor: or                    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail
                                                                         all the evidence put before him. That included all the
(b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
for the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                                                                         relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
responsibilities; or                                                     inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
                                                                         information presented to him, by individuals and official
(c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                                                                         bodies, including those representing the families o f those
police disciplinary matters:
                                                                         who died and others who have acted in support of them.
and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously     He has produced a thorough and comprehensive report
available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
                                                                         and goes into immense detail to analyse and reach
Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further public
inquiry: and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any   conclusions on each o f the submissions made to him.
evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant
                                                                            Let me briefly summarise what Lord Justice
to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other
action which should be taken in the public interest."
                                                                         Stuart-Smith says on the key allegations relating to video
                                                                         evidence and the cut-off time o f 3.15 pm for the inquest,
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report,               and allegations o f interference with witnesses. I refer first
which I am publishing today. It is available in the Vote                 to the video evidence. Two sets o f allegations were made
Office. His scrutiny is the latest in a series o f lengthy and           to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about video evidence. They
detailed examinations o f the evidence in this case. The                 were, first, that video tapes were stolen from the club’s
public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor                       control room to conceal material evidence from the earlier
considered fully the causes of the disaster and made                     inquiries. There is no dispute that the theft o f two tapes
wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and                     took place. The tapes were pictures from the club's closed
safety at sports events. Those have had a profound a n d .               circuit television cameras, not from police cameras.
positive effect on both crowd safety at football grounds
                                                                         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that, in any event, the
and on the policing of football matches.                                 tapes would have shown nothing significant. Moreover,
   The deaths that occurred were also the subject of                     he is satisfied that all the police tapes were made available
inquests conducted by the coroner for the Western district               in their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and to the
of South Yorkshire in two parts in 1990 and 1991. Those                  coroner.
inquests involved more than 80 days o f public hearings.
                                                                             The second allegation relating to video tapes, with
A further investigation was conducted by the West
                                                                          which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals at considerable
Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints
Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds                    length, was made principally by Mr. Roger Houldsworth.
for criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the police.              a video technician at Sheffield Wednesday football club.
That investigation involved taking more than 5,000                        It was that the police had blamed their failure to see
statements. At a later stage, in November 1993. a judicial                overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being
review o f the coroner’s proceedings upheld the inquest                   defective, when it was not; that evidence o f the video
verdict of accidental death and the conduct o f those                     tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately suppressed and
proceedings. W e have now had this further detailed                       concealed; and that two police officers gave deliberately
scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice o f Appeal.                             false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.
 1087                     Hillsborough               18 F E B R U A R Y 1998                 Hillsborough                        1088 *


 [Mr. J a c k S tra w I                                           authorities that could cause them to reconsider the
                                                                  decisions that they have already taken. He also co n cflfcs
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the police did            that none of the evidence that he was asked to consider
 not try to blame their failure to spot overcrowding on           added anything significant to the evidence that was
 the terraces on faulty CCTV equipment. He says that              available to Lord Taylor's inquiry or to the inquests.
 the police controllers had a good view over the terraces            I, the Attorney-General and the Director o f Public
 from the control 'box. and did not pretend otherwise.            Prosecutions have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith'.s
 He also concluded that                                           report very' carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
 "the importance of Mr. Houldsworth's    evidence   has   been    conclusions. That will. I know, be deeply disappointing
 exaggerated out of all proportion".                              for the families o f those who died at Hillsborough and for
 and that Mr. Houldsworth's existence and evidence were           many who have campaigned on their behalf.
 known to the Taylor inquiry and to the coroner.                     I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at
 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that the allegation          Hillsborough feel betrayed by those responsible for
 that the police hid video tape evidence o f the terraces         policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state
 is “unfounded''.                                                 of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
   There are allegations about the conduct of the                 changes that resulted from the Taylor inquiry will mean
inquest, and in particular about the cut-off time of              that such a disaster will never happen again.
3.15 pm. One o f the issues that has unquestionably                 However, there is another sense in which the system
caused most distress to those bereaved at Hillsborough            has failed the Hillsborough families. As Lord Justice
was the decision of the coroner to rule that all those            Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 o f his report:
who had died had received the injuries that caused their
                                                                     "I understand the dismay that they have that no individua^k
deaths by 3.15 pm. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that
                                                                  personally been held to account either in a criminal t w .
the coroner did not say that all those who died did so            disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing their job".
before 3.15 pm, or that all those who became
unconscious subsequently died. It was only in relation             That highlights some o f the serious shortcomings in the
to how or by what means the deceased came to their                police disciplinary system. Earlier this year, the Select
deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Lord Justice            Committee on Home Affairs produced a report that made
Stuart-Smith says that the cut-off time did not limit the         major recommendations for change. I shall respond fully
inquiry undertaken by the inquest, and that he does not           to that report soon, but what happened after Hillsborough
consider the inquest to have been flawed. The Taylor              is a prime example o f why we must improve the current
inquiry considered in detail the response of the                  arrangements.
emergency services after 3.15 pm as well as before,                  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on whether
and concluded that no valid criticism could be made               coroners’ proceedings are appropriate at all in respect of
of them.                                                          a major disaster that has already been the subject o f a
   The main allegations concerning interference with              public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of
witnesses were that specific witnesses had had pressure           a Home Office working group on disasters and
put on them by the West Midlands police, and that the             inquests— published in March 1997— that the role o f the
South Yorkshire police had collected evidence from                coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.
their own officers in an unacceptable manner.                        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report emphasises the
   On the first allegation, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith             exceptional difficulty o f the coroner’s task in conducting
concludes that there was no improper attempt to alter             the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I think,
the evidence of those witnesses. On the second, he                unnecessary burden on the families involved, g iv e n j ta t
records that a number o f the initial statements made             the Taylor report had covered substantially the aBre
by South Yorkshire police officers were subsequently              ground. Certainly, I am sure that Hillsborough proved that
amended on the advice o f solicitors to the force before          the inquest system in its present form is an unsuitable
being submitted to the Taylor inquiry. He says that in            means o f dealing with disasters o f that kind. I think it
a very few cases, which are referred to in appendix 7             would be far better— above all. for the bereaved
of the report, what was excluded was either factual or            families— if there were one fully comprehensive inquiry
comment in which factual matters were implicit. He                into the causes of death and the wider circumstances.
says that
                                                                     When I instigated the scrutiny, I said I would do my
"it would have been preferable"                                   best to ensure that the evidence considered by
for those matters not to have been excluded, but he is            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most o f the
satisfied that Lord Taylor’s inquiry was not in any way           main material that he has considered is contained in
inhibited or impeded by what happened.                            appendices to his report. Much o f the other evidence that
                                                                  he has considered is already in the public domain,
  The report also deals comprehensively in appendix
                                                                  consisting o f transcripts of public hearings or material
10 with the 10 questions posed by the Granada Television          considered by the Taylor inquiry. As I told the shadow
programme in December 1996.
                                                                  Home Secretary, I am arranging for the other materia!
   Taking those and all other considerations into account,        considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in
the overall conclusion that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith             the Library o f the House, save where there are overriding
reaches is that there is no basis for a further public            reasons for doing otherwise. Let me make it clear that the
inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application         material that will be published will include all the original
to quash the verdict o f the inquest, and he concludes that       statements made by South Yorkshire police offio^fc
there is no material that should be put before the Director       together with the amended versions submitted to me
o f Public Prosecutions or the police disciplinary                Taylor inquiry.
VIGuf oaxcL
  2J
VW\5ccd
S'yyvW -
 w\z
1089                      Hillsborough                     18 F E B R U A R Y 1998                Hillsborough                      1090


  All hon. Members will have profound sympathy                           how it happened in the worst tragedy in British sporting
with the families and friends of those who died at                       history are now closed as far as the Government are
Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend what                   concerned'.’
they have suffered. In his report. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith says:                                                          Mr. Straw: I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman
                                                                         for his opening comments. Of course, the whole House
   “I realise that my report and advjce will come as a disappointment
                                                                         agrees with the eloquent and compassionate words that he
to them"—
                                                                         used to express some understanding o f the nightmare that
the families and friend.s of those who died—                             the families have faced since that afternoon. He asked four
"especially since they have had iheir hopes raised that something        questions, the first of which was whether I am personally
more ;ould be done. But 1 cannot allow compassion to cloud my            satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully examined the
judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and objectively at         new evidence, or the claimed new evidence that has
what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence which    emerged. Yes. I am satisfied, and so is my right hon. and
had previously been considered".                                         learned Friend the Attorney-General.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General,                       It does not follow that when one establishes an inquiry
the Director o f Public Prosecutions and I have had to                   o f this kind, one is bound to accept its conclusions, but as
consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report in the .same                 the right hon. Gentleman will have seen from the
light, and we accept its conclusions.                                    summary in chapter 7, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
  The entire country is united in sympathy with those                    conducted a most careful examination o f the evidence and
who lost loved ones at Hillsborough. We cannot take                      has reached clear conclusions. It would have been
the pain from them, but I hope that the families will                    extraordinary if my right hon. and learned Friend the
recognise that the report represents— as I promised— an                  Attorney-General and I had not followed those
independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny o f all the                  conclusions in those circumstances.
evidence that was given to the committee.                                   The right hon. Gentleman asked whether I am satisfied
                                                                         that the families' complaints about the 3.15 pm cut-off
                                                                         point have been dealt with satisfactorily in the report.
   Sir Brian M aw hinney (North-West Cambridgeshire);                    I am satisfied about that so far as the report is concerned.
I thank the Home Secretary for his courtesy in letting me                Lord Justice Stuart-Smith states on page 41, paragraph
have early sight of his statement, and even earlier sight of              12 that in his view the coroner had been "widely
the report. It is a long report, and. as the right hon.                  misrepresented” about what the 3.15 pm cut-off point was
Gentleman will understand, I have not had the opportunity
                                                                         meant to mean. He states:
to read it all, but I have read carefully the chapter that
                                                                            "It should be noted that the Coroner did not say that all those
summarises the findings in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s                   who died did so before 3.15. or that the medical evidence was to
own words. I also thank the right hon. Gentleman for his                 this effect."
willingness to publish all the material, both unamended
                                                                         The point about the 3.15 pm cut-off was much narrower.
and amended. I am sure that that was the right thing to do.
                                                                         I do not think that that will be accepted by the families.
  We, like Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, express great                      The combination, the conjunction, o f the coroner's inquest
sympathy for the relatives o f those who died, and the                   before and after the major public inquiry raises concerns
spectators who were injured. We, too, find it difficult to               about the purpose o f such inquests when there is such a
imagine anything more horrific than the experience of                    major inquiry, about which I commented in my statement.
those who endured it, and o f those who lost their                           The right hon. Gentleman asked whether the families
families— including children— in that appalling incident.                 will be disappointed. Inevitably, there was always a risk
   I have four questions on the report. First, is the Home                that in accepting, as I did, that there was, prima facie,
Secretary satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully                  sufficient new evidence needing this kind o f scrutiny, the
examined all the so-called new evidence that has emerged,                 families' hopes would be raised and that that could lead
not least from the families, since the Taylor inquiry? Is he              to one o f the four possibilities that are mentioned in the
personally satisfied that none o f it was newly significant?              terms o f reference. That was inevitable. I do not in
Secondly, is he satisfied that the families’ complaints                   the least think that it was wrong to set up the inquiry,
about the so-called 3.15 pm cut-off point have been                       and I know that the right hon. Gentleman supported me
comprehensively addressed by the judge? No doubt the                      in doing so.
right hon. Gentleman realises that, although his decision                    The families are disappointed. With Madam Speaker's
to establish this independent scrutiny was broadly                        permission. I saw them at 2.15 pm this afternoon and,
welcomed, it always carried the risk that it would heighten               again with her permission, I gave them copies o f the
expectations, particularly those o f the families who were                report. They are upset, disappointed and angry about its
involved. That brings me to my third question. Does he                    conclusions. They are also angry that I have accepted
accept that they will be disappointed by the outcome of                   those conclusions. I understand that, but what I ask them
the inquiry and that some o f them may feel let down?                     t0 do— and. obviously, what they were not able to do in
                                                                          the three quarters o f an hour that I had with them— is to
   My fourth and final question to the Home Secretary is
                                                                          read the report carefully and, I hope, in time, to come
this. By agreeing that there is no basis for a further
                                                                          to understand that the establishment of this further
judicial inquiry: for a reopening o f Lord Taylor’s inquiry:
                                                                          .scrutiny and the way in which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
for a renewed application to the divisional court; for
                                                                          conducted it show great respect for their bereavement and
the Attorney-General to exercise his powers under the
Coroner's Act 1988; or for any new material to be put                     continuing concerns.
before the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Police                    Finally, the right hon. Gentleman asked me whether
Complaints Authority, is he suggesting to the House and                    I believe that, as it were, this matter is now closed.
the country that matters relating to what happened and                     We are announcing, today that there are no grounds tor
 1091                           Hillsborough                IX F E B R U A R Y 199,S              Hillsborough                    1092


 [M r. S tra w I                                                          followed by a comprehensive inquiry, which, in p r a c ^ k
                                                                          would include the purposes of subsequent main inquWs
reopening a further full public inquiry of the sort that w as             tinder a senior judicial figure, and a final, formal inquest,
conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, the coroner's inquest,                  which would simply receive the main inquiry's report.
disciplinary matters against the police or certain other                  In our judgment, that would be a far more satisfactory
matters. Those are-our decisions and they will have to                    way of dealing with these matters, and far less frustrating
stand.                                                                    to the relatives and friends of the bereaved.
   The feelings o f the families will live with them for ever,
 so the matter is not closed in that sense. All of u.s who                   Mr. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Although the
have lost children in any circumstances have some                        report has not provided the Home Secretary with support
understanding o f the way in which people never get over                  for a further general inquiry, does he recognise that this
the deaths o f children, even if they die from natural                   outcome will make it even harder to lift the cloud o f grief
causes; it is still more terrible if they die from violent               and frustration that hangs over the families and friends of
causes such as this. However, there are other lessons that               those who lost their lives? Bearing in mind Lord Justice
we have to learn. As I have said, those relate to the                    Stuart-Smith's reference to the "disgraceful lie" of a
purpose o f coroners' inquiries, to the fact that we should              senior police officer, the evidence o f material omitted
not put families through the mill twice, as happened in                  from police evidence and Lord Justice Taylor's assertion
this case, and to the need to change the police                          that the principal cause was a police failure, is it not
disciplinary system.                                                     understandable that the families will be bitterlv
                                                                         disapp ointed that the door seems finally to be closed on
   Mr. Eddie O ’Hara (Knowsley, South): One has to live                  any disciplinary action against particular individuals who
on Merseyside to understand the palpable sense o f grief,                should bear some responsibility? Will the right
resentment and anger that still exists in our part of the                Gentleman look again at that aspect of the issue and girc
world at what we regard as the continuing injustice as a                 priority to a reform o f police disciplinary procedure?
result o f the Hillsborough affair.
                                                                            Mr. Straw: The right hon. Gentleman asks whether
   My right hon. Friend has rightly pointed out that Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider two questions: was                  it will not now be even harder to lift the clouds o f grief
there new evidence; and was it sufficiently strong to be a               over the bereaved families. I cannot speak for them, but
                                                                         it would have been far worse had I not set up this further
basis for reopening the inquiry? I draw my right hon.
                                                                         scrutiny. They came forward with serious new allegations
Friend's attention to paragraph 14 and related paragraph
                                                                         and it was important that they were examined by someone
13 on page 41 o f the report, which deal with the 3,15 pm
                                                                         o f the experience and distinction o f Lord Justice
cut-off, which is one o f the most important sources o f
                                                                         Stuart-Smith. However, the right hon. Gentleman is
anger. Referring to new evidence about whether people
                                                                         right— there can be no dispute about it— that the families
were alive after 3.15 pm. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says:
                                                                         are bound to be bitterly disappointed by the fact that no
"it is difficult to see the relevance of further evidence that person
                                                                         one has taken the blame for what happened. Lord Justice
A was alive at 3.15 pm but died subsequently"—
                                                                         Stuart-Smith makes that clear and shares the bitter
referring to whether people might have survived if they                  disappointment o f the families, as do I and, I believe, the
had been given better medical treatment. He justifies that               House. As I said in my earlier remarks, that underlines
conclusion by referring to the divisional court, which                   the need for there to be significant changes to the police
rejected such grounds, concluding that such questions                    disciplinary system.
"were not relevant to the inquiry into how— i.e. by what means—
the deceased had come to their deaths."
                                                                            Mr. A ndrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and N e s t ^ ^
If a person had a cardiac arrest in hospital and was not                 My right hon. Friend has mentioned in the context o f the
satisfactorily treated, would that be regarded as simply                 report his consideration o f the future conduct o f inquests.
death by cardiac arrest, or would the consideration of                   Will he extend his review to consider carefully the way
neglect come into it ?                                                   in which relatives are treated during inquests? They are
                                                                         treated in a most dispassionate way, which results in much
   Mr. Straw: The point that my hon. Friend raises is                    o f the grief that is expressed vocally by many of the
often raised in relation to the conduct o f inquests, ft comes           people, including my constituents, who suffered in this
up when, for example, there have been allegations o f                    terrible tragedy.
deaths in custody and in many cases when there has been
a violent or unexpected death. The relatives believe that                   Mr. Straw: Yes, I will. We have the helpful report of
part of the purpose o f the inquest is to allocate blame for             the disasters and inquests working group, established
what has happened, whereas the purpose o f the inquest                   under the previous Administration, which made
is much narrower: to try to identify the cause of death. It              recommendations in March last year. Part o f the reason
is in that context that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith makes his              for the frustration— often anger— at inquests, o f relatives
remarks. It is important to recognise that all that he says              and others who are bereaved, goes back to a
in paragraph 14 on page 41 follows the decision of the                   misapprehension about their purpose. To some extent, that
divisional court, which followed a thorough judicial                     will be dealt with by the kind of changes that I have
review hearing, not to grant a reopening o f the inquest.                already outlined for inquiries into major disasters.
   Again, my hon. Friend flags up a need for            changes in
the way in which investigations are held                into major         Mrs. Louise Ellm an (Liverpool. Riverside I: My ri^fe
disasters such as Hillsborough. I repeat that           we believe       hon.   Friend    acted  promptly   and   properly
that, in future, there      should be what               are called      commissioning the scrutiny, for which I thank him.
mini-inquests into the       immediate causes             of death.      I agree that. the bereaved parents will remain upset.

        c   O' :   ::-p \ g :
1093                    Hillsborough                  18 F E B R U A R Y 1998               Hillsborough                     1094


disappointed and anarv and. in that knowledge, will he              aside, as the families would have wished him to do. It is
give the matter further consideration? Does he accept that          a matter of huge frustration that no one has been brought
it is not possible for all o f us at this early stage to assess     to justice. That represents severe defects in terms of police
the report's full implications and to read it in detail to          discipline, and I have spoken about the need for that to
form our judgment? Therefore, will he support calls for             be changed. It is not possible to put the clock back nine
an opportunity for the House to consider the report                 years to do so.
further, so that we may give a reasoned assessment of the
report and attempt to deal with the unresolved problems                Mr. Robert N. W areing (Liverpool. West Derby):
and traumas faced by the parents? I support them in not             Does my right hon. Friend accept that there will be deep
wishing to leave matters simply as they stand.                      unease on Merseyside and elsewhere, and that people will
                                                                    feel that there is no justice in this world? Does he further
   Mr. Straw: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her               accept that because few o f us have had the opportunity to
opening remarks, and I fully understand her concern—                read the report— although he was kind enough to analyse
which is widely shared— that there should be a debate on            it with the parents— far more scrutiny is required by the
the matter. I am probably one o f the few who has had an            House of Commons: possibly by the Select Committee on
opportunity to read the report thoroughly, and I shall pass         Home Affairs, which should be asked to report?
on my hon. Friend’s remarks to my right hon. Friend the                Furthermore. I add my voice to that of my hon. Friend
President o f the Council. I hope that my right hon. Friend         the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Mrs. Ellmanl and
will take them into account.                                        ask that there should be a proper debate following a
                                                                    reasonable period to allow us to read the report. For
   M aria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): I thank my right              example, it would seem that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
hon. Friend for his statement and for his consideration in          ruled as not significant a couple o f videos stolen from
seeking your permission. Madam Speaker, to speak to the             Sheffield Wednesday. How on earth could he say that they
families first before making it. He has accepted the deep           were not significant if he had never seen them? Many
disquiet that they feel as a result o f the report by Lord          questions have been raised by the report, and the parents
Justice Stuart-Smith, and I know that it is deep.                   will not feel that justice has been done until they are
I particularly    welcome     my   right hon.      Friend’s         answered.
undertaking to publish all the available evidence. What
would his attitude be if. at some stage, the families were             Mr. Straw: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith explains why he
to consider private prosecutions or taking further action?          came to that conclusion and how he could judge that the
                                                                    videos were not significant when he had not seen them.
   Mr. Straw: Subject to certain constraints, individuals           One o f the videos was from a misplaced camera angle.
in this country may take private prosecutions. That is              It was known that it had been pointing at a wall.
entirely a matter for them and for the judicial processes.          Therefore, the tape was of no value, even though it was
It would be improper for me to comment.                             stolen. As for the other video, two points are made. One
                                                                    is that it was a club video. Police videos in part covered
   Mr. Derek T w igg (Halton): I speak with some                    the same area. In addition, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
knowledge, as I was on the terraces at Hillsborough that            makes the point that the police admitted that they could
day and not in some directors' area. I had to wait for two          see with their own eyes what was going on on the terraces
hours to see whether my friends were alive, and I know              and did not need this crucial video evidence. That is one
that a number o f people from my constituency and that of           example o f why it is very important that everybody should
my hon. Friend the Member for Weaver Vale (Mr. Hall)                read the report’s details. When they do, they may be
                                                                    reassured that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has gone into the
were killed on that day.
                                                                    matter in great detail and with great care.
   May I express my bitter disappointment— not at the
                                                                       That brings me to my hon. Friend’s first point. I have
Home Secretary, whom I thank for organising
the scrutiny— but at the conclusions o f the report?                already accepted that it is a matter o f fact— there is no
The families will be bitterly disappointed by the fact that         question about this— that there is great disappointment
no one has been brought to justice, and such an injustice           among the bereaved families and friends o f those who
does not give confidence in our judicial system. I ask my           died on that terrible day. I do not think that it is correct
                                                                    to say— to pick up my hon. Friend's words— that there is
right hon. Friend for his comments on that. If we cannot
                                                                    no justice in this world. On reflection, he will perhaps
have a debate on the Floor o f the House on the report,
would you. Madam Speaker, be prepared to allow an                   accept that Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry was conducted
Adjournment debate on the subject in the future?                    impeccably, with great thoroughness. There has been no
                                                                    criticism o f either the way in which he conducted that
                                                                    inquiry or his conclusions. That may be only partial
   Mr. Straw: Of course. I understand my hon. Friend's
                                                                    justice in the context o f this terrible tragedy— it is partial
personal feelings in the light o f the fact that he was
                                                                    justice. I understand that the conduct o f the inquests was
present on that terrible day. I understand, too. that those
                                                                    controversial, but that has a great deal to do with the
feelings will live with him for the rest of his life. The
                                                                    system o f inquests, and that was not found to be unjust.
families are bitterly disappointed and, as I said, I hope
that their disappointment will be directed at my right hon.           It is inevitable that an inquiry's conclusions may be
and learned Friend the Attorney-General and me as well              uncomfortable to one side or another. I hope that those
as at Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. because it is our view that        who read the report will understand that it represents a
he has done a thorough, comprehensive and detailed job              thorough inquiry in the best traditions o f British justice.
with the utmost integrity. He has gone into all the
allegations carefully and. as he said, it was his job to look        Mr. V ernon C oaker (Gedling): As one o f the
at the evidence presented to him and to put compassion              Members o f Parliament who represents the Nottingham
 1095                         Hillsborough                   18 F E B R U A R Y 1998              Hillsborough                     1096 '


 [M r. Vernon C o n k e r j                                                 why he was chosen to hold the inquiry. When my Jama.
                                                                           Friend has had a chance to digest Lord Ju^R;
area, may I take this opportunity, on behalf of those                      Stuart-Smith’s report, he will appreciate that it has gone
Members, to express our sympathy with the families and                     into the allegations with great care.
people o f Merseyside? Does the Home Secretary agree
that the people o f Nottingham, along with those on                          M r. Tony C larke (Northampton, South): Does my
Merseyside, will want a full and frank debate on the                      right hon. Friend accept that it is that clear evidence that
report, which amounts to more than 200 pages and has                      will make it impossible for the families to accept
only just been published today? Will he do all that he can                disappointment, inasmuch as they know that the police
to ensure a full debate, so that people will have                         failed and that nothing is being done about that? Will he
the opportunity to express their views and opinions to me                 say a few words about the evidence that Lord Justice
and other Members o f Parliament, and we can express                      Stuart-Smith put forward in respect of the stolen tapes?
those views in the Chamber?                                               Surely, if the stolen tapes are missing, we must ask two
                                                                          questions. First, who was responsible for that theft and.
                                                                          secondly, for what reason were they stolen if not for
   M r. Straw : I accept my hon. Friend’s point. I should                 concealment? It is for that reason that I add my support
have made the point in response to my hon. Friend the                     to the call of my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool.
Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) that                       Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) for a full debate in the House to
there is obviously considerable feeling about the need for                examine the individual pieces o f evidence and missing
a debate. I shall pass that on to my right hon. Friend the                evidence before coming to a conclusion.
President o f the Council.
                                                                             M r. Straw: I appreciate that I am one o f the few pe<^?
                                                                          who have had the benefit o f reading the report. If my
   M r. D ennis S k in n er (Bolsover): Is the Home Secretary             Friend reads it, as I know he will, he will see that the
aware that I find it difficult to believe that 95 people were             question o f the two missing tapes is dealt with in some
killed but nobody is to blame? Is he further aware that                   particular detail. I have explained why Lord Justice
inquests on the deaths o f many people, such as after                     Stuart-Smith reached the conclusion that he did about
mining disasters and for this matter, are not fit and proper              whether the fact that they were stolen was significant.
places to start the procedure? He would do well, during                   This goes back to the point that I made at the beginning o f
this Parliament, to introduce measures to ensure that                     my statement. When we consider whether a major public
inquests are fit to deal with not just the death o f three                inquiry into events that took place nine years ago should
people in a house fire but with mass disasters. I have                    be reopened, with all the inevitable problems caused by
never believed that inquests are competent to do the job.                 the effluxion o f time, the issue has to be not only whether
                                                                          there is new evidence— which there might be— but
   Will the Home Secretary do me a favour? If, perchance,                 whether it is o f such significance as materially to alter the
there is another unfortunate incident o f this kind, will he              conclusions o f the first inquiry. That is what Lord Justice
not invite these tinpot judges and justices— distinguished                Stuart-Smith has examined. He has come to the
though they may be— to deal with the problem? I have                      conclusion that I have described about the two missing
never believed that they understand working-class culture.                tapes.
Over the past few years, all these people— Lord Justice                      It is a matter o f supposition why the tapes were stolen.
Scott, Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—                    People steal things for the purposes o f concealment or for
have been investigating matters. What do they really                      more prosaic reasons. They may have wanted the tapes
know about what makes working-class people tick?                          for their own use. N o one has ever been apprehended^ar
                                                                          the theft of the tapes, but in the circumstances d e s c r ^ p
                                                                          and set out in the report, it is palpable that they were not
   M r. Straw : My hon. Friend makes the point that no                    material to the question whether the police were to blame
one is to blame. It is not the case that the earlier inquiries            for failing to recognise that a serious disaster was taking
found no one to blame. Indeed, on page 49 of his interim                  place at the Leppings lane end. That was the issue. If Lord
report— Cm 765— Lord Justice Taylor was explicit and                      Justice Taylor had said that the police were not to blame
damning. He said:                                                         and that the tapes were likely to disclose why. the tapes
"the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control''.    would have greater significance. However. Lord Justice
                                                                          Taylor said that the police were to blame. He also pointed
There has been no cover-up o f that. There was a failure of               out— this was confirmed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—
police control, and Lord Justice Taylor pulled no punches                 that one o f the reasons why the police were to blame was
whatever in reaching that conclusion. I hope that that                    that they did not have to rely on video evidence:
gives the lie to my hon. Friend’s suggestion that judges                  they could see with their own eyes what was going on
are incapable o f holding investigations into matters o f this            and they failed to make proper decisions following that.
kind. I note that whenever there is a call for an inquiry,
there is a greal demand for members of the Court of                          M r. R oss C ranston (Dudley, North): May I take my
Appeal to hold them.                                                      right hon. Friend back to the issue of police discipline and
                                                                          the feeling among the relatives that no one has been
   It is inevitable that not everyone will be satisfied by the            brought to justice? May I ask him specifically whether
result o f an inquiry because such judgments defy human                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith addresses the issue of early
behaviour. However, Lord Justice Taylor’s report showed                   retirement by police officers to avoid d isciplin^ ^
great understanding o f soccer and soccer culture. He was                 procedures? May I press him for a speedy response t o ^ ^
an ardent soccer supporter himself. I had the occasional                  Select Committee on Home Affairs report on police
discussion with him about it. That is one of the reasons                  discipline?

        cDi:;-p\c:/6
1097                    Hillsborough                 18 F E B R U A R Y 1998                                                    1098


   Mr. Straw: 1 have already referred to Lord Justice                                   Point of O rd e r
Stuart-Smith's remarks about the fact that no one has been
brought to justice and that no one has suffered any                4.21 pm
disciplinary proceedings or even lost their job as a result           Mr. A ndrew Robathan (Blabyr. On a point o f order.'
either o f those terrible events, or o f Lord Justice Taylor's
                                                                   Madam Speaker. I have given you prior notice of this
clear conclusion that a failure of police control was the
                                                                   point o f order, which concerns the accuracy of statements
principal cause o f the disaster. By implication, it is clear      recorded in the Official Report. We all judge the O fficial
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is not happy with what
                                                                   R eport to be o f immense use when we write our speeches
happened, and neither are we. I have looked in great detail
                                                                   or assemble arguments, and it is important that
at the helpful report from the Select Committee, o f which
                                                                   statements recorded in it are accurate, so I ask your
my hon. Friend is a member. As I said earlier, we intend           guidance. On 21 January, the hon. Member for Broxtowe
to make an early announcement about that matter, with a
                                                                   (Dr. Palmer) introduced a ten-minute Bill about air
view to improving the system of police discipline.
                                                                   weapons. I have spoken to the hon. Gentleman and we
                                                                   have discussed the matter, although sadly he'cannot be
                                                                   here this afternoon. I should say that I wish him no ill
                                                                   and I am sure that it was confusion of facts, rather than
                                                                   any other cause, which led to this point of order.
                                                                   The Official R eport states:
                                                                      "In the past few years, one police officer was killed and another
                                                                   7.000 injured by airgun attacks."— [Official Report. 21 January
                                                                   1998: Vol. 304. c. 1014.]
                                                                   However, in response to a written question from me. the
                                                                   Home Secretary said that, although he had no figure for
                                                                   the past two years, he could find no fatal injuries and a
                                                                   total o f 22 injuries recorded during eight of the past
                                                                    10 years. I can find no other evidence of anybody being
                                                                   killed. Every policeman injured is a serious matter, but the
                                                                   discrepancy between 22 and 7,000 is large and I wondered
                                                                   whether you could give your judgment on that. Madam
                                                                   Speaker.

                                                                      M adam Speaker: The answer is a polite no. It is not
                                                                   a point of order: the hon. Gentleman is challenging the
                                                                   figures used by another hon. Member and that is not a
                                                                   matter for the Speaker, but a matter for debate and
                                                                   argument. It is not for the Speaker o f the House to
                                                                   determine the figures or to become involved in arguments
                                                                   about the substance o f debates. The hon. Gentleman may
                                                                   try to use other methods to bring the matter to the
                                                                   attention o f the hon. Member for Broxtowe (Dr. Palmer).
         23                       Montserrat                      30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                                                                         24
         (M r. FoulkesJ
                                                                                            Hillsborough Disaster
                  “ V d0 n0t lhink ± !lt even my hon. Friend
                                                                             3.47 pm
         G oJim w nf f* PrCSe?t GPvernment—or a Conservative
         Government—for a volcanic eruption.
                                                                               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                                   'r ?    aw): Wlth Percussion, Madam Speaker, I
         J J ? n d £ nl Bllldry <Banbury): Wi» * e hon. Gentleman           should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
         reconsider his remarks about inactivity by the earlier             stadium disaster.
         Government, g,Ven that that Government paid for the
                                                                               Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the
                    aJ UmbCr ° f new schools and a new general              Hillsborough disaster, which happened on 15 April 1989.
        hospital in Montserrat, which were destroyed by the
                                                                            Inat was more than eight years ago, but no one who saw
        S , ! ? i ^ nfhe °°!lfinn * at Montserrat receives more             the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have
        aid per head of population than any country in the world?
                                                                            forgotten those terrible events. For those who lost loved
        fnn^LH°.US! r UldJike 10 know’ if not today Perhaps in              members of their family, the pain is ever present.
        tomorrow s debate, how much money are Her Majesty’s                 Following Hillsborough, Members of the House were
        Government are prepared to earmark to ensure Sat                    united in their determination to do all in their power to
        Montserrat is viable in future.
                                                                            prevent anything like that ever happening again.
                                                                              After the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries
        G e^riem S 1 I1WiU                ^ t0 ensure *a t the hon.        and investigations took place. ITie most thorough and
 ^                      ® . q“estl0n ,s answered in tomorrow’s             wide ranging of those was the public inquiry led by the
It|    for wtiTh Ir "am
       tor which      f “V    “ troductoiy
                         directly          sP««h. then in the reply
                                  responsible.                             late Lord Taylor. The terms of reference of that inquiry
                                                                           encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster, but
        J ‘ iS "0tJ?g h t c T pare dependent territories with              making recommendations about crowd control and safetv
       other countries. We have a special responsibility for               at sports events.
       J < *" dent *er? t0” es, as l°n8 as they remain in that role,
                                  We accept’ j° intly with the elected          ^nTay5.r S “ quiiy t00k ond evidence from more
       Government of Montserrat, our responsibility to the                 h Z                   P? liC hearings durin8 May and
       people of Montserrat; and that continues.                           June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence
          No doubt if the hon. Gentleman catches Madam                     5S! I            f Urf CS-  his interim report in August
                                                                            1989, Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number
       2 * ? .er.s. eye’ ^ uwifl have the opportunity tomorrow to          of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a single
       extend his contribution and tell us what the previous               cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear
       Government did. I do not believe, however, that he will             that, in his view,
       rifofk       My u          acted with the sense of urgency
       that has been shown in the past eight weeks.                        coiuror main rcaSOn f0r 1,10 disaster was lhe faiIure of police

      M r. Andrew M iller (Ellesmere Port and Neston): My                  ™ ° rtrdJ ay!-0r f ade 43.recommendations in his interim
   hon. Friend will be aware that, last year, I saw the                    report. His final report m January 1990 made a further
   devastation in Montserrat from a Lynx helicopter flying                 to recommendations. The developments that have taken
   from the back of HMS Argyll, the West Indies guard S i p               place since then in safety at football grounds and in the
   on station at the time. In view of the risk to Lynx                    policing of football matches have been based largely on
   helicopters because of the nature of the dust from the                 those recommendations. Football in this countiy has been
                                                                          transformed since the Taylor report. To a large extent,
ft           ®*plos“on*.,s my hon. Friend satisfied that, in the          that is due to Lord Taylor’s wide-ranging and soundly
^    ~ . ^ere having to be a major evacuation, there is                   based conclusions.
   sufficient seaborne support to bring that about?
                                                                             The deaths that occurred on 15 April 1989 were also
         M r. Foulkes: Yes. As well as providing the ferry                the subject of inquests conducted by the coroner of the
                                                                          western district of South Yorkshire. After examining the
      S ’ fhAP        Started y®sterday> we have had discussions
      with the Governments of the other islands in the area, and          io o f"fif’ t JUry at * e c°roner’s inquest found in March
      we are satisfied that there is sufficient seaborne capacity         199i thai the cause of death of those who died at
      to cany out an evacuation. I can say, however, that we             Hillsborough was accidental death. A further investigation
      are currently reviewing the evacuation procedures—the              was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
      second issue of which was produced earlier this year—in            by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether
        e light of recent happenings, to ascertain whether any           there were any grounds for criminal proceedings and to
      updating and improvement are necessary.                            consider whether any police officer should be subject to
                                                                         disciplinary proceedings.
                                                                         ,       in v e n tio n involved the taking of more than
                                                                         5,000 statements and the scrutiny of all the material that
                                                                         had been examined previously by the Taylor inquiry.
                                                                         After that investigation, the evidence was sent to the
                                                                         Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded that no
                                                                         person should be subject to criminal proceedings.
                                                                            The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chiof
                                                                         superintendent and the superintendent in charge on the
                                                                         day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
                                                                         In the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill
                                                                         health in advance of a ruling by a disciplinary tribunal.
       JOCWl.PAfJIM
  a2 _
BGMSCUi/
8 q /f c #
        25
                            Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                  30 JUNE 19*)7
                                                                                                          Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                                                                                                          26
       Under police discipline rules, a disciplinary hearin»
       cannot p„*eed when a police office, tJ ta b e fo ^ S f                  We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith a senW
       d 3 )         to d - ^      P0l'“ ComPl«1"« Authority                   ftSllem
                                                                               full     s ooff reference
                                                                                    terms        f* 6 C° Urt
                                                                                                          are° as
                                                                                                               f Appeal’
                                                                                                                  follows:for that Pu’rpose. His
       decided later that disciplinary proceedings against the
       superintendent should be withdrawn beefuse S                            at                 Whuet^ r       evidence         relating ,o (he disaster
       ^rem ent of the chief superintendent m l t ^ T h a t t                                             Sl*“” - 15 ^            1,89 * w T -S ? 2
                                                                                    (a) To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor' or
                                                                              J b)7 ° the Director          Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                                                                              re sp o n sib il5 °o r     ° f d,schar*in*    ^     respective       statutory


       c « o n T rPr^  i t a           t   l ^        z   t   ? *:
       coun ruled th»,    of
       «v«w proc^djngs justmed                      by tl^ c o m ^            p ^ ii;                      f s                       - » • « “ » . *»
                                                                              establishment by the Sraetary of state                           “    ju5'if)'




                                                                             S fc L S S . *              od“                    ■*«•“ «*            fK
                                                                             jd » n place a cop, of those tenrn of Terence in the

                                                                             a ii^ 6 h3V® asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine
    b e e ^ S ^ 0"8 "® " n,adet0 * * P r e s s o r and have                  jfl the written and other evidence that has been s u b S S
    D irector o f Pi w *’ dL * 6 Attorney-General and to the                 He w ill also consider any further m a te r ia lS T „ S S
               o f.P^ hc Prosecutions. A Granada television                  parnes wish to submit to him. He will have tTo S       S
                  “ Dec1f mber last year dramatised the disaster
    and raised a number of issues that, in the view of thJ                                   “ Sw
                                                                             avauUble is of such   te? r
                                                                                                 significance evld‘"“
                                                                                                              to justify «a further fiill
                   makerS’ rePresented new evidence Hie                      pubhc inquiry. His advice to me will b e ^ d e S S
                               “    Adjournment cS S e on
    17 December 1996, which was led by my hon FWend t Z
   Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. Kilfoyle) and to
                                                                          S S e tu S ” ' “ V f
   for F i t ? Predecessor, the right hon. and learned Member                                            n c t * at     be relevant to
   for Folkestone and Hythe (Mr. Howard), r e X l I fa w                       ir decisions that has not previously been considered.
   how senously my predecessor viewed the matter.                             I hope that this examination will enable us to establish
                                                                           onclusivefy whether material evidence about the causes
       Since that programme, further material has been
                                                                          o f the HiUsborough disaster has been overlooked I
   S     S       T    ^    °f     HUIsbor° “tf> fanilUes support
             Th.c,se "Presentations have related in particuSTto          neeaed. We owe it to everyone who has been touched bv
                                                                         d          i t d      f t e £ r d V u Ae families of those who
  2T IL 'TOff ttheX Attorney-General
   B onice           ? “           *■•*
                                     and the        Crown
                                                                                      g     to the bottom of the matter once and for all.
  Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the
                                                                         I tSnVBt h ^ aW?i,1I,ey (North-West Cambridgeshire):
                                                                         rv^rsonai         .Secretaiy for his statement and for his
  erector of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that                 personal courtesy in relation to it.
 c r in S S° faJ.presented to her would not justify fresh                       happened at Hillsborough was a tragedy of
 cnmmal proceedings. The former Attomey-GeneS                         almost unimaginable proportions. Thousands of o Lde—
 g             ^    learned Member for North-East                     retm f ^ oId alike— went to a football game; 96 did not
 2r£rKr               Lyeuxpresented
  n the basis of the material 3150 ***to
                                      *•him—that anv                               others were injured. ITiose realities have
                                                                      blighted the lives of thousands of people for ever There
 haveC“     t r tlle High Court for a « w inquest would J t           =     n ta n and loss from w hidTto » S
 nave any realistic prospect of succeeding.
                                                                      S t e S e S neV" reC0,' r' “ d Wt “ a" >«**«
             the less, I am acutely conscious that the families
 £ X t™ S' 1LHilsbOT°"*i>«• -4-
   1
including hon Members, are very concern^ »w
S     to end iSSThS remain' 1 am determined to go as far as
L d fta t " T        n0 matter ° f * & & * * * is overlooked         ^ h at no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not
2 d S i r „ l ° nr reach a f,nal ^      “sion without a full
and independent examination of the evidence.                         S         eS enc^                 With0Ut a M " d                — — ta
   The Attorney-General, the Director of Public                      I agree with the right hon. Gentleman on that. I welcome
PublfcTmeT™? 1 have* .therefore, agreed that it is in the            Sm artTm°!SCe,nent ^ Wil1 s“PP°rt Lord j S
                                                                     Stuart-Smith m pursuing that important examination.
                     fh        M ‘pdependent scrutiny to
relating to th* a -    ere now exists any new evidence                   *)ave four specific questions to ask the Home
       g to the disaster which was not previously available.        . w f ta7 about his statement. First, given the urgency
                                                                    involved not least for those most Iffected b ^ E
  -• CD3I-FAOI/J
         27
                            Hillsborough Disaster                 30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                               Hillsborough Disaster                  28
         [D r. Brian Mawhinney]
                                                                            wm h«J°i,r- LT i - Justice Stuart-Smith to decide and he
        terrible events; primarily the families, but also the police
        officers what timetable does the right hon Gemwi™                                                  l0”8 e’,p' ri“ “ as a senfor
        envisage and can the House have his assurance that the
        process will begin immediately?

        i nS Ci°n?Iy’    HT e Secretary said that he would make            2
                                                                           matter of ngH Kh0nvSriend
                                                                                     a debate.              Leader
                                                                                               O f course I shall do of the House the
                                                                                                                     that.
        S w i         .tUart' Smith’s advice to him available to the
        House and the public. W ill he also publish aU to
                                                                                            (Liverpool, Garston): I congratulate my
                              by ,te lord * * •     -       -               S S a£ nT f nend 0n his sta,ement- 1 also congranikte
                                                                            Granada Television and Jimmy McGovern whose efforts
                                                                            have brought this matter back to the attention of the
                                                                                    ?"       nght hon' Friend assure the House that
       interested parties wish to submit. W ill such material be
       examinable in public and will those who may be affected             oddoS ?       Wf ? ,VC f0Ught for 80 IonS wiI1 have the
                                                                                              8 representation to enable them to
       S  ta the
       before inlord
                 s?justice
                     1? giv  'Vheany
                           reaches oppconclusions?
                                       on"“,>'                   SI        |>resent their cases, whether orally or in writing to the
                                                                                        ? WiI1/4
                                                                           to enable them  to dothe^ receive some financial assistance
                                                                                                  that?
       Ho™3!!3'’ g!Ve1 * * “ nativity of this matter and the
                         * C?nstructive attitude, which I hope he
       feels that I have reciprocated, will he undertake to agree            M r. Straw: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her
       with his nght hon. Friend the Leader of the House thafthe          o n w              hCT weIcome for the statement. The costs
                                                                          w ilfh T m l h      e t° travel to appear before the scrutiny
         tuart-Smith has concluded his investigation?                     will be met by my Department My hon. Friend asks about
                                                                          legal representation. That issue has not been raised by me
          Positive responses by the right hon. Gentleman to those         dmng my discussions with the families. I understand that
       four questions will help to reassure the families that we
       are genuinely seeking to help.                                     ^ esr ^ , h-         Ie«al ^presentation. If a further issue
                                                                          arises, 1 shall, of course, consider it.

                                                                      M r. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Is the Home
      remarks^anrT f1 th? k * * right hon- Gentleman for his
      remarks and for his courtesy. If it is not whollv            fh lf      3^ are ‘ L,beral Dem°crat Members welcome
                                                                   this focused re-examination of the evidence including
    2 aK w Home8? “ T " " * 6               on Ws appointment      recenUy   found
                      *                    Secretaiy. I am extremely  grateful   to evidence, on these terrible events, which
    him for his welcome for these proceedings. This is not         have been etched into the minds of all the people who
    and never has been a matter of party controversy As I          !aw .??. television coverage at the time and etched
               1 kno” i 0”' serious|y my predecessor, the right   dreadfully into the lives of the people who lost familv
                                                                  members, but will he confirm that it is very unlikely—
    5 S m to                      f0r          an<* H y*e «£k
                                                                  and perhaps impossible—that police discioline
                                                                  proceechngs could be reopened as a result of what might
      The right hon. Gentleman asked four questions the first
                                                                         h         ,'nqUliy? Does he recognise that the public
   & t f d r r , ^ H Um“ abie- L» ,,b S “ s S « s S                      it difficult to understand how police discipline
               t      ’ subject t0 a case that he is currently
   a s ^ fih U h6 9 ° urt.of APPeal being concluded as soon       C th       8S Am 5* br0Ught t0 a halt when retirement on
                                                                  health grounds takes place before the hearing has begun?
      po ible, he intends to do some work in respect of the
I i* » duUes before the end of M y a n d T i m hh                                    Taylor’s main recommendation was that,
   proceedings in September. We hope that the matter            w S!
                                                                 aMough there were many factors, the main reason for the
                                                                 disaster was the failure of police control, that will leave
                                                                 questions in the public mind, which will pass beyond the
     j       end of the year. However, the House will
  S t a t S f h 131 th3t 'S ai udSment which only Lord Justice   r e S . ' n,° ^       ^    1,6 d° ne When inclusions Se
  Stuart-Smith can make in the light of all the
  representations that he receives.
                                                                    M r. Straw: I thank the right hon. Gentleman for his
  „ .?.^ondly’ * e right hon. Gentleman asked whether in         wefcome for my statement. He asked me to say that
  addition t° publishing the advice that I receive from Lord               Pohce discipline proceedings would be very
                      ' S ' P"“ * •»■> » e v i i T K                   Stu'sm SrniriT1 'S l° anticipate ^e v'ew that Lord Justice
    considered by him. My answer to the right hon                      Stuart-Smith may or may not come to and, with great
    SrS
    fxamnS
            k thS* Pr0V,SKnal. 1
               *
                                  ShaU m
                                       ybest
                                       d0         ,0 ensure
                        ’ bUt there may ^ good reasons-for
                                                                       S     l ‘° *,e nght h0n- Gentleman, I shall not do Aat.
                                                                       He also invites me to make general comments on police
    example,   in respect of criminal or disciplinary                                 lations TTjere ma;y be an occasion to debate
                  why such evidence cannot be published at
    the same time as the advice is published. However if               S a . S T S 'S e 'l r    re8"'a"0nS-      1          ^
    Swlim ? 'S l°      UnpubIished- I shall make that clea^ at          .J      °?ly            P°,ice discipline regulations exist
                                                                        and have te n approved from ,ime „ tjme by th e H o S
    raJh l      r!ght.hon- Gentleman asked whether there               to y »e statutory regulations. It is. of co u L opeTfo
.                    ,n pubIic 311(1 whether the families and                       ° f s“ tt «”d TO the House to change them in
                                                                       the light of circumstances.                               !
) to tJ !   P     abI® *? make representations. The answer
              ^            question is yes. As the House
  would expect, the exact proceedings of the scrutiny are              t h a f S S S f ’; ^b®^ie*d, Hillsborough): I am sure
                                                                            the Home Secretary realises that the most tragic
      :i am.PAfiirtv
          2l>                    Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                    30 JU N E 1997
                                                                                                    Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                                                                                         30
           rauma of the event was suffered by the families of the
                         Wh° attended      match, but it was a t o            !ritid«rn     f P a‘ ,s not in any sense to imply any
          one of the most traumatic events in their history for the                      ° f u WOrk of ^         Director of Publfc
              a     ? C Hlllsborough area of Sheffield-Hhe links              Prosecutions or the Crown Prosecution Service.
                    £ fVC ^ de 8,1(1 main,ain w*th families in
                                                                                      Andrew M iller (Ellesmere Port and Neston)- On

         ? ®=s£SSsS«
             5
                                                                             ZJST
                                                                                     )fh CT I,Uen,S ° f mine wh0 were so tragically
                                                                             whether the f ^
                                                                                         .
                                                                                                    may 1        my right hon- Friend
                                                                                            5esh ,nqu,ry wil1 bring about some
                                                                                             „    Way in which the coroner’s court
                                                                             afteMh^deafh fn ™ dUring the inquiries immediately
                                                                                           ^ Does 11 constitute the possibility of fresh
                                                                                  nCf evidence that should have perhaps come to the
               StTaW: 1 accept entire|y what my hon. Friend said-
         were  suDDorter*! y?nd ^ People directly affected who               a“ S e ? C°“          “ r“er- " 0W                   JS 5
               supporters of Liverpool football cluh 9n/t
         ^umatised the people living around Hillsborough and all
         We E f i ' \ SfheffieId and ^ south Yorkshire® as we»                       StraVT! ? ere bas been continuing concern about
                                                                             w i T U nr i S C^ l qUeStS gCneraIly “ * conducted. There
         - g s r s 's m z r p iS : s a                                       S e s t r w h ih ^ reP° rt mi° Iar8e'scale disasters and
                                                                             inquests, which recommended significant change
                                                                             d S f 8 / Chan?e whereby if there were, God forbid a
                                                                             w S fL      3 S- ar Scale m i nature in the future, there
         inHnH* h°?‘ *?riend “ k d me whether wider lessons                                        similar to that conducted by the late
        can                            P°Iicing of football matches’
        can be considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
        scrutiny. The answer to that, I am afraid is that we Hn
        not anticipate that they can be. The scrutiny S l ^ k t
        new evidence that has come forward since th#» «<> r                          ;j s i                             *•w ^
        inquiries, to find out whether that evidence is sufficient^/             ,1Sj Ue of ^ way *n which the first inquest was
        significant to trigger either , new p u £ f a q Z orf f l         dhSJS6? W3S         SUbjCCt 0f ^    consideration by the
                                                                          divisional court when there were proceedings for judicial
        of Public X aCU° nt by A c Attomey-General, the Director
        Y o r ^ J ^ eCTti0nS ° r ^ chief officer of South                 exMcT’t L 'V 1        f° r ^ °rd Justice Stuart-Smith, but I
                                                                          expect that he will not wish to go over that ground but
                       •     not believe that, at any stage since
                                                                          will instead, as part of his scrutiny, wish to consider with
                 h    ^ TayI° r reported’ * * • * 1138 ^ n any            ff^at care the new allegations of evidence not put before
     2 “ “ of .hls ,wider recommendations, most of which                  the inquest especially, as the House is w ff
     have been impJemented, on the policing o ffo o tb a li
     matches and on crowd control.
                                                                         S vrelatives
                                                                              e f a n and
                                                                                       d programme
                                                                                           * * * “ ° f makers,
                                                                                                       ^     WWch’
                                                                                                               the inquest was not
                                                                         properly able to take into account.         Q           *
    M^ r- Tony             (Banbury): I am sure that no hon
    s S S v Z 1 ChaUenge ^ i ud8®ent that the Home                           M r- Nicholas Soames (Mid-Sussex): I               warmlv
    Secretary has come to today, but will he confirm that in
    h * statement, he said that, on the evidence submittS To             J     3     i d " 81" v " ' Gentleman’s statement and the
                                                                                            ens,Uve way ,n which he outlined his
    d£                    * * * * ^ “ cutions had c S d < £
    l   . thing justified fresh criminal investigations7 Could           fa r e s ^ o f       ab° Ut    i8SUe 0 f P°Iice ‘Msciplfae
    tagw e two undertakings to the House: that in d S c S S              “ d S f tn !          qUUy’ but wU1 he nevertheless
                                                                                               a
    Lorijustice Stuart-Smith wiU make it dear what new’                  in th ^ a h ! n f Ter 8 la m in a tio n — not necessarily
                                                                                      r      events’ but more generally—of the
 S lecl^ oof
          f%Pubhc
             'fh r°nProsecutions
                    ^ ering that in
                                  was not avaiIabIe   the               police disciplinary code, which provides that once an
 Director                           making that judgment
 and why that evidence was not available earlier?                                  retUeu ^ y matters under investigation lapsed
                                                                        h ^ r S o t s S * Sh0UW ^                           -    ^
 fw £ » .S traw: 1 can confirm exactly what the hon
 GenUeman says. I said that the Director of Public                                Straw: ,Yes> without reference to this particular
                                                                         case, I accept that many members of the public regard it
S  n S ° t o to
presented     ^ eher
                  r taken MC ViCW
                       would not th3t  ^ fr«h
                                  iustifv material 80 far                as odd that when an officer retires, that is to e S t t l
£ 5 ? A T            ' 1 3r ° rCfe,ITed t0 a Judgment made by the        disciplinary processes. However, one of the things on
M ifort E
memoer  North-East t.ierght (Sir
           S ne?Bedfordshue hon-NMLvein
                                  d fe^ed
                                        but
                                                                         which I am currently taking advice is to fact that as I
                                                                        understand it, regulations expect chief officers not to
                                                                        where dk* .^fkement of officers on grounds of ill health
                                   j “dgmen< on taformalion other                    P ^ proceedings are still pending. There is
2   SS           E   S   S   E    "* *
                                                                        torefore, an issue not only of whetor Is c ip W
                                                                       ofSei?°Hf       ?.u * * changed, but of whether chief
                                                                       existfa? ? l ^ ! ‘Ce “ S p,r0p! rly            the terms of
4ft« h«^ .gja u£o n , oT Tc^p^tTooK ars
                      and the fta h e v id S L t t a t e A t S
                                                                       tha» i • gulations. Both of these matters are subjects
                                                                       that I wish to investigate.                            J ,

                                 thw wwch ““             ofPuMic
    osecutions has so far come to on the evidence that she             the^Hom?^! El!ma,n (LiverPool, Riverside): I welcome
                                                                       the Home Secretary s statement in that it opens up the
    y CD3I-PAGI/7
        31
                              Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                     30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                                  Hillsborough Disaster                  32
        [M s Louise EllmanJ
                                                                               Those of us from Merseyside know that, to this dav
        possibility of justice for the families whose lives have               to nerves are still raw and the pain is still tangible when
        ^ assu rrth ^H 6''35131? - l$ my right hon- Frien<* able               therefore like 7to*associate
                                                                                                   Up?“ dsmyself
                                                                                                            to e mwith the remarks
                                                                                                                                i smade
                                                                                                                                    S
        considerations takepTace he                        '* * *
                                                                               (M sTllm M ) AaMn^IS Member f0r Liverpool, Riverside
                                                                               (Ms tllman) that, m the previous inquiry, the feelings of
       tneir belief that they have been denied justice in that                Hillsborough families were shamefully neglected.
       s S T 10"          no' br“ ,8h' « *« » > *                                May I pursue that point and ask my right hon. Friend
                                                                              whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference
                                                                              wiH extend to consideration of past and possible future
       Fn^.sr ^ f                                                t   t                      suPP°rt for those families? Although very
                                                                              strong support was provided—particularly locaHv hm
                                                                              also nationally to those fai       s                  Z

                                                                              K ™ 'ss terms
                                                                              Justice   te m ^ rf™  f $UPPOrtextend
                                                                                               of reference   Was pillful'
                                                                                                                    also toW i» die Lord
                                                                                                                              examining
                                                                              certain newspapers’ disgraceful accusations a b S T to
       gnef felt by relatives of those who lost their lives As I              behaviour of fans who were killed, at a time when toi?
       said ,n my statement, those feelings have been                         families were feeling such pain?
       compounded by a belief that some L e c te of the
       *agedy_lts causes and the culpability o /to s e w h ^
                                                                             hon^FnVru?W* 1 und*rstand entirely the feelings of my
     Cn^ xS n0thaveled -
                     0                     ,0                                hon Friend.expressed on behalf of his constituents He
                                                                                              ^ ,enns of reference extend to
                                                                             Government support to the families. They do not With
        M r. Damian Green (Ashford): I am sure that the                                  *> "V 5»n. Friend, I make Z a ^ i e X
   o   f Z J ^      WiU be 8Ware that although the events
   of that day were particularly traumatic for die pLnle of                            . 2 “y any
                                                                             ascertain whether by ^evidence
                                                                                                        ,osd“exists relating to the
                                                                                                                                 S
                                       * * wm              ^         ^
   rootDail fflns across the countrv He u/in aic^ u .
   that, in the past 12 months, after years in which inefdems                j^ . ^        2            «           “£ T S!S£ 5

   •     r    ®*          have      been        worrying sisns     that
   hooliganism is beginning to increased L               li jh t o/hU
   S   n Jackson) that Lord Justice
   (Helen                      f0r Stuart-Smith
                                    Sheffie,d’ will not be                  to da                        * * * famUies have asked us
   able to consider the wider issues arising from to
                                                                               M r. Ronnie Feam (Southport): I welcome the
  snouid the incident be examined by a public inquiry -i
                                                                            statement as a Merseyside Member, at the end of a line
  public inquiry will be able to consider the wider , K s of
  crowd control and policing at football matches?                           FromwhM m° St ?upporters of Liverpool football club
                                                                            From what remember-I was in to House at the tim e -                     F
                                                                                   P^°PuC        that ‘bey had recollections of what                t;
     M r. Straw: For well over t o past 10 years I have                                                                                             b
  taken my children to football matches The hnn                            ta riffe d      * “ T came forward because to y were
                                                                           terrified to give evidence. Can we make an appeal— from                  k
1 M       W        , £ f“ “        ^             topleinenMoS of           to House or through to lord justice—to onlinary people                   h
                                                                           ®t|d ask them to stretch their im o rie s o n t f S S f f f             tc
                                                                           to y were frightened to do so at to time, to come forward               ir
 fm llull pounds. The recommendations have led alsoto                                                                                              ir
                                                                           £ £ £ £ " evid““?                      <•*- S                           e
 ^ U       p S      r B      i K     i ^ , “      re T S                                                                                           L
 anyone, including one’s children, to football matches Ten
                                                                                    Str?w: If there are any individuals who have
                          forcr in’ * « ■                                                                                                          Cf
 S ly l i            received no representations that tore
 need to be changes m the criminal law to deal with crowd                  conducted VSSe* late ta d T a X r ^ a T to ^ u e s ^ 1* ^           te
 control at football matches, although I will consider anv                 S S “ H“      P°lice disciPl'nary investigation by Wea              bt
 such representations that might be made       ° nsider m y                Midlands Police, I appeal to them to c o n S a r d
                                                                                                                                               re
                                                                            I did not properly answer the second part of t o                   al
S tJ a J s m i^ f * 11 ? Car  **“ W     * of Lord Justice                                                                                      e\
otuart-Smith s scrutiny will be to consider the fr«h                       U“        m ™y hon- Friend * e Member for Knowsley,
®3 lde.n“ i lhal has become available on the Hillsborough                        (M r- OHara) m relation to allegations hv                     in
                                                                          newspapers. Although I shall not go into that lSm e make             Pi
mv    fun nnhrn0t antlCipa!e ^ fuI1 ,erms of «fe«nce of                                                                                        I
any ful public inquiry that I may establish As I said                                    tha‘ If d Tay,or’s » P «
earlier m answer to my hon. Friends, however whaTis                                   ° “ made by certain newspapers and d K                   b\
S      t , y      peradventure is that no one has criticised                                                                                   p£
                                                                          w™ the
                                                                          was the failure
                                                                                   feilure^fhati* e PrinCipal
                                                                                          of police  control. IreaSOn
                                                                                                                 hope fOT
                                                                                                                      that^remains
                                                                                                                             disaster
                                                                                                                                    a          ur
Lord Tay or or to way in which he conducted hisTnnn.W
particularly on crowd control at football matches.                        matter of reassurance for the families.                              be
                                                                                                                                              rii
  M r. Edward O ’Hara (Knowsley, South)- May I aeain                                                                                          th
express my condolences to the Hillsborough families?                      d&
                                                                          w K ^aS
                                                                              . * S i Wednesday
                                                                                      wT1'?* football
                                                                                                <declareclub
                                                                                                         “ ta“re $t“eyea
                                                                                                             and an
                                                                          witness to to event who was no more than 50 yd away
  24nxi.PAT.IM                                                                                                                                .Of
V <•
       •33                     Hillsborough Dtsu\tt?r
                                                                    30 JUNE m i
                                                                                                  Hillsborough Disaster                 34
       before and after the game. The only other hon. Member
       |W*°i!VaLan eye Wltness was Eddie Loyden, who has since                disaster and a number of people who were severely
       If- '   House- Sheffield Wednesday football club has the               injured there. I am sure that the Hillsborough families
       deepest sympathy with the victims and will be happy to                 support group will welcome the independent review T l
       co-operate m any way with the inquiry.           PPY ‘°                evidence. Will that review look at to events t o t S
          II h.uVe lWj queslions for my right hon. Friend First                                   ,and 5 30 Pm? ^ e issue is very
       will the evidence be given on oath? There is a great                   important for many of my constituents. I hope that what
       interest in that. Secondly, he will recall that the previous
                                                                             Su X ' i c X           l" S an”°""“ d ,0day Wl" tead *> a
       W . l X ' S v ” ' " ' £2S° 'm         “ cl“di"* c o m f S o t L
                             PayJ ° '             “ d S ta d all
      me expenses to the parties concerned, including the
      witnesses and relatives of the victims? Will it be possible
      to reopen the matter of compensation? Can te X ® u s
                                                                             A j M y s r ,; sl JrJS'us
                                                                             SSL            Cn“ adil W w W on programme and by the
      some information about that?                                                                              »f <i«»h-w hetlL it
                                                                             If™      ,   i i !host wh0 dled »r          it was later
      es^cialfvgiven
                 ^ln 1hh*™  ^     gratefuI *° my hon-  Friend.                                        sum ^      ‘ wOI examine that
      especially         s position  as a director of Sheffield
      Wednesday football club. He asked whether evidence
      before the scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will be                                 Points of Order
     case" If 1L o rd IW* are "ot Panning that that should be the
     •         ^      Justice Stuart-Smith considers that he has            4.26 pm
     cnS          P° We? *° COnduct *** SCTUtiny, I shall actively             M r. Michael Ancram (Devizes): On a point of order
     e x S et h ? ,SUCS £ presentuations from him- but I do not              Madam Speaker. With reference to the point of order
                              « Problem, given the nature of the            raised by my hon. Fnend to Member for Ribble Valiev
     r s         s s s r            8 him,o '“ d“ ,ke in ■*■>«• °f          (Mr. Evans) on Fnday, have you had time to complete
                                                                            your consjderation of the letter that he sent you about
     t h ^ r ? T “ ! “ ‘ f Whether                 w ill pay                to behaviour of the Secretary of State for Wales and its
     cost of •
             mquirym.ltself
                      quuy-anj
                            Wewin
                                sha11  certainly
                                   refilnd thfi pay for the
                                                         ®                  implications for the rights of Members of this House?
     mcidental expenses of those who appear before it to Lake               _ In particular, as to further public utterances of the
     representations. I dealt with to S u e of                             Secretary ° f State and to hon. Member for Blaenau
     representation, which is a much wider issue. So far, I have           Shbe              f }        contradictory that to y cannot
     had no calls for legal aid. That would involve some laree             S J S       i 8                 given the Prime Minister’s
                                                                           categoncal assurances to the House last Wednesday, is it
  t o S E E n 'W I lf ann0t commit myself- With respect
  sfFy .      Fnend, the issue of compensation for trauma                  n i S nT nt £ * 1 rePutat*on of the House and the
  suffered does not anse as a result of this scrutiny.                               118“ embers that to Secretary of State for Wales
                                                                           should make a personal statement to the House at the
    M r. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover): Does my right hon                      earliest opportunity?
  Fnend recall that, a short time before the generaUlection
  £causaf t h t Ph°adCeT w* V Warded substantial sums’                     m e ^ t o KPea? f : l ha? now seen the letter written to
  Because they had witnessed the honific events? It is well                me by to hon. Member for Ribble Valley (M r Evans)
  known that many of the Liverpool families of the victims                 M n S f T * W!!1 understand. I do not divulge details of
                                                                           correspondence between myself and individual Members
 tX T h                      an^thing- 1       il*       Ws £ £ £
  M u L w-M°KrnpenSatl0n Wil1 not he dealt with by the                     to V^    SPf ndCd 10     ,0day- 1 have no commeS a S t'
                                                                                                         ri8ht hon- Gentleman has
                                                                          ofDrincTnJ v, facts are not available to me. As a matter
 e      s    s    z    j t     -     “ oid   *—                           U Sn^ of I k      Cr: 1 say clearly th* freedom of speech
                                                                          is one of the most cherished privileges of parliamentary
                                                                          democracy I expect Members to exere“                  tK
     M r. Straw: The issue of some police officers receiving              fundamental nght at all times to the fullest extent.
 TOnpensaoon white som e o f t t a e who w S T S S f
 traces have not is not a matter for this scrutiny— not
                                                                                            Hu?heS (Southwark, North and
S t o A e Sf0r r r scrutiny*
LSnnc f
                   but becauwh*ch
                             se*isis ntootexamine
                                           direcdy                        Berroondsey): On a point of order, Madam Speaker. Is it
S * ° ns ° / ne" “ atenal evidence. If that new material                  of B r iS n i°   J ° U' ^ )OU, half “ hour    the end
evidence is found to exist, it should trigger a new public                H o n ^ ^ I m ? °n« KonS*t0 express on behalf of the
                                                                          House two thoughts that are probably strongly in the
S K n aCti°,n by ^ Attorney-General, the Director of                      beelf n ° i Members of Parliament-those who have
I fc n v S S S 1             Chief 0fficer of ^ PO^ce.                    been pnv,leged to go to Hong Kong and those who have
bv hon M ^ i! ” the concerns that have been expressed
                                                                         w ho <    A * 7 S‘m p ly ’ wil1 y°u Pay tribute to all those
pavment o f" 1     °n ^     SideS ° f ^ House abSut the                  who served the Crown and to people of Hong Kong
E * . K-r compensation to police officers and its                        during the past centuiy and a half, including those in to
b T r l S ? £ *V u      LWh° were there- The issue could                                     S.ec0ndly*    y °u express to ho%
rioht h 1c      de e that I promised to discuss with my                   f this Parliament that to democracy that has been
                                                                         cultivated m Hong Kong w ill be able Jo c o n t i from
^ o w        FS       .t c X       ' ^                          “        midnight tonight throughout to years ahead?

o f t ; ^ ei al,, (Wef Ver, Vale): 1 represent a number
           who lost loved ones in the Hillsborough                       r * ™ J ? ^ ipeauker: 1 know that ^ hon- Gentleman
                                                                         recognises that that was not a point of order. But it is a
  3 CD3I-PACI/0
  V\<a.<vSrArj                     O
                                                                                                                                  (!)
      \/U            i n               r\a,3%
                                                    17 D E C E M B E R 1996           Hillsborough Tragedy                     856
855

                                                                 began m outh-to-mouth resuscitation. Individual police
                        Hillsborough Tragedy                     officers and first aiders did what they could, but there
  Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House            w as paralysis at the top o f the command.
do now adjourn.— [Mr. Brandreth.]                                   A s the Attorney-General observed in the H ouse on
                                                                  26 October 1994:
10.1 pm                                                             “It was a painstaking and thorough inquiry. . . . The Taylor
                                                                  report placed the blame for the tragedy fairly and squarely on
   M r. P eter K ilfoyle (Liverpool, W alton): It is with a
                                                                  police handling of crowd control at the event.”— [Official Report,
very heavy heart that I speak in this Adjournment
                                                                  24 October 1994; Vol. 248, c. 981.]
debate. I am grateful, however, that m y hon. Friends
and Conservative M embers are in the Chamber.                     Lord Justice Taylor noted in paragraphs 311 and 278
F a m ilie s o f the bereaved o f Hillsborough have travelled     o f his interim report that
down to London and are in the Strangers Gallery to                “the real cause of the Hillsborough disaster was overcrowding”
provide their support during the debate. I particularly           and that
note the fact that the H om e Secretary has chosen to             “the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police
reply to this debate, because I think that he realises the        control.^
significance and sensitivity o f the issue.                           There was an agreed understanding in the Taylor
   On 15 April 1989, on a glorious spring afternoon,              report and beyond on what happened and w ho, in
96 people went to a football match never to return                general, was responsible, but the inquiry did not take
again to their fam ilies. They were men and w om en o f           place in a vacuum. A s the tragedy unfolded,
all ages— from 10 to 67— and 28 o f them were 18                  m isinformation was being spread. W e were told that
years old or less. They cam e from all parts o f the              fans had broken down gate C, that hordes o f drunken
country, although m ainly from M erseyside, and all o f           fans charged the rear o f the Leppings lane entrance and
them had one thing in com m on— a lo v e o f football,            that the Liverpool fans had been the authors o f the
particularly o f Liverpool football club.                         terrible misfortune o f the day. Those who uttered such
   It w ould serve no useful purpose to repeat all the            charges and wrote such lies should still hang their heads
events o f that day, or to attempt to rehearse the many           in shame, given the eventual findings o f the Taylor
legal arguments that have been made in the intervening            inquiry.
seven and a half years, but it is important to establish,             The low point must have been the infam ous report
in general terms, what happened on that fateful day.               o f that terrible day in The Sun. Even by its grub street
   Although the Liverpool supporters outnumbered the               standards it reached an abysmal low , but it w as not
opposing team ’s supporters, they were allocated tickets           alone. Newspaper after newspaper, tabloid and
for the sm aller Leppings lane end. The allocation was             broadsheet, fed the line that fans were responsible for
made on the direction o f the police, to facilitate their          the deaths. The world is full o f gullible people. Perhaps
plans for incom ing traffic carrying rival supporters.             that is w hy as late as 1993 the hon. M em ber for
Roadworks on the trans-Pennine route slow ed down the              W elw yn Hatfield (Mr. Evans) was still peddling the
traffic carrying Liverpool fans. A s they approached the           line that it was all the fault o f Liverpool fans. A s late
ground, it was noted that match day arrangements had               as 1995, Mr. Brian Clough continued to point the finger
been changed from those for a similar gam e in the                 at the fans in his autobiography. There is no fo o l like
previous season.                                                   an old fool, in politics or in football.
   It has been pointed out that the standard practice at              A t the sam e tim e, a steady stream o f w holly partial
 Sheffield and elsew here was for p olice to channel               versions o f events emanated from p olice sources,
 supporters to the appropriate turnstiles by using crash           blaming the fans and fuelling a clim ate o f cynical
 barriers. Tragically, such action w as not taken on that          disregard for the facts, dw elling instead on the
 day, and it set in m otion a train o f events that led to         exoneration o f those whom som e m ight argue were
 the tragedy.                                                      culpable for the events o f that day.
    The crowd built up outside the turnstiles in such a               W e are here tonight because o f a recent docu-drama
 w ay that the p olice officer in charge there,                    on Hillsborough which dem ythologised the Hillsborough
 Superintendent Murray, was concerned that fans were               tragedy and provided catharsis for the survivors and the
 in grave danger o f being crushed. H e sought, and was            fam ilies o f the dead. It was plain to anyone w ho saw
 given, perm ission from the officer in overall charge,            that harrowing account— I note that the Hom e Secretary
 C hief Superintendent D uckenfield, to open gate C to             has com m ented that it was a harrowing account— that
 alleviate the crush outside. That resolved the im mediate         there was a presumption by the authorities that drunken
 crisis, but gave rise to a much greater danger because            loutish behaviour was responsible for the deaths. That
 the natural path for the fans to follow , unless directed         w as illustrated by the tone and content o f the police
 otherwise, was through the tunnel facing them. There              questioning in the docu-drama. I do not accuse
 w ere no stewards or police to funnel fans into                   individual      junior   police    officers  of    acting
 com paratively empty pens. Pressure built up in pens 3            unprofessionally; they were follow ing a line set out for
 and 4 and in the tunnel. These were the killing fields            them by senior officers and the press.
 for 96 innocent men, w om en and children.                          If showing that a w holly erroneous version o f events
   In the im m ediate aftermath o f the horror, there was          had been portrayed by the press had been the only
 a breakdown in official reaction to the tragedy, which            achievem ent o f the docu-drama, it would have been
 unfolded liv e on television around the country. It was           worthwhile, but it also raised the issue o f the allegedly
 the fans w ho pleaded for the gates in the perimeter              faulty video camera and the m issing video tape. In my
 fence to be opened; it was the fans w ho requisitioned            research, I noticed that in questions to the Home
 hoardings as m akeshift stretchers; it was the fans who           Secretary in the House follow ing his statement o f

      4 3 8 C D 3 K -P A G I/5 2
  33
Havoc^d
Arfj'rwfcAt'
m xdO L
     857                Hillsborough Tragedy             17 D E C E M B E R 1996           Hillsborough Tragedy                   858

    i t rS      «           n° n- Fnend the M ember for                 10.12 pm
    St. Helens, South (Mr. Bermingham) urged that all film
    o f the tragedy be made available to the proposed
    inquiry. He presciently said:                                                      0 t State for the Ho,ne Department
                                                                       (M r.M ichael Howard): I w ould like to join the hon
      "Unless we move quickly, that footage may be lost and it         Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. K ilfoyle) in
    conlums evidence that may be of great value to the inquiry         expressing m y deepest sympathy to the fam ilies involved
    [Official Report, 17 April 1989; Vol. 151, c. 38.]                 in the tragic event which took place at Hillsborough.
    How right he was.                                                  I know that I speak for the w hole House when I say that
       W e now have the testim ony o f Mr. Roger                       our thoughts w ill remain with them this Christmas, which
    Houldsworth— a       vid eo   technician    on    duty    at       I know that they must find a particularly difficult time
                                                                       or year.
    Hillsborough on that fateful d a y -w h o apparently
    contradicts the p olice version o f the state o f the video          A nybody w ho saw the news reports on that dreadful
              f ? ad the sf m e view as * e p olice o f the           Saturday, 15 April 1989, w ill have been overw helm ed by
   build-up o f fans in the pens. His analysis o f the                 he terrible, distressing pictures. I know that the loss o f
   im pending disaster is as at odds with the view o f the            the fam ilies that suffered that appalling tragedy was made
   police.
                                                                      all the worse by the fact that it arose from an event that
     O f course, the p olice take contradictory positions on          should have been a normal fam ily outing.
   Mr. Houldsworth s testim ony. First, they say that there is
   no new evidence in it, yet it was not put before the inquiry        r 1 JhaVre , watched the programme “Hillsborough” and
   or the inquest. Only the police version o f the video              I m deeafoandllQ arrow ing;-t(m T!iFliX )nTG eM eim nw iir
                                                                      appreciate that any decisions fh ar l am catted upon To
   S l h T J ! ' PUt v thf inquest jUfy- APParently, the              n ^ e T ia v e To Be made on the basis o f a consideration o f
     outh Yorkshire police, the coroner, and the investigating
                                                                      all the relevant facts and not sim ply on the basis o f one
   force the W est Midlands police— have hitherto
      clined to co-operate in determining how much o f Mr.            television programme, however powerful and m oving. A s
   Houldsworth s evidence was known and to whom. N or                 the hon. Gentleman knows, there have been four
    as there been, as far as I am aware, any attempt to clarify       independent       investigations  and     review s  o f the
   how and by whom, it was decided not to call him. Som e            Hillsborough tragedy: Lord Taylor’s inquiry; the inquest
   would describe that as a conspiracy o f silence.                  into each o f the deaths; the investigation into police
                                                                     behaviour supervised by the P olice Complaints Authority;
     H owever, the Yorkshire Post has ascribed to the police
                                                                     and the judicial review o f the inquest. Each o f those
  the view that Mr. Houldsworth has changed what he said
                                                                     lnqum es served a different puipose, and it m ight be
  at the time, which contradicts the nothing new argument.
                                                                     helpful if I said a little about each o f them and their
  The police cannot have it both ways. W ithout doubt there          outcom es.
  are serious grounds either way for reviewing that vital
  evidence, p a t must be added to the other outstanding               First, the formal inquiry by Lord Taylor was
  questions that have never yet been answered.                       com m issioned by the then Hom e Secretary on the second
      The South Yorkshire police, in particular, must still          day after the disaster. Its terms o f reference were not only
   answer the follow ing questions. W hy was C hief                 to inquire into the events but to make recommendations
  Superintendent D uckenfield put in charge o f a major             about crowd control and safety at sports events. Over 31
  sem i-final only 21 days before the gam e when he was             days, between 15 M ay and 29 June 1989, Lord Taylor
  relatively m experienced at policing football matches?            heard oral evidence from 174 w itnesses at a public
  W hy, unlike in 1988, were there no barriers or cordons to        hearing; in Sheffield. H e also received evidence in the
  filter the crowd outside the Leppings lane end? A s the                     subm issions and letters. The inquiry considered
 danger unfolded, why was the k ick -off not delayed? Whv           video film from three separate sources, providing in all
 did police not recognise the build-up in pens 3 and 4 when         about 71 hours o f further evidence.
 television commentator John M otson and the video
                                                                              Taylor published an interim report in A ugust
 technician, Roger Houldsworth, clearly saw what was                    89, setting out the causes o f the disaster and making
 happening? W hy was the lethal tunnel not sealed o ff as it        im m ediate recommendations. He found that there were a
n " l r nJ n „19P        ^     did C hief Superintendent            number o f causes o f that disaster. The im mediate cause
D uckenfield tell the Football A ssociation that fans had           o f the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut o ff access
forced gate C when he had ordered it to be opened? Whv             to the central pens, w hich were already over-full. They
 id it take until 3.30 pm to make an address on the public         w ere already over-full because no safe maximum
announcement system to inform or instruct fans or to seek          capacities had been laid down, because no attempt was
m edica personnel to help the dying and the injured?               m ade to control entry to individual pens num erically, and
G iven that 4 2 ambulances reached the ground, w hy did            there w as no effective visual m onitoring o f crowd density.
not more o f them get on to the pitch to provide expert
                                                                       Lord Taylor found that when the influx from gate C
h1 - ^ 9       ^     dld ° nly 14 o f those who died get to
hospital? W hy was the city ’s major m edical disaster plan         entered pen 3, the layout o f the b arters afforded less
never put into effect?                                              protection than it should have done and the barrier
   Those and many more questions need to be answered                collapsed. H e found that the need to open gate C was due
I he House cannot raise the dead, but I hope that we can            to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. That congestion
raise the burden on the survivors and on the fam ilies o f         occurred because, as both the club and the police should
 he victim ^ w ho w ish only to see that justice is done. The      have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with
dead, their fam ilies and survivors cry out in the name o f        the large numbers unless they arrived steadily over a
natural justice to be answered. It is incumbent on us to           lengthy period. The p olice had failed to draw up plans on
seek a reopening o f the inquiry into the events o f that          how to control large numbers should they am v e in a short
dreadful day.                                                      period. Unfortunately, that event, w hich Lord Taylor
                                                                   considered to be foreseeable, was what took place.
  439 CD38-PAG 1/53
                             Hillsborough Tragedy                  17 D E C E M B E R 1996           Hillsborough Tragedy                    860
 859

 [Mr. Michael Howard]                                                                An inquest is a fact-finding inquiry conducted to
                                                                                  establish reliable answers to four important but limited
                                                                                  factual questions. They are the identity o f the deceased,
    Finally, Lord Taylor found that the presence o f an
 unruly m inority, w ho had drunk too much, aggravated the                        the place o f death, the time— if known— and the date o f
 problem, as did the club’s confused and inadequate signs                         death, and how the deceased cam e by his or her death.
 and ticketing. There were a number o f reasons for that                          That is all an inquest can consider. Rule 36 o f the
 dreadful disaster, and no single person or organisation was                      coroners’ rules o f 1984 requires that proceedings and
 held to blame, but Lord Taylor did clearly put a                                 evidence are directed solely at finding answers to those
 significant portion o f the blame at the door o f the police.                    questions and forbids any expression o f opinion on other
 Indeed, he w as particularly critical o f the attitude o f South                 matters.
 Yorkshire police to the disaster.
                                                                                     The jury exam ining the evidence found that the cause
       Lord Taylor said:
                                                                                  o f death was accidental death, but the findings o f an
        “It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing and in their submissions
     the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede that they            inquest do not bind any person affected by them. The
     were in any respect at fault in what occurred. Mr. Duckenfield,              inquest’s conclusion, indeed, must not be framed in such
     under pressure of cross-examination, apologised for blaming the              a way * as to determine any question o f criminal
     Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that apart, the police case       responsibility on the part o f any named person or any
     was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to blame the



 •
                                                                                  question o f civil liability* A finding o f accidental death
      club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
      brush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to            does not prevent further proceedings.




•
      barrier 124a being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives
     cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would             The third investigation into the disaster was conducted
      have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if                     by W est Midlands police, supervised by the independent
      responsibility had been faced.”                                             Police Complaints Authority, with a view to establishing
       Lord Taylor also considered the reports that had been                      whether the tragedy resulted from, or was made worse
     published in the press about the behaviour o f Liverpool                     by, c rim in al activity on the part o f any individual. It also
     fans. Again I quote from his report:                                         considered whether any officer should be subject to
        “Before this Inquiry began there were stories reported in the press,      disciplinary proceedings.
     iu>d said to have emanated from police officers present at the match,
     of ‘mass drunkenness’. It was said that drunken, fans urinated on               The investigation involved the taking o f 5,341
     police whilst they were pulling the dead and injured out, that others        statements, as w ell as scrutiny o f all the material that had
     bad even urinated on the bodies of the dead and stolen their                 previously been exam ined. The evidence was sent to the
     belongings. Not a single witness was called before the inquiry to
     support any of those allegations, although every opportunity was             Director o f Public Prosecutions, w ho concluded that the
     afforded for any o f the represented parties to have any witness called      result did not indicate that anyone should be made the
     whom they wished. As soon as the allegations I have mentioned                subject o f criminal proceedings. That has meant that
     were made in the press, Mr. Peter Wright, Chief Constable of South           neither     C hief   Superintendent        D uckenfield    nor
     Yorkshire, made a dignified statement dissociating himself from
                                                                                  Superintendent Murray, w ho were both criticised by the
     &ucli grave and emotive calumnies. Those who made them and those
     who disseminated them would have done better to hold their peace.”           Taylor inquiry— nor for that matter any other person—
     3 That is strong criticism . I think that those quotations                   has been charged with any crime. For any other person
     demonstrate that many o f the points made by the                             apart from a police officer, that would have been the end
     programme, “Hillsborough”, were considered by Lord                           o f the proceedings, but for a police officer there remained
     Taylor at the time.                                                          the question o f whether they had failed in their duty.
         I should stress that, since the report, the police have                     The Police Complaints Authority decided that C hief
      accepted responsibility for the part that they played in the                 Superintendent D uckenfield and Superintendent Murray
      disaster. The present ch ief constable o f South Yorkshire,
                                                                                   should face disciplinary charges. Police disciplinary
      Richard W ells, has on several occasions publicly
                                                                                   hearings are held in private. They are concerned only with
      expressed his deep sorrow at the deaths. More recently,
                                                                                   whether an officer m ay have failed to conform to police
      on the “Today” programme, he said that the police saw
      their responsibility in three particular areas. He admitted                  discipline; it does not consider wider issues.
      that once the gates were open, the police should have                           In the event, Mr. D uckenfield retired due to ill health
      foreseen where the fans would go; he accepted that they
                                                                                   in advance o f a disciplinary tribunal’s ruling on whether
      might have reduced som e o f the pressure by changing the
                                                                                   he was guilty. It is som etim es forgotten that, although a
      kick-off time; and he also accepted that officers did not
                                                                                   number o f punishments can be im posed for bad discipline,
      recognise soon enough the distinction between disorder
      and distress. The South Yorkshire police have accepted                       the m ost serious that a disciplinary tribunal can im pose is
      that they were at fault in those respects and the South                      that o f dism issal or o f a requirement to resign. In the
      Yorkshire police authority has paid com pensation to the                     event, Mr. D uckenfield stopped being a police officer and
      fam ilies o f those w ho died.                                               the disciplinary hearing could not continue because such
         The second investigation into events was an inquest                       hearings can be held only on police officers.
      conducted by Her M ajesty’s coroner for the western
                                                                                      The    Police    Complaints     Authority    announced
      district o f South Yorkshire. That was a difficult task,
                                                                                   subsequently that disciplinary proceedings against
      partly because o f the number o f deaths and partly because
                                                                                   Superintendent Murray would be withdrawn. When
      the Taylor inquiry w as still in progress. The coroner
      conducted an inquiry into the deaths and sat for a total o f                 explaining its decision, the authority stated that the
      9 6 days. It is important that I remind the H ouse o f the                   retirement o f the C hief Superintendent, Mr. D uckenfield,
      purpose o f an inquest.                                                      on medical grounds, meant that what in effect was a joint

          440 CD38-PAC1/54
861                      Hillsborough Tragedy          17 D E C E M B E R 1996          Hillsborough Tragedy                 862


allegation o f neglect o f duty could not be fairly heard in            The charge has been made— it is one that I w ill
the absence o f the more senior officer. H ow ever, som e            consider carefully— that there has been a cover-up, an
time later, Superintendent Murray decided that he did not           .attempt to pervert the course o f justice. I shall also
w ish to remain as a police officer either.                          consider w hethef tTiefe^iy any new e vidence, and if so,
                                                                     whether that~evI9ence is oTsuch significance that had it
   It is o f course w ell known that there was dissatisfaction
                                                                     been put before Lord Tavlor or before the coroner, either
with the verdict o f the inquest. The law provides a remedy
for that by way o f judicial review . The fourth
                                                                     the outcome o f the Taylor inquiry or the verdict o f the       U
                                                                     iurv would have been different.
exam ination, therefore, w as the judicial review o f the
coroner’s proceedings.                                                 A s I consider those questions, I shall be searching for
                                                                    the truth about what happened/Tt has been said that there
    R elatives o f a number o f the victim s applied for judicial
                                                                    was a video camera trained on the central enclosure, and
review. In those proceedings the conduct o f the South
                                                                    that the Taylor inquiry was told that it w as not working,
Yorkshire coroner’s inquest was subjected to a close and
                                                                    ^although that was not the case. But I have been informed
detailed examination. In giving the judgment o f the
                                                                    by the ch ief constable o f South Yorkshire that both the
divisional court, Lord Justice M cCowan ruled very clearly
                                                                    videotape and a transcript o f that tape were made
that none o f the points raised justified the intervention o f
                                                                    available to the Taylor inquiry. Clearly, that is a matter
that court. In particular, the court found that the decision
                                                                    that I w ill need to look intft— 1
o f the coroner to exclude evidence o f what happened after
3.15 pm on that afternoon was not an unreasonable                       I fully sym pathise with the fam ilies w ho feel that in
decision. It also made no criticism o f the coroner’s                som e way they have not learnt the w hole truth about the
directions to the jury.                                              deaths o f their loved ones. Certainly in an appalling
                                                                     tragedy such as Hillsborough it is perhaps inevitable,
   Clearly, it is not possible for m e to know the truth o f
                                                                     though deeply distressing for the fam ilies, that there w ill
what happened on that terrible Saturday. What is
                                                                     be confusion about som e details.
important is that w e should be satisfied that those dreadful
                                                                       I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken
events seven years ago have been fully investigated and
exam ined. The hon. M ember for W alton calls for a                  as soon as I have been able to consider all those issues.
                                                                    I shall certainly take into account everything that the hon.
                                                                                                                                     4
reopening o f the public inquiry. I have had a number o f
letters making a similar request from those w ho were               ^Gentleman has said tonight. W hatever my decision, I shall
bereaved, and I have met at least tw o o f them.                     alw ays be deeply m oved by the memory o f that awful
                                                                     event at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.
    I have said that I w ill consider those representations.
 I must em phasise the fact that I would not take a decision            Question put and agreed to.
lo T e o p e n the inqunyJightly: I must be Convinced that it          Adjourned accordingly at twenty-seven minutes past
 w o u i a ^ Tn the public interestTo do so.                         Ten o ’clock.




      441 CD38-PAG1/55
