                            PERSONAL



 From: Sir Clive Whitmore
k      24 July 1990                       CC   HMCIC
                                               Mr Burns (o/a)
                                               Mr Moorey


Mr Walters


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


I think that the Home Secretary should be aware of a recent
little flurry over the Hillsborough Inquiry.

Earlier this month Mr Richard Wells, the new Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire, told HMCIC that a                  who had
driven Lord Justice Taylor on his first visit to snerrield on
18 April 1989 had reported that Lord Justice Taylor had made a
remark in his hearing which suggested that even before his
Inquiry had properly begun, he had made up his mind that the
greater part of the blame for the disaster would be attributed
to the police. Lord Justice Taylor was said to have made this
comment to Mr Geoffrey Dear, then the Chief Constable of the
West Midlands Police, the force which carried out police
inquiries into the disaster, and it was claimed that Mr Dear
had in response acquiesced with Lord Justice Taylor's view.

 The                   said that he had told his wife


 Taylor and Mr Dear at the time. He had waited a year,
 however, before making a formal report because he had always
 believed that nobody would take his word against that of Lord
 Justice Taylor but eventually he hid decided to take action
 because of the growing strength of his feeling that the South
 Yorkshire Police had been unfairly treated by Lord Justice
 Taylor in his interim report.

 HMCIC and Mr Wells told me of the
 allegations last week. Mr Wells saici tnat ne text ouliged to
 treat them seriously, not least because a response would have
 to be given to t   h  e   a    n    d    because there was a real
 possibility that he ox une u l h a s friends would go to the
 media.  I decided that it would be wise to tell Lord Justice
 Taylor and Mr Dear about the police constable's report and to
 get their reaction to it.




                             PERSONAL
                              PERSONAL
  HMCIC and I accordingly saw Lord Justice Taylor on Friday
  morning of last week and although he did not recall the
  details of the conversation between him and Mr Dear on the day
   in question, he emphatically denied that he had said anything
^fefhich meant that he had approached his Inquiry in a prejudiced


  HMCIC saw Mr Dear later the same day, and he too said that
  although he could not remember the details of .the
  conversation, he was absolutely certain that Lord Justice
  Taylor had not said anything to him which implied that he was
  beginning his Inquiry from a biased position. On the contrary
  he had always found Lord Justice Taylor to be scrupulously
  fair in his pursuit of the truth about the disaster.

  HMCIC and I agreed with Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear that
  if the                          story broke in the media, we and
  they would nave q u i C K i y to decide a line to take.

  HMCIC has now written to Mr Wells letting him know the outcome
  of the meetings with Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear and
  telling him that our conclusion is that the matter cannot be
  taken any further.




                                       t




                                PERSONAL
