IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 1988

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


                        PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
                         IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                           RICHARD JONES
                           MICHAEL KELLY
                            PETER TOOTLE
                        KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


                      THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

               SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
                    (the mother and sister of Paul Carlile)
                       JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
                     (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                               JOAN SINCLAIR
                          (the sister of Michael Kelly)
                        LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
                  (the father and mother of Richard Jones)
£                        PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
                   (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
                JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
                 (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)


SHEWETH THAT:

(1)   Your Memorialists are:



      (i)     Sandra Stringer and Donna Carlile, the mother and sister of Paul

              Carlile, deceased.
(ii)    John and Theresa Glover, the father and mother of Ian Glover,

         deceased.



(iii)   Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael Kelly, deceased.



(iv)    Leslie and Doreen Jones, the father and mother of Richard Jones,

         deceased.



(v)     Peter and Joan Tootle, the father and mother of Peter Tootle,

         deceased.



(vi)    James Stephen and Anne Williams, the father and mother of Kevin

         Williams, deceased.



Between the 18th day of April 1989 and the 28th day of March 1991 an

inquest was held before Doctor Popper, one of Her Majesty’s Coroners,

touching the deaths of the six deceased named hereinbefore and some 89

others who had died as a result of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on the

15th April 1989.



At the said inquest the jury returned and the Coroner recorded that the six

deceased named hereinbefore had died of multiple crush injuries and the

conclusion of the verdict was accidental death.
Your Memorialists hereby seek your authority under Section 13 of the

Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court for an Order quashing the said

inquisition and ordering a fresh inquest. They do so on the grounds that the

said inquest was vitiated by the wrongful rejection of evidence by "irregularity

of proceedings" by "insufficiency of inquiry" and by a failure to direct the jury

correctly as to the verdicts available to them on the facts and in particular the

omission to make any mention at all of the alternative verdicts of "lack of

care", accidental death due to lack of care" and "accidental death aggravated

by lack of care".   They further submit that in some cases at least there has

been a subsequent "discovery of new facts or evidence" that justifies the

quashing of the inquisition and the holding of a fresh inquest



Your Memorialists respectfully refer you to the individual summaries

appended hereto which set out the particular facts of their individual cases.

In what follows your Memorialists will develop some of the points common to

all their submissions which have caused them to seek your authority to apply

to the High Court under Section 13. But they accept that each case will have

to be looked at individually in deciding whether to grant your authority to

some or all of them. All of them complain that the Coroner wrongly failed

to direct the jury as to the verdicts of lack of care or accidental death due to

or "aggravated by lack of care". They do so firstly on the basis that the

negligence of the police in causing the tragedy was self-evident and has

indeed been admitted; this justified leaving the verdict of "lack of care" to the

jury on the basis of the police’s failure to perform their duty of care to the
deceased. But, additionally and in the alternative, they complain that the

Coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care in the emergency services’

and police’s reaction to the deceased’s initial injuries, wrongly insisted on a

cut-off point of 3.15pm for the evidence heard at the main inquest (despite

evidence that the deceased were, or may have been, still alive after that time)

and wrongly failed to direct the jury on the availability of a verdict of

accidental death aggravated by lack of care or lack of care based on the

failure of the various responsible agencies to provide the deceased with

adequate medical attention after they had sustained their original injuries.



               BACKGROUND TO THE INQUEST



The inquest arose out of the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield which

occurred on 15th April 1989. On that day the semi-final of the Football

Association Cup was arranged to be played at the Stadium between the

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs. What happened next can

be summarised in the words of Lord Keith in his Judgment on the case of

Cooper & Others -v- Wright:



"The South Yorkshire Police Force, which was responsible for crowd control

at the match, allowed an excessively large number of intending spectators to

enter the ground at the Leppings Lane end, an area reserved for Liverpool

Supporters. They crammed into pens 3 and 4, below the West Stand, and in

the resulting crush 95 people were killed and 400 physically injured".
As is recorded in Lord Keith’s Judgment, the South Yorkshire Police have

subsequently admitted that their negligence was responsible for the said

injuries and deaths.



Before the inquest hearing opened on 18th April 1990, there had been an

official inquiry ordered by the Secretary of State for the Home Department

on 17th April 1989. This inquiry was carried out by Lord Justice Taylor with

the help of two assessors. In his Interim Report on the "events at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Grounds on 15th April 1989" which was presented to

Parliament in August 1989, Lord Justice Taylor had established a chronology

of the key events and made certain findings of relevance to this Memorial.

Your Memorialists respectfully summarise the chronology of findings to assist

you by way of background to their complaints about the conduct of the

subsequent inquest. Lord Justice Taylor’s findings can, then, be summarised

as follows, on the basis of his Interim Report:



(i)     Before the kick-off of the match, which was scheduled for 3.00pm,

         there was a build-up of supporters outside the Leppings Lane

         entrance to the grounds which caused pressure and discomfort to

         those trying to get into the ground through the turnstiles.



(ii)    At 2.52pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield - who was the police

         officer in charge of crowd control at the match decided that, in order

         to relieve the pressure at the turnstiles, he would give permission for
the gates to the ground at the Leppings Lane entrance to be opened.

The opening of one of the gates, Gate C, resulted in a sudden influx

of supporters through the tunnel and into the spectators’ pens 3 and

4, building up an intolerable pressure on the supporters at the front

of the pens. This decision to open the gate was found by Lord

Justice Taylor to be a negligent "blunder". He also found that the

police had thereafter further misjudged the situation by failing to

take any steps to divert supporters from pens 3 and 4. He found

that, had this been done, they could have prevented the fatal build­

up of pressure in the pens during the minutes after 2.52pm - which

eventually resulted in the supporters being crushed against the

perimeter wall and the wire mesh of the fence above it. Lord Justice

Taylor also found that the police had made a fatal error in deciding

not to postpone the match, once the problems at the turnstiles

became clear, and that postponement of the match to enable a

slower and more orderly entrance into the ground could also have

averted the resulting disaster.



Lord Justice Taylor found that the pressure on those at the front had

already become intense and life-threatening by 2.59pm, but that the

dangerous situation went "unheeded" and "unremedied" by the

police.



The match kicked-off just before 3pm and shortly after that at
3.04pm a further surge caused by the spectators’ response to a

narrow miss at goal by Beardsley for Liverpool further increased the

pressure on the supporters crushed against the wall at the front. By

then, if not before, many of the supporters had suffered the severe

crush injuries from which they died. The exact time of death was

not established by Lord Justice Taylor since this was clearly not an

essential part of his inquiry’s task.



To the front of the crowd, there was delay by the police in opening

the perimeter gates in pens 3 and 4 to the track which ran alongside

the pitch. These were not open until 3.00pm, and until they were

opened the victims of the crush had no means of escaping from the

pens during the build-up of pressure between 2.52pm and 2.59pm.

It was only after 3.00pm that spectators were able to escape by those

gates onto the track and the pitch.



The match was not stopped until 3.05pm and it was only then that

the gravity of the situation appears to have been appreciated.



There was then a delay in evacuating the casualties from pens 3 and

4 and in responding to the magnitude of the disaster. In particular,

Lord Justice Taylor made the following findings:



         Initially no officer took effective charge of the evacuation
of casualties from the pens.



It was not until 3.12pm that chief Superintendent Nesbit

arrived on the pitch and organised a chain of officers to

simplify and expedite the evacuation of casualties from the

pitch.



Though it was not clear when the Major Disaster Plan was

initiated, it was certainly not initiated until 3.06pm

(subsequent evidence suggests that the existence of a major

disaster was not communicated to the ambulance services

for some time).



Ambulances from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Area

began to arrive at Leppings Lane at 3.13pm and at the

Peniston Road entrance at 3.17pm.



No request for the fire-brigade or for cutting gear was

made until 3.13pm (it would obviously have helped to

evacuate the injured from behind the wiring had the fire-

brigade and cutting equipment been available sooner).



No request for help was broadcast to doctors and nurses in

the grounds until 3.29pm when, according to Lord Justice
                  Taylor’s findings, "it was too late".



It is plain then that, on the basis of the evidence heard by Lord Justice Taylor

(which to a large extent was reheard by the Coroner and his jury at the

inquest) there was clear evidence that police blunders and negligence was

responsible for the fatal crush which caused the deaths of the deceased. If

then the jury were, as a matter of law, entitled to reflect that negligence in a

verdict (whether of "lack of care" or some other verbal formula falling short

of the gross negligence or recklessness necessary to constitute unlawful killing

by manslaughter), such a verdict should have been left to them on the facts.



Secondly, it is plain that Lord Justice Taylor found some serious deficiencies

in the police response to the plight of the injured once they had sustained

their injuries at some time between 2.52pm and 3.05pm, or even later. It is

true that he had concluded that many of the injuries and deaths were

probably inevitable once the fatal crush had built up. But heTecognised that

a quicker response to the emergency by the police to ensure the early

attendance of the emergency services might have saved at least some lives.

These findings did at least raise the further question of whether the cause of

death (i.e. crush injuries) had not in some cases been aggravated by "lack of

care" in the sense of a failure to respond swiftly enough to the plight of the

injured and provide them with the necessary medical care to avert death.
Lord Justice Taylor did find that "there was insufficiently close co-operation

between the police and the emergency services", and further found that "it is

clear that SYMAS and the Fire Brigade should have been called earlier than

they were". But, in view of his finding as to the "pathetically short period for

which those unable to breathe could survive" he found that it is "improbable

that quicker recourse to the emergency services could have saved more lives".

Moreover, he rejected the criticism that, once they had been called, the St.

John Ambulance Brigade, the Fire Brigade and SYMAS (the South Yorkshire

Metropolitan Ambulance Service) had been slow to respond or inappropriate

in their response or that there was any insufficiency of equipment or lack of

triage. However, it is clear that he did not rule out the possibility that some

lives may have been saved by calling the emergency services in earlier and his

conclusion that in most cases the injuries would have been fatal in any event

after a very short period of crush asphyxia depended on a particular

pathological premise (namely that fatal crush injuries were due to a

continuing pressure which made death inevitable in a matter of minutes)

which has subsequently been challenged and is inconsistent with the fact that

some of the dead appeared to have revived briefly and many of the injured

who got medical attention'promptly did survive (See BMJ article dated 30th

November 1991 and annexed hereto). As to his view that the emergency

services could not be validly criticised, this was based on a rejection of the

evidence of two doctors present at the ground with which a jury (had they

been allowed to hear their evidence at the inquest) might not have concurred.
So, despite his reservations about the number of lives that might have been

saved by a swifter response Lord Justice Taylor did make findings which

suggested that the lives of some of the dead might have been saved if there

had been a more timely response by the police to the crisis and if they had

called in the emergency services more quickly. But, as indicated above, there

was additional evidence considered by Lord Justice Taylor, and available to

the Coroner, which went considerably further. This evidence principally

consisted of the statements of two doctors and a nurse who had been present

at the match and attempted to assist and treat the casualties - namely Dr.

Glyn Phillips, Dr. John Ashton and Mr. F.J. Eccleston, a senior nursing

manager.



Dr. Glvn Phillips



Dr. Glyn Phillips has provided a statement to the Coroner, a copy of which

is annexed hereto. In summary, he remarks in his statement how he had been

a spectator at the match, and had experienced the crush as the crowd surged

forward in the pen, and had managed to escape from the pen over the

perimeter fence. He then made various attempts to resuscitate unconscious

spectators lying on the pitch. In one case he succeeded in reviving a spectator

who was lying unconscious by the goal line, cyanosed and pulseless, when he

first came upon him. After some fifteen minutes of cardiac massage and

mouth to mouth resuscitation Dr. Phillips noticed the young man began to

make his own breathing efforts. He got him to an ambulance and told the
ambulance man that he needed an ambulance "now" - but the ambulance man

told him that he couldn’t get the ambulance out. The time, on the basis of

Dr. Phillips’ estimations, must by then have been sometime after 3.21pm. His

evidence is significant in that it demonstrates the possibility that lives could

have been saved with proper emergency help after the crush injuries sustained

at around 3.00pm - 3.04pm. It also indicates that there were matters which

deserve investigation in inquiring as to the cause of death which occurred

after 3.15pm (the "cut-off' point selected by the Coroner). Dr. Phillips’

evidence is also significant in that he called for a ventilator whilst attending

the victim who revived and was told that there was none; and he also asked

for an oxygen cylinder, and was provided with an empty one. This did point

to a significant ‘lack of equipment’ as a problem that may have contributed

to the deaths of some of the deceased.



Dr. John Ashton



Dr. John Ashton, who had attended the match as a spectator with his two

sons and nephew, is a medical practitioner and senior lecturer in Community

Health at University of Liverpool. In a statement dated 19th April 1989 he

gave a detailed account of the events that unfolded from about 3.15pm

onwards which highlighted the serious shortcomings in the response of the

police and the emergency services. His account was as follows:



         When he got a view of the pitch shortly before 3.15pm he said:
"There seemed to be a few St. John’s Ambulance people attending

the people who were lying around the pitch and I could see people

lying on the pitch unattended. There was a large line of police

officers across the pitch at the centre circle".



At about 3.15pm he was able to get a better view of what was going

on the pitch and described what he saw as follows:



"The overwhelming impression was of a large and growing number

of casualties and not much response. The supporters were now

impatient and angry at the slowness of the response to the

emergencies. There appeared to be only one or two stretchers on

the pitch and one ambulance was making its way around from the far

comer." He then described how the supporters were chanting for

assistance to be brought to the injured on the pitch and how many

of them began to tear down the advertising boards and organise

themselves into stretcher parties. It was around this time that he

heard the tannoy appeal for doctors to help. This took place at

about 3.29pm.



Dr. Ashton asked several policemen who he could report to to help

and was told they did not know. Finally, a senior police officer

(Inspector Grace) was pointed out to him but he too said that he did

not know who was in charge of emergencies or whom he should
report to to help.



Dr. Ashton then went out into Leppings Lane at around 3.30pm to

3.35pm and found that there was only one ambulance there.



Dr. Ashton found that there was no triage system in operation to

identify those most in need of medical aid so he organised a triage

system himself as to whom to put in the ambulance.



Dr. Ashton recounted how there was no steady flow of ambulances

until between 3.45pm and 3.50pm. Once they began to arrive he and

a local practitioner worked together sorting out the casualties and

dispatching them in ambulances.



It was not until then that "an anaesthetist arrived from somewhere

and fire engines came with resuscitation equipment, but all of this

was really too late”. Dr. Ashton took the view that, by 4.30pm it was

"all over".



Dr. Ashton recorded his view that "on this occasion crowd safety

took second place to crowd control" and that the emergency service

was "woefully inadequate". He recognised the difficulty of assessing

how many lives might have been saved by a more timely response,

but clearly his statement raised this issue most clearly.
Mr. Eccleston



Mr. Eccleston is a qualified nurse and Senior Nurse Manager who made a

statement dated 18th April 1989 giving his account of the disaster in which he

had been caught up after attending the match as a Liverpool supporter with

his son. In his statement which is appended to this Memorial, he gives an

account of the events which occurred after the match was stopped. His

account of events can be briefly summarised as follows:



(a)      He was allowed onto the pitch by a steward when he explained he

        was a trained nurse.



(b)    - He then helped the police pull casualties through the gates of the

         pens onto the pitch.      The first casualties were conscious and

         recovered but they then began to pull out unconscious bodies.



(c)      He recalls resuscitating one young man to the point where he

         regained consciousness and was able to talk (pages 3-4) and then

         taking him on a stretcher to the S t John’s Ambulance room.



(d)      Later on at about 15.30 he strove to resuscitate another young man

         but "lost the battle for the young man’s life". He records that at that

         stage "we still had no equipment of any sort to work with".
It was shortly after 15.30pm that the first ambulances began to make

their way onto the pitch.



He later went to the gymnasium where the space was divided into a

part set aside for the presumed dead and a part for the living. This

was about 15.55pm and the scene was "absolute chaos".



Your Memorialists would particularly draw attention to his

conclusions (6) and (7) which were as follows:



"(6)    Observing from the outside it appears to have taken far too

         long to decide that it was not a security problem and that

         the fans genuinely needed help.         Working with and

         alongside the individual police officers in the immediate

         disaster area, I have enormous praise and admiration for

         their efforts. Overall at the scene, however, there appeared

         to be a lack of coordination and genuine leadership.



"(7)    For an extremely long time we were without any medical

         equipment of any description. I still can’t understand why

         the local Health Authority’s Major Medical Disaster Team

         was not called upon.       I understand that all Health

         Authorities in this country have a major disaster policy. It

         is impossible to accurately estimate the difference this
                  would have made in saving life. I do however believe that

                  the Liverpool fans should have been given the chance".



Issues Raised bv Evidence Disclosed to Coroner



It is plain then that the general evidence disclosed to the Coroner when he

embarked upon the Inquest proceedings in April 1990 raised at least two

issues that deserved investigation and might result in a verdict that reflected

culpable failure on the part of the police and/or the emergency services:



(i)      Firstly there was the negligence of the police in permitting the

         situation to develop to a point where the "fatal" pens were so

         crowded that the crush injuries resulted which proved fatal to the

         deceased.



(ii)     Secondly, there was the slow response by the police and emergency

         services to the plight of the injured, the evidence that some could

         have been saved by a more timely response, and the general

         evidence of chaos, lack of leadership, lack of equipment and lack of

         ambulances during the crucial time from 3.04pm until 3.30pm and

         thereafter.



These were all matters which, it is submitted, require investigation in order

to determine properly "how" the deceased met their deaths, and they made
the Coroner’s subsequent decision to fix a 3.15pm cut-off point unlawful and

unjustifiable. Against that background your Memorialists turn to the conduct

of the Inquest itself.



Opening of Inquest with Jury - 18th April 1990



The Coroner swore in a jury and commenced the inquest before the jury on

the 18th of April 1990.      On that occasion the Coroner explained the

procedures that he proposed to adopt to the jury and to the representatives

of your Memorialists’ families. The situation was complicated by the fact that

the Director of Public Prosecutions was still contemplating the initiation of

criminal proceedings against officers of the South Yorkshire Police for their

part in permitting the disaster to occur. The Coroner therefore decided to

open the inquests and hear evidence in the first stage at a series of mini­

inquests which would be confined in their scope to the statutory question of

"who” the deceased was in each case and "when and where” he met his death.

He indicated that he would postpone all wider investigation into the further

question of ”how" the deceased came by their deaths - and the extent to which

fault played a part in that causation - until after the Director of Public

Prosecutions had reached a decision on whether to initiate criminal

proceedings. He therefore explained his intentions as follows:



(i)      He would firstly hold a series of mini-inquests into the deaths of

         each of the deceased confined to the investigation of "who the
decreased was, when he died, as far as it can be established and

where he died, as far as it can be established" (page 10 G-H of

transcript of proceedings on 18th April 1990). At the end of each of

these mini-inquests he would adjourn pending the decision of the

Director of Public Prosecutions on criminal proceedings.



He would not permit any investigation of the wider question of "how"

the deceased met their deaths at these preliminary inquests and "no

criticism or attack on any person or corporations will be permitted

and if a question is asked I will not allow it" (page 128).



The evidence of these mini-inquests would be presented in the form

of "summaries" read out by presenting officers. These "summaries"

would summarise the statements taken from eye-witnesses as to the

movements of the deceased on the day of the disaster, the sightings

made of them at the time of the fatal crush, the finding of their

bodies on the pitch, any attempts at resuscitation made, and the

taking of their bodies to the temporary mortuary in the gym, and the

certification of death. There would be no oral evidence at these

mini-inquests save for the reading out of these summaries, based on

statements taken, by presenting officers and the evidence of

pathologists as to the cause of death (pages 13F - 14F).



The Coroner admitted that he was not complying with the
        requirements of Rule 37 of the Coroners’ Rules which lays down the

        procedure that must be followed before documentary evidence is put

        before an inquest instead of original viva voce evidence (page 17D

         18C). In particular, he was not going to summarise the contents of

        the summaries and then invite the consent of the interested parties

        to this mode of adducing evidence as Rule 37 requires. He justified

        this departure from the requirements of Rule 37 on grounds of

        practicality.



The mini-inquests of the six young men whose deaths are the subject of this

Memorial took place between the 1st and 4th of May. Detailed accounts are

included in the individual statements relative to the deceased individually

which are appended herewith. But the six mini-inquests had the following

features in common:



(i)     At each of them post-mortem evidence was given by pathologists to

        the effect that death was due to traumatic asphyxia or crush

        asphyxia. Put simply this means that the pressure of the crush of

        bodies on them prevented their chests from moving in or out so that

        they could not breathe and oxygen was cut off from their vital

        organs. As a result they lost consciousness and subsequently died.

        In each case, the pathologists claimed that the deceased would have

        lost consciousness in a matter of seconds and that they would have

        died within a matter of a few minutes.
At each of them the evidence of eye-witnesses relating to the

deceaseds’ movements prior to death, the injuries they sustained,

their condition on being found and the certification of death was

primarily given by way of reading out a documentary ‘summary’

which collated and summarised the statements of the contemporary

eye-witnesses. With few exceptions none of the eye-witnesses gave

oral evidence and the families of the deceased had to rely on the

accuracy of the summary presented in order to gain an account of

the last hours of their sons’ deaths and the circumstances of their

deaths.



In four of the cases there was some evidence that the deceased were

still alive after sustaining their initial crush injuries and for longer

perhaps than had been said seemed to be possible by the

pathologists. These were the cases of Paul Carlile, Ian Glover, and

Kevin Williams and Michael Kelly. Coupled with the evidence that

some of the other victims who survived were found unconscious after

the initial crush but revived by timely medical intervention (see

paragraphs 11-14), this has raised in the minds of the deceaseds’

families the question of whether their lives could have been saved by

a more timely medical response and suitable efforts at resuscitation.

This, in turn, raises the issue of whether the causation of their

deaths was referrable to or "aggravated by" "lack of care" in the

accepted sense of that expression as defined in cases such as ex_
         parte Hicks ('1987) 1 WLR 1524. Similarly in the two cases where

         there is no evidence of life after 3.04pm, the cases of Richard Jones

         and Peter Tootle, their families are left with reason to suspect that

         the deceased may have still been alive and capable of being saved

         between the time of the crush and the time when they were certified

         dead (at 4.00pm in the case of Richard Jones, and 3.54pm in the

         case of Peter Tootle). The evidence relating to the four who showed

         signs of life after 3.04pm and may have been alive after 3.15pm and

         capable of being saved, will be briefly summarised below.



In respect of three cases of Paul Carlile, Ian Glover and Michael Kelly the

evidence (as fully set out in the families’ individual appended statements) can

be summarised as follows with regard to the question of survival:



(i)      Paul Carlile



         The evidence of Professor Usher was that Paul Carlile, who was not

         in fact certified dead until 4.35pm, would have fallen unconscious

         within ten to twenty seconds of sustaining his crush injuries and died

         within minutes thereafter. This claim appears to conflict with the

         statement of the off-duty nurse Michael Hollinghurst which was

         shown to his mother, Sandra Stringer.        In that statement, Mr.

         Hollinghurst describes how he first became aware of Paul Carlile

         when he felt him ‘climbing up his legs’. He was seen to be pulling
himself up by holding onto Mr. Hollinghurst’s trousers. This would

have taken place between 3.03pm and 3.15pm and suggests that Paul

Carlile was alive and conscious when first found by Mr. Hollinghurst.

In the statement Mr. Hollinghurst describes his attempts at

resuscitation, and how he was told to leave the enclosure by a

policeman or ambulance man who said he could achieve no more.

This has raised in his family’s minds the suspicion that Paul Carlile

could have been saved by a more sustained attempt at resuscitation.

It is questionable whether Paul was in fact dead at the point. There

was no electro-cardiogram to test for a pulse (which is extremely low

in traumatic asphyxia cases). Given that he had been conscious

when he was trying to pull himself up, Paul’s family believe that he

might have been saved had Mr. Hollinghurst been allowed to stay

with him longer. They are also very concerned that though he was

one of the first casualties to be taken out through the tunnel to the

Leppings Lane area shortly after 3.15pm, he was, however, never

placed in an ambulance and was still on the ground in that area at

4.35pm when Dr. Monaghan certified him dead. A final matter of

concern raising the question of possible survival is the fact that Mr.

Monaghan requested the use of a machine when attending to Mr.

Carlile. This may suggest that, even then, it was not certain whether

he was dead or not A further point to note is that when Michael

Hollinghurst gave evidence at the resumed inquest none of the

details relating to Paul’s attempts to stand up were raised as an

issue.
Tan Glover



Ian Glover was removed from Pen 3 by two police officers and was

placed on his back on the ground. His brother Joseph attempted

mouth-to-mouth resuscitation but was stopped by a police officer

who pronounced Ian dead and placed a jumper over his face. No

equipment was used to ascertain the presence of a pulse. The

evidence of Professor Usher was that he died of traumatic asphyxia,

and that his injuries would have created unconsciousness within ten

to twenty seconds and made death inevitable within four to six

minutes. This, however, was inconsistent with the evidence of his

brother, Joseph, which was not given orally to the mini-inquest but

indirectly via the Reporting Officer Geraldine Evans. She states (at

page 5B of the mini-inquest transcript for 4th May 1990):



"Sir, I have to include that I have spoken with Joseph this, morning

and he wishes to state that in the gymnasium a doctor was present

and when he examined Ian he did in fact find a pulse and attempted

to resuscitate him for about fifteen minutes but was unsuccessful".



It is clear that these attempts at resuscitation would have taken place

during the period between 3.25pm and 3.40pm and suggest the

possibility both that Ian was alive after 3.15pm and that he might

have survived had there been a more timely attempt at resuscitation
by a qualified person. The fact that his face had been covered whilst

he was on the pitch possibly prevented such an attempt.



Michael Kelly



In Michael Kelly’s case the pathologist, Dr. John Clark, gave

evidence at the mini-inquest on the 1st of May 1989 that he died of

crush asphyxia but that the asphyxial changes in him were relatively

mild. There was evidence that he was still alive at 3.08pm (10D of

mini-inquest transcript) which tends to negative any suggestion of

instantaneous unconsciousness and death minutes after. Moreover,

PC Maugham gave evidence that he reached Michael Kelly at some

time around 3.08pm, gave him artificial resuscitation, and carried him

to the Spion Kop End on a hoarding improvised to serve as a

stretcher. That would have been some time around or after 3.15pm

and PC Maugham was quite confident that Michael Kelly was still

alive at that stage.   He described how Michael Kelly was still

breathing for himself when he handed him over to the S t John’s

Ambulance Service. Moreover Michael’s Post-Mortem details reveal

no evidence of brain damage and he agreed with Counsel for the

family that he was confident that he "had won through" in Michael

Kelly’s case and resuscitated him. Naturally this evidence, together

with the evidence that Mr. Kelly’s asphyxial changes were relatively

mild, suggested to his family that his death was preventable and that
         he only ceased to breathe subsequently and died because of some

         shortcomings in the care he received after he was handed over to the

         St. John’s Ambulance Service. He was not certified dead until

         3.59pm.



Kevin Williams’ Mini-Inquest



At Kevin Williams’ mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave

evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to

have resulted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

five minutes (page 3B-E). However, evidence was then read out, in the

course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:



(i)      There was first a statement from a PC Bruder which was referred to

         in the summary in which he stated that he had come upon Kevin

         Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the

         rest of his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

         vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read out at this hearing

         though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

         Clearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

         and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

         after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question of
whether he could have been resuscitated though PC Bruder stated

that his own attempts at resuscitation eventually failed and that

Kevin Williams went grey.



However, a further statement was then referred to from a Special

Constable Deborah Martin who had made a statement to the effect

that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

late as about 4pm. In the original, statement she made which was

not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



"He stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart

massage and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened

his eyes, his only word was "Mom" and then he died".



This statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

transcript and page 7D-E). But clearly it once again raises the

possibility of survival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question of whether death might have been prevented by more

timely medical intervention. The Coroner was sufficiently concerned

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th

May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death of Kevin Williams.
Kevin Williams (the resumed mini-inquest^



When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner called further

evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that

Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable time after sustaining his

crush injuries and to reassure the family by qualifying and undermining the

testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin. The further evidence

took the following form:



(i)     An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated that he had re­

        interviewed PC Bruder on 3rd May and that, in the light of the

        further questions put to him, PC Bruder now accepted that his

        description of the deceased as ‘having convulsions’ should be altered

        and the ‘movement’ was best described as a ‘twitch’ (6C). He also

        reported that PC Bruder had now qualified his claim to have ‘"felt

        a slight pulse" and that he now accepted that ’’whatever he felt there

        he cannot be categoric it was a pulse" (page 6G). He further reports

        that PC Bruden now accepted that he had not witnessed Kevin

        Williams being sick (page 7b).
            i




(ii)    Dr. David Slater, the pathologist, was then recalled. His evidence

        was that Kevin Williams’ death was caused by a "very very severe

        case of asphyxia" and that there "was four fractures to the voice box".

        In his view unconsciousness would have resulted from the crush
         injuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain damage death would

         have occurred within three to six minutes thereafter but whole body

         death may not have resulted until sometime thereafter (pagers 10-

         12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

         time after he had been taken from the terraces. But he was sure

         that Kevin Williams had died before Special Constable Martin

         arrived on the scene.



(iii)    In addition, a Dr. Ernest Gumpert was called to explain further the

         distinctions between brain death and whole body death and to record

         his view that Kevin Williams was brain dead before he got out of the

        area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



Subsequent Developments Regarding Williams’ Inquest



Subsequent investigations have repealed that considerable pressure was put

on both Special Constable Martin and PC Bruder to retract or qualify their

evidence as to the signs of life they described in Kevin Williams. These are

set out more fully in the statement of Kevin Williams’ mother, appended

herewith. But the manner in which the very significant evidence of these two

witnesses was presented to the mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory. Qearly

the jury and the family should have had the benefit of hearing oral evidence

rather than somewhat misleading second-hand accounts of their original

statements and of the qualifications they had subsequently been persuaded to
make to their original evidence. And clearly the edited version of their

evidence actually presented was, at the very least, not a complete picture of

their eye-witness accounts.



Mini-inquests concerning Richard Jones and Peter Tootle



The mini-inquests into the deaths of Peter Tootle and Richard Jones revealed

no positive evidence of signs of life after they suffered from the crush injuries

which resulted in their deaths. The only evidence in respect of these two

after they suffered their injuries was as follows:



(i)      Richard Jones



         Richard Jones, who was found to have died of traumatic asphyxia

         has been identified standing in enclosure 3 at 2.50pm. The only

         evidence of what happened to him after this time came from Police

         Sergeant Killoch who disclosed in his summary that sometime later

         Police Constable Paul Bromley joined a group of supporters who

         were carrying Richard Jones across the pitch to the north stand on

         a makeshift stretcher.     Once there, the constable attempted to

         resuscitate him but was unsuccessful. He then assisted in carrying

         Richard Jones into the temporary mortuary where at 4pm he was

         certified dead.   The very lack of evidence has made his family

         concerned that his life might have been saved had there been
suitable medical intervention at an earlier stage. They also raised

with the Coroner their concern to know whether his life could have

been saved had he not been assumed to be dead when taken to the

temporary mortuary but instead taken to hospital and given the

benefit of resuscitation attempts at the hospital. The Coroner dealt

with this by saying at (page 8D of the transcript) that in an ideal

world everybody would have gone to hospital but that this ignored

the practicalities.



Peter Tootle



In the case of Peter Tootle there was very little evidence as to what

happened to him after he fell unconscious from his injuries in the

third enclosure. His friend and companion Colin Frodsham saw a

police officer attempting to resuscitate him for about ten to twenty

seconds when he (Colin Frodsham) recovered consciousness himself.

There is then evidence that at some time between 3.20 and 3.40pm

Police Constable Friend saw Mr. Tootle at the end of the ground

opposite to the Leppings Lane end; he then examined him and

carried him into the temporary mortuary where he was certified dead

at 3.45pm. (Dr. Bull who certified him dead certified a total of 30

victims dead in the space of twenty minutes).      His family were

concerned to know whether his life might not have been saved by

more timely intervention by skilled medical help. At the resumed
         inquest Mr. and Mrs. Tootle listened to all the evidence but only

         heard their son’s name mentioned once as a verdict was attached to

         it.



At the conclusion of the mini-inquest, when the Coroner adjourned to await

the result of the Director of Public Prosecution’s decision, the position was

as follows:



(i)     Pathologists had given their view that in most cases unconsciousness

         had followed within seconds of the crush injuries which eventually

         proved fatal and that brain death occurred on average within four to

         six minutes thereafter.   But clearly, there were some cases (eg

         Michael Kelly) where the comparative mildness of the crush injuries

         meant that, even if this general rule was correct, it was not

         applicable in the individual case.



(ii)    On the contrary, eye-witness accounts and those of doctors actually

         present at the scene tended to suggest that lives could have been

         saved by more prompt medical attention. There were a number of

         examples of successful resuscitation when prompt medical attention

         had been made available. The report of Lord Justice Taylor had

         found that there had at least been delays in summoning the

         emergency services. The evidence was very strong that there had

         been shortcomings in the response of the emergency services. None
of this evidence had been heard because it was inevitably bound up

with the wider question of "how" the deceased met their deaths and

with questions of fault which the Coroner had excluded from the

mini-inquests.



Your Memorialists all had reason to believe that the delay in calling

the emergency services and the shortcomings in their response may

have played a part in the causation of their relative’s deaths. In four

cases, there was evidence of survival beyond the four to six minute

period given by the pathologist for death to ensue, and in two cases

(Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams) there was positive evidence that

resuscitation had proved temporarily successful.       This made it

necessary to investigate whether some failure in medical attention

contributed to the causation of deaths which were not in fact

inevitable.



Most important of all the deceased’s families had been lead to

believe that the question of "how" their relatives met their deaths

would be fully investigated at the resumed inquest.         And they

considered that an inquiry into "how" they died that did not extend

to the time of their actual deaths and deal with the preventability of

their deaths by suitable emergency response could hardly be called

adequate.
(24)   The Resumed Inquest



       In September of 1990 a decision was reached by the Director of Public

       Prosecutions not to prosecute anybody in respect of the Hillsborough disaster.

       Thereafter, the Coroner decided that the adjourned inquests should be

       resumed and completed with a full inquiry into the question of "how".

       However he indicated that he would impose a cut-off point of 3.15pm on the

       inquest and would hear no evidence as to events after that point. He chose

       this cut-off point because that was the time that the first ambulance arrived

       on the pitch. The effect of the decision to impose a cut-off point at 3.15pm

       was as follows so far as it affected your Memorialists:



       (i)      It ruled out any inquiry into the adequacy of the response of the

                emergency services and effectively meant that there was no inquiry

                into the question of whether the deaths of the individual deceased

                might have been prevented by more prompt and adequate medical

                intervention.



       (ii)     It proceeded on the basis that all the deaths of those involved in the

                disaster had become inevitable by the time they had sustained the

                crush injuries they suffered before or up to 3.04pm or thereabouts,

                despite the fact that there was ample evidence to suggest otherwise

                which the jury should properly have been permitted to consider.




                                       -34-
(iii)     Moreover it meant that there was no evidence of the wider

          circumstances surrounding the last minutes of life since there was

          considerable evidence that these six deceased were or at least may

          have been still alive after 3.15pm.            Yet the surrounding

          circumstances of what was going on after 3.15pm and before they

          were certified dead were not inquired into.



Submissions on 3.15pm Cut-off Point and Ruling



At the outset of the resumed inquest in November 1991 the Coroner heard

submissions from the representative of the families (Mr. King) that he should

not restrict the evidence by reference to a 3.15pm cut-off point and that he

should investigate the question of whether the failure to summon the

emergency services swiftly enough and any failures in their response had

caused or contributed to the causation of the deaths of the deceased. He

rejected these submissions and ruled that the 3.15pm cut-off point would be

observed. It is respectfully submitted that the said decision was unlawful for

the reasons set out in paragraph (24) above and that the consequence was

that the Coroner failed in his duty to inquire "how" the deceased came by

their deaths in the fullest sense and wrongly excluded from the jury’s

consideration what in many cases were the last minutes of the deceased’s

lives. Your Memorialists submit that in the light of all the circumstances set

out above the Coroner thereby gave grounds for the High Court to quash the

inquisition on the basis of "rejection of evidence" and "insufficiency of inquiry"
within the meaning of Section 13(1) of the Coroners’ Act 1988.           Your

Memorialists adopt the arguments of their Counsel in his submissions which

are appended herewith in the transcript of the proceedings of that day and

the Coroner’s ruling.



The Coroner then proceeded to hear the evidence of the events of the

Hillsborough Stadium disaster together with his jury. The evidence heard

disclosed that the deaths of the deceased were largely caused by the negligent

failure of the police to control the influx of the crowd into pens 3 and 4, to

prevent the dangerous build-up of pressure in the pens and thereafter, once

the pressure was proving life-threatening, to remedy the situation by

evacuating the crushed supporters onto the pitch and thereby saving their

lives or limiting the number of casualties. The evidence heard also showed

that there had been delay in sending for the ambulances and calling for an

emergency response. On the basis of this evidence alone it is respectfully

submitted that a verdict of "lack of care" or "accidental death" "due to" or

"aggravated by" lack of care should have been left to the jury.



On the 12th of February 1991 Mr. and Mrs. Jones, two of your Memorialists,

wrote to the Coroner asking him to reconsider his decision about the 3.15pm

cut-off point In their letter they pointed out that there had been a lengthy

delay in removing the casualties from the pens and that the process was not

complete until 3.35pm "a fairly lengthy delay which obviously did nothing to

help their chances of survival". They pointed out that some of the survivors
who had been admitted to hospital with severe injuries had been helped to

recovery later in the day. And they requested that Dr. John Ashton and Dr.

Glyn Phillips should be called to give evidence at the inquest; the Coroner

had already seen these doctors’ statements.       The Coroner wrote back

declining to revise his decision on the 3.15pm cut-off point or to call Drs.

Ashton and Phillips to give evidence.      In this refusal it is respectfully

submitted that he was once more guilty of an unlawful "rejection of evidence".

The letter sent by the Jones’s and the Coroner’s reply are appended herewith.



At a later stage the Jones’s caused a report by Dr. James Burns, a Home

Office pathologist, to be sent to the Coroner. This report questioned whether

the approach of Professor Usher (and the other pathologists who gave

evidence of the cause of death) had been, correct insofar as they suggested

that the crush injuries sustained by the deceased would have proved fatal in

a number of minutes. As Dr. Bums pointed out, the claim was based on the

supposition that the crush injuries were caused by a continuous restriction of

chest movement. In fact it was possible that in many cases the restriction of

chest movement caused by the pressure of the crowd was not continuous but

intermittent and in that case death would not inevitably have occurred before

3.15pm, and there might have been a possibility of recovery if they were

evacuated and given proper attention - if they were unconscious but not yet

brain dead. The Coroner did not admit this further evidence nor did he

review his decision as to the 3.15pm cut-off point in the light of it. In this

decision, again, it is submitted that he erred in law and wrongly rejected

evidence.
Defects of Coroner’s Summing-up



When at the conclusion of the inquest the Coroner summed up he failed to

direct the jury as to the availability of a verdict of "lack of care" or of

combining "lack of care" with "accidental death" in some such formulation as

"accidental death due to lack of care" or "accidental death aggravated by lack

of care".   It is respectfully submitted that this was a fatal and unlawful

omission. He had a duty to so direct the jury wherever there was evidence

that a culpable negligence short of the level necessary to justify a verdict of

"unlawful killing" was present and caused or contributed to the death of the

deceased. In the alternative, if this wider submission is not accepted, then it

is respectfully submitted that he did at least have an undoubted duty to direct

the jury as to the availability of a verdict incorporating reference to "lack of

care" if they found that there had been some culpable omission as a result of

which an "opportunity" to render essential medical care and thereby prevent

fatalities had been "lost" (the test of a "lost opportunity to render care" was

laid down in the case of R -v- Southwark Coroner ex parte Hicks ("1987") 1

WLR 1624 and is applicable here). On the evidence before the jury, despite

the limitations due to the imposition of the cut-off point, it was open to them

to conclude that, but for the delays in the arrival of the emergency services,

the deceased, or at least some of them, would have survived.



Your Memorialists James and Anne Williams also draw attention to the

further evidence that has come to light since the inquest which is summarised
         in their individual statements. This suggests that the inquest did not get a full

         and complete picture of the evidence of PC Bruder and Special Constable

         Martin and that the inquest into Kevin Williams’ death should be quashed on

         the basis not only of "rejection of evidence" and "irregularity of proceedings"

        but also on the basis of the "discovery of new evidence".



(31)    Finally, all your Memorialists submit that there has been an "irregularity of

        proceedings" in that the Coroner wrongly dispensed with the requirements

        of Rule 37 and introduced composite summaries into evidence without going

        through the proper formalities for the admission of such documentary

        evidence. Alternatively, he was wrong to dispense with oral evidence from

        important eye-witnesses who had actually seen some of the deceased in their

        last minutes before death and could throw light not only on the actual time

        of death but also on the causation of death and its preventability.



g)      Your Memorialists therefore humbly request that you grant leave to them

        under Section 13(1 )(a) of the Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court

        for an order that the inquisition be quashed and that a fresh inquisition be

        held.   Your Memorialists submit together with this Memorial a volume

        containing all their individual statements in support of this application and a

        second volume containing all the appendices referred to herein.




                                                          EDWARD FITZGERALD
DATED this iS^day of        April 1992 by Malcolm J. Gregg & Co, Second Floor,

Century Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool, L2 6RG.

                                          -39-
IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT lo s s

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


             PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
              IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                 RICHARD JONES
                MICHAEL KELLY
                 PETER TOOTLE
             KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


           THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

    SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
         (the mother and sister of Paul Carlile)
            JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
          (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                    JOAN SINCLAIR
               (the sister of Michael Kelly)
             LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
       (the father and mother of Richard Jones)
              PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
        (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
     JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
      (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)




Malcolm J. Gregg & Co
Second Floor
Century Buildings
31 North Street
Liverpool
L2 6RG

Solicitors for the Memorialists
