From          MRS 6 I MOODY                      Mr Dear HMIC      2 1 HOV ' 9 9 1
              F2 DIVISION                        Mrs jCatto
              Tel: 273-2621                      Mijtfs Edwards
              20 November 1991                   ftr Goddard
                                                 -Mr
                                                 Mr Miles G2
                                                 Miss Harrison E Div

Mr Pickering


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:      LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH MP


Lord Ferrers discussed with Miss Harrison and me on 13 November
the style and content of the response to the attached letter from
George Howarth MP to the Home Secretary on a number of issues
arising from the latest developments in the aftermath to the
Hillsborough tragedy. I attach a draft for consideration, which
I hope will meet his wishes.




                                 MRS G I MOODY




GIM-717.000
 Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home
 Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.


 I should like to emphasize once more, as we have on earlier
 occasions, how deeply we feel for all those who lost relatives
 or friends in this horrific incident.    The whole Government
 was, as you know, deeply saddened to hear of this dreadful
 disaster at the time it happened.    It is because of our
 sympathy with their appalling loss that we have always tried
 to ensure that the circumstances which caused it should be as
 fully and as openly exposed as possible.    I do not therefore
^^hink it is being entirely fair to say, as you do, that "no
 detailed investigation around the responsibilities of those
 concerned has yet been undertaken or published” when in fact
 at least four investigations of the events have been
 undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were
 properly covered.




 The first of these was of course the formal inquiry by the
 Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor commissioned by the Home Secretary
 on the second day after the disaster.    The investigation
 inaugurated by the Taylor inquiry involved some 440 officers
 from the West Midlands police force, who took some 3,776
 statements as well as taking advantage of video film from 3
 separate sources providing, in all, some 71 hours of further
 evidence.     This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted
 and in my view the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on


 GIM-710.000                      1
 the disaster gives a very clear picture of police activity on
 the day.


 The inquest into the death at Hillsborough, which took over
 100 days to examine the material facts, constituted a second
 inquiry into these events.


 The inquest, in fact, served a separate function, in that the
 law states that its purpose is to ascertain the identity of
 the deceased, and how, when and where he came by his death.
 The Coroners Rules provides that neither the coroner nor the
^pury shall express any opinion on any other matters.   In
 addition, the rules specifically prohibit the framing of an
 inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any
 question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,
 or civil liability.   Any issue of civil or criminal liability
 is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the
 coroners inquest.


 If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest
 including the verdict (as I believe some relatives are), it is
 open to them, under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, to
 apply with the authority of the Attorney-General, for the High
 Court to quash the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be
 held, either by the same coroner or by a different one from
 the same administrative area.   Coroners inquests may also be
 challenged by way of judicial review but anyone contemplating



 GIM-710.000                     2
such a course of action would be well advised to seek legal
advice at an early stage.


In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for
Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted
a further major investigation with a view to discovering
whether the disaster resulted from or was made worse by
criminal activity on the part of anyone.     This too was a very
large investigation, but the Director of Public Prosecutions
did not conclude that the results indicated that any one
should be made the subject of a criminal prosecution.


Perhaps it would be helpful if I comment on this.     It means
that, so far as anyone can discover - and the evidence amassed
has been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the
result of any criminal activity.     In particular, neither Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield nor Superintendent Murray nor any
other person have been charged with any crime.


For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end
of the matter.     For police officers however there remains the
question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,
they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as
police officers.    The fourth investigation of the events of
the day covered complaints which had been made regarding
police behaviour.     This investigation involved the taking of a
further 5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the
material previously examined.    It was supervised throughout by

GIM-710.000                      3
 the Police Complaints Authority, who subsequently expressed
 themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and
 thoroughly conducted.   The privacy of people who complain
 against the police is protected by the courts and the results
 of this investigation cannot therefore be published.


 In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police
 Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are
 required to consider whether there are ways in which the
 officer may have failed in his duty and, if so, to arrange for
 a formal hearing of the charges against him.    They did so,
^pifter receiving the report of the complaint investigation, and
 the PCA decided that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
 Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges.


 As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who
 were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in
 which your letter is written makes me think that you must be
 under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of
 police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in
 private and is concerned only with whether or not the officer
 concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.
 The hearing would not therefore in any way contribute to
 public knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do
 more than receive and consider evidence already known as to
 the propriety of Mr Duckenfield's conduct.     It is not
 therefore really relevant to the question of a further



 GIM-710.000                     4
 investigation into police operations on the day which is, I
 understand, what you are really seeking.


 Another important issue in relation to police discipline which
 is often ignored is that the most serious punishment which the
 disciplinary tribunal would have been able to impose, had
 Mr Duckenfield been found guilty, would have been dismissal or
 requirement to resign.   This would be the heaviest punishment
 it would be possible to award an officer for the very worst
 offence he could have committed, and would be used in any case
 where it was clear that the officer's behaviour was such that
^|.t was inappropriate for him to remain a police officer.   By
 retiring, Mr Duckenfield has already left the force and thus
 made further action unnecessary.


 It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr
 Duckenfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate
 authority in police disciplinary cases, but I can and should
 say that it needs to be remembered that it is by no means
 certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr
 Duckenfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred
 against him.


 If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man it would not be
 right to refuse him retirement on medical grounds in order to
 hear charges which may or may not be proved and whose most
 serious result could only be that he leave the service he has
 already asked to leave voluntarily.     This, however, like the

 GIM-710.000                     5
 other matters raised in your letter, is a matter for the South
 Yorkshire Police Force and its police authority and I suggest
 that your concerns might best be discussed with them.




 Your main concern however in writing to me was, if I have read
 your letter right, the feeling that there should be some
 further investigation of police operations at Hillsborough as
 a whole.      In practice, successive Home Secretaries have only
 commissioned to major inquiries into the conduct of a force
 where they considered that the whole conduct of a force in
gelation to the community it policed had been called in
 question.     This is not the case with the South Yorkshire force
 despite the terrible events at Hillsborough.      Furthermore, in
 the light of the very wide ranging investigations which have
 already been conducted and the lapse of time, I find it
 difficult to see what additional useful information yet
 another (fifth) investigation could produce.


 I am sorry I cannot send you a more helpful reply despite the
 very deep personal sympathy we feel here for all those
 bereaved at this terrible event.




 GIM-710.000                       6
                                                              J h   1
                                                                  ttnvi

                                                              v im a c
                                                              DM *
               HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                                          .   /HinhLluk
                    L O N D O N SW1A OAA


5th November 1991

Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.                  >/•.
Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SWIH 9AT
                                  •7 '•'      -       t
                                                  }

Dear Home Secretary                               /
RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I am- writing to protest at the way in which South
Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield for his part in the
Hillsborough tragedy.
As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
for certain decisions will never, unless you
intervene, be fully pinned down.
Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
subject of a proper medical examination. However,
if- the families of those sadly killed at that event,
or; indeed, any of the survivors, are to be'satisfied
that the justice they were promised by the then Prime
Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
seems to me, really matter.


                                           (continued).
                          -   2

Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your
very closely at the implications of SoutSxJLancashire's;
Police decision to effectively evade an inv5stigatii»-<tfito
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication. >>
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
Whilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.
It is jjL-±hi-s_^art that I seek your intervention in finding
some w^y--tsrf-_pr^fea^Ly investigating in detail the role of
South (Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
officers-1 responsible specifically, in the policing of
that day of that event.
Yours sincerely


             rth M.P.
             rth
c.c. Mr   Peter Joynes
     Mr   P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr   Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr   Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr   Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr   Bob Parry M.P.
     Hr   Bob Wareing M.P.
     Mr   Frank Field M.P.
     Mr   Joe Benton M.P.
     Mr   John Evans M.P.
     Mr   Gerry Bermingham M.P.
                            »




                                 H o m e O ffice
                                QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                 LONDON SW1H 9AT




                           November 1991




jW ftr.

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
Thank you for your letter of 4 November to
the Home Secretary.
Enquiries our being made and a substantive
reply will be sent to you in due course.




                 R J PICKERING    1
          Assistant Private Secretary




George Howarth Esq MP
