INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               T h e Rt H o n Lord J u s tic e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370

Sir Gordon Borrie QC
Director General of Fair Trading
Field House
15-25 Bream's Buildings
LONDON
EC4A 1PR
                                            Date
                                              30 January 1990




F A CUP F I N A L . TICKETS


Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
25 January with a copy of your review on the allocation of
tickets for the Football Association Cup Final.  As you will
know, Lord Justice Taylor has now completed his Report (and for
convenience I am enclosing a copy).  You will see that he has had
nothing more to say about the allocation of FA Cup Tickets in the
Final Report.  He suggests that the best thing is now to let
matters rest, but may have a word with you about this in due
course.
                                       •/
                                       lO \M& £ vvxCXvO^,




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                        FIELD HOUSE
                                                  15-25 BREAM'S BUILDINGS
                                                      LONDON EC4A 1PR
                                                          01-242 28S8
                                                     TELEX 269009 OFTRIN G
                                                        FAX 01-269 8800


From the Director General of Fair Trading
Sir Gordon Borrie QC
                                                25 January 1990

Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
The Hillsborough Enquiry Unit
Room 408
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1




Dear



F A    Cup Final Tickets


You may recall that the Chief Trading Standards Officer
(CTSO) of the City of Liverpool copied to you his two
reports to me on the allocation of F A Cup Final Tickets.

I enclose a copy of the review the CTSO asked me to make
under Section 2 of the Fair Trading Act 1973.      Although
I have made some comments on the safety implications of
the C T S O 1s two reports you will see from paragraph 40 of
my review that I consider that it would be best to leave
your inquiry to consider these implications.      I am sure
that you have already done this.



Yours sincerely




Gordon Borrie



Enc
    ALLOCATION OF

   TICKETS FOR THE

 FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

       CUP FINAL




   A REVIEW BY THE

 DIRECTOR GENERAL

OF FAIR TRADING UNDER

SECTION 2 OF THE FAIR

  TRADING ACT 1973


    JANUARY 1990
ALLOCATION OF TICKETS FOR THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION CUP FINAL




Background

1.   The Chief Trading Standards Officer (CTSO) of the City of Liverpool
has carried out investigations into the allocation of tickets for the
1988 and 1989 Football Association (FA) Cup Finals at Wembley.   He has
asked me to look into the FA's policy of allocation under Section 2 of
the Fair Trading Act 1973.  Before explaining my duties under Section 2
I would like to congratulate the CTSO and his colleagues on the
thoroughness of his two investigations, which I summarise below.



Summary of the CTSO's report on the allocation of tickets for the
1988 Cup Final

2.   In his 1988 report the CTSO said that for a number of years there
had been some concern on Merseyside that the FA's policy on the
allocation of tickets for the Cup Final led to a shortage among the
supporters of one or both competing teams.  Fans who could not obtain
tickets at face value from the FA's allocation to their club were often
forced to pay inflated prices to ticket agencies and touts in order to
attend the match.

3.   The CTSO understood that the approximate allocation of tickets for
the 1988 Cup Final was as follows (figures were based on a nominal
capacity of about 96,000 for Wembley Stadium):



        Finalists                            50,000
        County football associations         27,000
        Overseas associations                   500
        First division clubs                  5,000
        Second division clubs                 5,000
        Third division clubs                  1,400
        Fourth division clubs                 1,400
        Non-league clubs                      1,500
        F A council representatives           1,250
        Football Association                  2,000
        Wembley Stadium                         500



4.   Approximately 46,000 tickets were therefore allocated to clubs,
associations and individuals not directly connected with the two
finalists and there was an equal allocation to the clubs involved in the
final, no account being taken of the average number of regular
supporters following the respective teams.




                                       1
5.   The CTSO said that the problem of ticket shortages among supporters
was highlighted in 1988 because of the considerable difference in the
average home league attendances of the two finalists.  Liverpool FC
attracted an average of about 40,000 fans throughout the season, but
Wimbledon FC's average home gate was less than 8,000.  The policy of
allocating about 25,000 tickets to each club left a potential shortfall
of at least 15,000 tickets in Liverpool and a possible surplus of up to
17,000 tickets at Wimbledon.

6.   The CTSO considered that a fairer allocation system would take some
account of the numbers of regular supporters following each finalist
throughout the season.  From his observations at Wembley that year, he
believed that, although Liverpool FC received 25,000 tickets, the number
of Liverpool supporters inside the Wembley stadium was between 30,000
and 40,000.  This would mean that between 5,000 and 15,000 Liverpool
supporters obtained tickets originally allocated elsewhere.

7.    The CTSO received 566 allegations of overpriced tickets during his
investigations, of which 313 were from persons willing to give their
names and addresses.   The CTSO understood that FA rules required all
football clubs and county football associations to place their stamps on
Cup Final tickets allocated to them.   The names of 38 football clubs
were stamped on 118 of the allegedly overpriced tickets seen by the CTSO
and the names of 18 county associations were stamped on 33 of them.   But
there were no stamps on approximately 300 of the tickets shown to the
CTSO.   Many of the latter 300 tickets were for sections of the stadium
which may have been allocated to Wimbledon supporters.

8.   The CTSO claimed that the sale of FA Cup Final tickets above face
value was now almost institutionalised.  Examination of the large
numbers of newspaper advertisements offering tickets showed how many
tickets were being passed on by individuals or organisations to whom
they had been officially allocated.  It was clear, he maintained, that
some people were profiteering at the expense of the football supporters
who could not get a ticket from the allocation to their club.

9.   A further problem encountered by the CTSO at the 1988 Cup Final was
that of forged tickets.  Many fans approached him, his colleagues and
police officers to check the validity of tickets they had bought from
unofficial sources.  All the forgeries seen appeared to be printed with
the same gate and entrance number which prompted police and Wembley
officials to deny fans with forged tickets access to the ground.  It was
apparent that the shortage of tickets for the game provided a
potentially lucrative market, particularly among Liverpool fans, for the
forgers.  Many fans had paid inflated prices for forgeries.

10.   The CTSO and his colleagues at Wembley saw very large numbers of
Liverpool supporters with tickets for the end of the stadium allocated
to Wimbledon fans.  It seemed likely that many of those tickets would
have been allocated originally to Wimbledon FC and therefore would have
reached Liverpool supporters through unofficial sources.  To the credit




                                    2
of both sets of fans, the CTSO reported, there was no trouble inside the
stadium but this situation could have lead to a breakdown of segregation
procedures with very serious consequences, the CTSO claimed.

11.  He and his colleagues saw a certain amount of violence outside the
stadium.  At least four ticket touts were seen to receive severe
beatings.  There were also two attempts by supporters without tickets to
storm the gates.  This led to some violent scenes and serious
confrontation with the police.  In the CTSO's view this violence
represented a serious risk to the general safety of fans outside the
stadium.  Virtually all the violence observed outside the stadium was
ticket-related.  Much of this violence might have been avoided if more
tickets had been allocated to supporters of the participating teams, the
CTSO claimed.

12.  The main points in the CTSO's summary of his findings were as
follows:

      a   Almost half the tickets for the 1988 Cup Final were not
          allocated to the clubs competing in the match;

      b   There was an equal split of tickets between the finalists and
          no account was taken of average home league game attendances;

      c   The present allocation policy could lead both to a shortfall of
           tickets for the supporters of one or both finalists and in many
          of these supporters having to pay inflated prices for tickets;

      d   The safety of supporters could be put at risk by the present
          policy.   Almost all the violence outside Wembley Stadium in
           1988 was ticket-related and segregation arrangements•inside the
          ground failed due to large numbers of tickets at the Wimbledon
          end coming into the possession of Liverpool fans;

      e   Ticket shortages among supporters provided a potentially
           lucrative market for ticket forgers and many examples of
           forgeries were seen at the 1988 Final.



13.  The CTSO recommended that the Director General of Fair Trading
should investigate the FA's ticket allocation policy under Section 2 of
the Fair Trading Act 1973.

14.   The CTSO also asked the FA to consider:

      a   a review of its ticket allocation policy with a view to
          providing more tickets for the supporters of the two clubs
          participating in the final;

      b   taking into account the average home league game attendances    of
           the finalists when apportioning tickets between them;
     c   requiring all tickets to be stamped by the clubs, associations
          or organisation to which they are allocated;

     d   with the aid of ticket serial numbers provided in the CTSO's
          1988 report, conducting an enquiry to establish how the tickets
          came into the possession of individuals apparently unconnected
         with the sources to which they were originally allocated;

     e   taking disciplinary action against those found to be in breach
          of FA rules; and

     f   publishing its own report on the results of investigations and
          enquiries made as a result of his report.




Summary of the CTSO's report on the allocation of tickets for the 1989
Cup Final

15.  According to the CTSO the FA decided to allocate tickets for the
1989 Cup Final on the same basis as for 1988.   However, in the light of
the Hillsborough tragedy (in April 1989) a decision was subsequently
taken to offer the bulk of the tickets to Liverpool and Everton Football
Clubs who each took 35,000 tickets.  The remaining 10,000-15,000 tickets
were distributed by the FA on an ad hoc basis in view of the shortage of
time available and no set allocation ratio was worked out for the
remaining clubs, associations and organisations.

16.  Since the 1988 Final, considerable alterations had been made
at Wembley Stadium with more standing areas being converted into seated
accommodation.  This reduced the capacity of the stadium at the 1989
Final to approximately 85,000.  Had the FA decided to continue with
their allocation policy of previous years this would have meant a drop
from about 25,000 to just over 22,000 in the number of tickets allocated
to each finalist, thus further exacerbating the ticket shortage problems
and further fuelling the activities of the ticket touts, according to
the CTSO.

17.  In the light of the decision to distribute the bulk of the tickets
to the two clubs involved, the CTSO decided to conduct a further
investigation into the activities of ticket touts to establish if the
improved allocation system did indeed reduce ticket touting and its
associated problems as forecast in his 1988 Cup Final report.

18.  The CTSO and his colleagues found 75 tickets allegedly purchased at
prices above face value, compared with approximately 450 in 1988.   The
CTSO concluded that^by an increase of 40 per cent in the numbers of
tickets allocated to each of the finalists, an 83 per cent drop in
ticket touting was achieved.




                                    4
19.  Of these 75 tickets none carried any stamp to indicate its origin.
While Liverpool and Everton football clubs were exempted by the FA from
stamping    their ticket allocation due to the number of tickets and
shortage of time involved, it was understood by the CTSO that all other
clubs, associations or organisations who received tickets had been
instructed by the FA to stamp them.  It appeared   to the CTSO that FA
rules were still being broken by some.  The CTSO recalled that in 1988
over 300 examples of unstamped tickets were found.   Enquiries revealed
that 60 (80 per cent) of the 75 tickets which were alleged to have been
sold at prices above face value came from the 70,000 allocation shared
between Everton and Liverpool.  Information given to the CTSO by the
clubs was that none of these tickets was allocated to staff.

20.  The CTSO reported that, as in 1988, ticket agencies were able to
obtain supplies of Cup Final tickets, although the increased allocation
to the two finalists would have significantly restricted the numbers
available to them.   Eleven ticket agencies were named by supporters as
having been the source of their tickets.   Nine of the 11 agencies were
based in London.   In contrast to the 1988 Cup Final, no evidence of
forged tickets came to light during the 1989 investigation.

21.  Observations by the CTSO and his colleagues at Wembley on Cup Final
day revealed that there were fewer ticket touts operating in the
vicinity of the stadium.  It was apparent that several thousand fans had
travelled to the Final without tickets hoping to be able to purchase one
on the day of the game.  The vast majority were disappointed and most
dispersed as kick-off time approached.  There was, however, around
kick-off time, a charge at a gate by a number of fans which was repelled
by the police.

22.   The main points in the summary of the CTSO's 1989   report were:

      a   The 40 per cent increase in the allocation of tickets to the
           two finalists in 1989 led to an 83 per cent drop in ticket
           touting;

      b   there was a significant decrease in ticket-related violence at
          the 1989 Final;

      c   there appeared to be no forged tickets in circulation at the
          1989 Final; and

      d   FA rules requiring the stamping of tickets to identify the
          club, association or organisation to which they were originally
          allocated continued to be broken.

23.  In the light of evidence gained at the 1988 and 1989 FA Cup Finals
the CTSO requested that the FA:

      a   should allocate up to 70,000 tickets to the cup finalists and
          take into account average home attendances in deciding the
          ratio of tickets to be allocated;




                                     5
      b   should investigate all allegations of breaches of its rules
          identified in the 1989 report;

      c   should    publish the results of its own enquiries into the
          evidence provided by the CTSO's 1988 report and publish details
          of disciplinary action it had taken on proven breaches of FA
          ru l es ;

      d   should ensure that all football clubs, associations, Wembley
          Stadium, FA council representatives and the Football
          Association itself place their stamps on all FA Cup Final
          tickets allocated to them in order that the original sources of
          tickets sold by touts could be readily identified by fans.

24.  I was requested to consider the 1989 report in addition to the
CTSO's 1988 report and, in line with my duty under section 2 of the Fair
Trading Act, to take steps to ensure that the FA's future ticket
allocation policy for the Cup Final does not act against the economic or
safety interests of consumers.

Copies of the CTSO's 1988 and 1989 reports were submitted to Lord
Justice Taylor as evidence for Phase II of the inquiry into the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.



Section 2 of the Fair Trading Act 1973

25.  Under Section 2(1) I have a duty to keep under review the carrying
on of commercial activities in this country relating to goods and
services supplied to consumers with a view to becoming aware of
practices which may adversely affect their economic, health or safety
interests.  Further, under Section 2(2) I have a duty to keep under
review the carrying on of commercial activities with a view to becoming
aware of monopoly situations or anti-competitive practices.  Finally,
under Section 2(3) I can make recommendations to the Secretary of State
as to any action it would be expedient for theSecretary  of State to
take in relation to any of the above matters.



The C T S O 18 case in brief

26.  The CTSO maintains that the usual practice for the distribution of
FA Cup Final tickets is against both the economic and safety interests
of consumers.  He apparently believes that the practice is against the
economic interests of those supporters (particularly those of the
finalists) who want to go to the match but who are unable to buy a
genuine ticket at face value.   He also believes that the usual practice
increases the risk of violence inside and outside the ground and is thus
against the safety interests of supporters.   He suggests, among other
things, that the FA should provide more tickets for the supporters of
the two finalists and should allocate those tickets inproportion   to the
average home league gates of the finalists.
Consideration of section 2(1) of the 1973 Act

27.  In considering the CTSO's case, I interpret the word 'consumers' in
Section 2(1) of the 1973 Act as being consumers in general.  Thus, in
this context, 'consumers' would be football supporters in general and
not the supporters of the two finalists alone or in particular.   That
said, it is likely that the majority of the supporters in general
wanting to go to the Final would be fans of the two competing sides.

28.   I now consider whether the FA's usual distribution practice is
against the economic interests of football supporters in general.    I
consider, in particular, the FA's usual practice of distributing almost
half of the tickets to bodies other than the teams of the two finalists
and of giving equal shares to the teams of the two finalists
irrespective of the numbers of their regular supporters.   It is clear
that many tickets allocated in 1988 to bodies other than the two
competing teams ended up in the hands of ticket touts and were then sold
to genuine supporters at enhanced prices.   It is also clear that many of
the tickets allocated to Wimbledon FC in 1988 were not bought and used
by genuine supporters.   To the extent that genuine supporters have to
buy tickets at enhanced prices, usual practice could be said to be
against their economic interests.

29.  The FA have told me that, as far as the 1988 Final was concerned,
there was no material difference between the percentage of tickets
allocated to Wimbledon FC which were resold at enhanced prices and those
which were allocated generally and resold and that the margin of
difference between these figures and those relating to Liverpool FC was
very slight.  The question did therefore arise as to whether the change
in practice the CTSO suggested in 1988 would have any appreciable effect
in reducing the risk of resale of tickets at enhanced prices.  However,
it would appear from the CTSO's 1989 report that that year's increase in
the allocation of tickets to the supporters of the two finalists led to
a large drop in ticket touting.

30.  I would therefore suggest that the FA should take this fact into
account in deciding future policy on ticket allocation if only for the
safety implications I refer to below.



Consideration of the competition aspects including those under section
2(3) of the 1973 Act

31.  I now deal with the matter under my various powers as the United
Kingdom competition authority.  The rules of the FA form an agreement
which is entered in the public register which my Office maintains under
the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976.  However, the allocation of
tickets for the FA Cup Final is not specified in those rules and it is
not a restriction I can consider under the 1976 Act.  Under section 2(2)
of the Fair Trading Act 1973 and the related provisions of the
Competition Act 1980 I can investigate practices which may restrict,




                                    7
distort or prevent competition.  Put simply, these provisions are
designed as a safeguard against the exploitation of market power for
gain, particularly when ordinary market competition is thereby
restricted, distorted or prevented.  The FA has not, in my view, engaged
in any conduct which is an abuse of market power or which is likely to
restrict, distort or prevent competition.  It follows that the
competition legislation I administer would not be an appropriate vehicle
for tackling the matters raised by the CTSO.



Conclusions on the economic aspects

32.  Clearly more football supporters want to go to the FA Cup Final
than there are tickets available.   I would suspect that there would be
little support in the football world for any suggestion that the FA
should increase the price of Cup Final tickets sufficiently to bring
demand into equilibrium with supply.   That being so the FA is thrown
back on other criteria for allocating its tickets.

33. Whether or not the usual practice of the FA in allocating Cup Final
tickets j^s against the economic interests of football supporters, as the
CTSO claims, I feel that any change in that practice is a matter best
left to the FA.

34.  In any case, I find it difficult to visualise how I could make any
useful recommendation to the Secretary of State for any legal remedy to
the ills identified by the CTSO.   I do not believe that it would be
practical or reasonable to suggest a Parliamentary Bill making it a
criminal offence for the FA to distribute Cup Final tickets other than
in a way set down by law.   Such drastic action seems unsuitable and
would probably prove ineffective in dealing with every complaint about
ticket distribution.  Further it would be difficult to draft rules which
would allocate tickets fairly in any and every given situation.
Certainly I myself am not able to recommend how such rules might be
drawn up.  It is, in my view, a matter for the FA and its members to
resolve - taking into account any findings of Lord Justice Taylor - and
for member-clubs who are dissatisfied to take up within the machinery of
the sport's governing body.



Response of the FA

35.  The conclusions I have just drawn do not mean that the hard work
done by the CTSO and his colleagues has been of no avail.  I am assured
by the Chairman of the FA that the Association carried out an extensive
and thorough investigation of the allegations of sales of tickets for
the 1988 final at enhanced prices and it not only fined those found to
have contravened its rules but imposed bans on the supply of tickets to
them, the banning periods ranging from one year to life.  I have been
told that the FA also took great care to ensure that the relevant clubs
and other bodies were reminded of the importance which the FA attaches
to the observance of its rules concerning ticket allocations, and that
they were made fully aware that sanctions will be imposed in respect of



                                      8
4




    future breaches of those rules.   It is not however the FA's policy, I am
    told, to publicise the sanctions it has imposed on its members.   I hope
    that the FA will consider, in the light of the CTSO's 1989 Report,
    whether or not the measures it took following the 1988 Final, and the
    publicity it gave to them, were sufficient to deter the reselling of
    tickets for future FA Cup Finals.

    36.   The chairman of the FA told me, in response to the CTSO's 1988
    report, that although the Association had given further consideration to
    its policy of allocation, it had decided that the current percentages
    were both fair and appropriate.   More recently the FA announced (press
    reports of 16 January) that the number of tickets allocated to the two
    finalists would go down in the 1990 Cup Final to 42,000 because of a
    drop in capacity at the stadium.   The percentage allocation of tickets
    to the two finalists would however go up from 51.6 per cent to 53.7 per
    cent.   The Chief Executive of the FA was reported as saying that the
    Association would need to examine whether it was right for 21,000
    tickets to go to each of the finalists.   I myself would agree with the
    CTSO's suggestion that the total amount of tickets for the two finalists
    should be shared between them in proportion to their average home league
    attendances.

    37.  Although this is not a point the FA itself has made to me, I accept
    that the Cup Final is a celebration of the end of the football year.   It
    is an occasion for football as a whole and not just for the supporters
    of the two competing sides.  Nevertheless, I hope that the FA will give
    careful and sympathetic consideration to the allocation of more tickets
    for the regular supporters of the two finalists when both finalists have
    large regular followings.



    The safety implications

    38.  I have not so far dealt with the safety implications of the FA's
    usual distribution practice.

    39.  I share the concern of Mr Colin Moynihan MP (Answer to
    Parliamentary Question 31 January 1989) about the damage that black
    market ticket sales for major football matches can do to the efforts of
    the police and clubs to segregate rival fans effectively.   I therefore
    agree with the point he made about the need for tighter control over the
    distribution of tickets and the imposition of sanctions against those
    found abusing those controls.

    40.  The CTSO's 1988 report has of course been overtaken by the
    Hillsborough tragedy.  I note that the CTSO has copied both of his
    reports to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry and I think that no good
    purpose would be served by my attempting to duplicate part of the work
    of Lord Justice Taylor, whose inquiry has been much more wide-ranging on
    safety aspects.




                                        9
9   Suggestions to the FA

    41. In    conclusion, I would like to draw together the four  suggestions
    I have addressed to   the FA in this paper.  They are as follows.

         a   if only for its safety implications, the FA should take note of
             the CTSO's finding that the 1989 increase in the allocation of
             tickets to the supporters of the two finalists led to a large
             drop in ticket touting;

         b   the FA should consider whether the measures it took following
             the CTSO's 1988 report, and the publicity it gave to them, were
             sufficient to deter the reselling of tickets for future FA Cup
             F i n al s;

        c    while taking proper account of the interests of football
             throughout the country as a whole, the FA should give careful
             and sympathetic consideration to the allocation of more t i c k e t ^ ^
             for supporters of the two finalists when both finalists have
             large regular followings; and

        d    in any case, the total amount of tickets for the two finalists
             should be shared between them in proportion to their average
             home league attendances.




                                          10
