                                                            R eference   a o H ' f 5 f £ i8 D /Y



                 David Hunt encloses a letter from Liverpool Council about
                 Hillsborough.

                             ? To P/S of M of S as within




                                                        M Ward
                                                        15 January 1997




I




    CODE 18 77
                                                Q UEE N A N N E ’ S GATE LONDO N SW1H 9AT




The Rt Hon David Hunt MBE MP                     Our Ref:    P W /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /4
House of Commons                                             PO 5 0 1 /9 7
LONDON
S W 1A OAA

                                                            - 3 FEB 133"




Thank you for your letter of 23 December, enclosing one from Liverpool Council
about the tragic events at Hillsborough.

As you will be aware, I have undertaken to consider carefully the points which
were made in the programme "Hillsborough", and the representations which have
been made by the bereaved families and by others. I will not take the decision to
reopen the inquiry lightly but will need to be convinced that it is in the public
interest to do so and that it will stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that terrible day.

In coming to my decision, I will consider whether there is any new evidence. I will
also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it
been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide a detailed
report of all the points raised by the programme. I shall decide whether any
further action should be taken as soon as I am able to consider all the issues.




                                MICHAEL HOWARD
                                                QUEEN A N N E ’ S GATE L O N D O N SW1H 9AT




The Rt Hon David Hunt MBE MP                     Our Ref:     P W /9 7 5 /2 1 8 0 /4
House of Commons                                              PO 5 0 1 /9 7
LONDON
SW 1A OAA

                                                              i s feb     mr




Thank you for your letter of 2 3 December, enclosing one from Liverpool Council
about the tragic events at Hillsborough.

As you will be aware, I have undertaken to consider carefully the points which
were made in the programme "Hillsborough", and the representations which have
been made by the bereaved families and by others. I will not take the decision to
reopen the inquiry lightly but will need to be convinced that it is in the public
interest to do so and that it will stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that terrible day.

In coming to my decision, I will consider whether there is any new evidence. I will
also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it
been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide a detailed
report of all the points raised by the programme. I shall decide whether any
further action should be taken as soon as I am able to consider all the issues.




                                MICHAEL HOWARD
Thank you for your letter of 23 December,        enclosing one from
Liverpool Council about the tragic events at Hillsborough.


As you will be aware, I have undertaken to consider carefully the
                                           ♦ i           <«

points which were made in the programme Hillsborough,         and the
representations which have been made by the bereaved families and
by others.   I will not take the decision to reopen the inquiry
lightly but will need to be convinced that it is in the public
interest to do so and that it will stand a chance of providing
a better understanding than there is at present of what happened
on that terrible day.


In coming to my decisional will consider whether there is any new
evidence^I will also consider whether that evidence appears to
be of such significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor
or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry
or the verdict of the jury would have been different.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide
a detailed report of all the points raised by the programme. I
shall decide whether any further action should be taken as soon
as I am able to consider all the issues.
             Pron           .glit Hon. David Hunt,             M.P.
                                                                                ?




                                        MOMS
                            LONDON SW1A OAA

23 December 1996



                                                           '


                                                                 ..
             ■

e&jf

I enclose a letter I have received from Liverpool Council about the new and
unused evidence which researchers from the recent tv programme on the
Hillsborough Disaster have uncovered.

I understand you are considering the case for setting up an new inquiry and I
would welcome your comments on the points raised in a letter which I can
forward to the Council.




                                               W qJ




 The Rt Hon Michael Howard QC MP
 The Secretary of State
 Home Office
 50 Queen Anne’s Gate
 London SW1H9AT
                       Olvlslonol File Rcferonco f u i h >     .< |o ia )/^

HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

Addressee
 Name       (ti,         1         y ( v         <£ t^X
 Address                      Reference
 Tick on# bQK
      O '       House of Commons
      □         House of Lords
      □            Other - Insert full postal address




l e t t e r drafted tor Signature by |

    W V '.X vcutl       \X^><s >gA ___________ {Name of Signatory'


Enclosures]




 ( oples to be sent to~{




                                        f Filll rrfcircsses. If necessary/
                                  Personnel    &   Administration Directorate
                                         Committee & Member Services


                                 PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
         cnnawm


                                              Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                              Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                              Your Ref:
                                              Our Ref: MFCDA/CM

 12th December 1996


To: All Members of Parliament for
Merseyside.



Dear Sir/Madam

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I have been requested to provide you with the attached proceedinqs
°r,    meeting of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party held on
6th December, 1996.

The meeting considered the reaction to the "Hillsborough"
television programme broadcast by ITV on 5th December and gave
Pre.iminary consideration to ways of assisting the bereaved
families in^their renewed campaign for the justice and
accountability which they feel has been denied them in the
aftermath of the Disaster. There is considerable feeling that such
a campaign will be successful given the new and unused evidence
which has emerged as a result of the programme and you are
therefore asked, given the implications for this matter beyond the
     boundary, if you would be prepared to support the campaign
which is now being organised by the families and the. City Council
to bring this about? You should note that each District Council on
Merseyside is also being asked to support the campaign.

You should, also note that you are invited to attend a Special
Meeting of Liverpool City Council to be held in the Town Hall,
     Stffet7 L;j-verP001 ft 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, 19th December,
1996. All the issues arising from the Programme will be debated at
that meeting and the writer of the drama/documentary, Jimmy
McGovern, has been invited to address the Council.

Yours faithfully



Committee Clerk    \'     ^
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party


 ... .                Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
 Administration & Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resource Service;
                   Information Technology; Legal Services; Public Relations.
            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                            Of the . ,

               Policy and .Resojj^ces. Committee

                     6th December, 1996




 PRESENT: Councillor Jack Spriggs, Chair;
          Councillors Bill Craig, Steve Ellison, G. Knibb
          Peter Millea, Bill Roberts, Len Tyrer and
          Peter Tyrrell.



          Councillor Margaret Clarke also attended.



 Minutes of Last Meeting

 The Working Party considered:-

 (1) the formal proceedings of the last meeting of the
     Working Party held on 11th November, 1996 and a note of
     the matters discussed at that meeting;

 (2) an outline received from the Director of Education
     regarding the present position with regard to bursaries
     which are being funded from the Hillsborough Trust
     Fund.

 Resolved that -

 (A) the dissatisfaction of this Working Party with the
     criteria for the Hillsborough bursaries insisted upon
     by the Trust Fund Manager, be re-affirmed and its
     continuing concern about some wider aspects of the
     distribution of the Furd be also placed on record;

 (B) in the light of the above the Liaison Officer be
     requested to write to the Charity Commission to clarify
     the issues which have been raised and pending such
     clarification the Director of Education be requested to
     take no action with regard to the processing of the
     bursaries;




l/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A061296
  (C) the remainder of the proceedings including the
      requirement, which may be necessary, for the Council to
      take further action in respect of the Guatemalan
      Disaster and the issue of compensation payments, be
      noted.


• -Hillsborough" Television Prog-ramm^

 The Working Party considered -

  (1) various matters arising from the broadcasting by
      Independent Television on 5th December, 1996 of the
      drama/documentary "Hillsborough" and in particular the
      legal implications of the new and unused evidence about
      the Disaster which has emerged as a result of the
      research undertaken for the programme; and

 (2) a Report of Mr. Steve Martin of the Social Services
     Department concerning the helpline provided by the
     Council following the programme and in particular the
     overwhelming response received in favour of the
     programme and its contents.


 Resolved that this Working Party -

 (A) congratulates writer Jimmy McGovern and Granada
     Television for their production of the television
     drama/documentary programme "Hillsborough", broadcast
     by Independent Television on 5th December, 1996;
 (B) notes that the programme

      (i) provided a factual re-construction of events
          surrounding the Disaster and its aftermath, based
          on the issues of justice and accountability for
          the bereaved families of the Disaster - the. issues
          upon which this Working Party was created in April
          1989; and

     (ii) has, through its research, revealed significant
          new and unused evidence about the Disaster which
          may enable further legal proceedings related to
          the Disaster to be pursued and justice to be
          obtained.

 (C) supports the action taken by the Liaison Officer to the
     Working Party, in full consultation with the Family
     Support Group and the Chair of the Working Party,
     seeking legal advice on the options which may now be
     available following the disclosures which have resulted
     from the programme;

1/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A061296
             fair and favourable coveraqe b                          °t           o v e r w -helmingly
            a n d t e l e v i s i o n s t a t i o n s a n d i n r,m ° ^   n^wsP aP e r s ^ radio
            Mirror", and their i o u r n a l i ^ n                      d™ f       ° f t h e "D a i l y
            s p e c i f i c a l l y r a i s e d at a n i f              R e a d e ' who have
            q u e s t i o n s related to i u s t i S           I   . f el m a n y of the
            this W o rk in g Party since 1                     9      8        been asked by
            asked more widely as a      *■ * which are now being
            programme;      Y      reSulC of che broadcast of thl


         ’ Department^ Liverpool P e ^ o n S ^ t 0 -th6 S°Cial
           Alder Centre for ?heir ?o?JS ^               Society and the
           Staffing the helol            S    establishing and
           public during 2 l S t e r tie        ?vallable to the
           Programme;                                    transmission         of   the



           t ^ b l l E a S l S h S Z T e r T s torh jUf i Ce f°r the families
           conjunction with t S HmIbo?o,^ah f                     in
          that all District coimrila                          °ugh families and requests
          M e r s e y s i d e a n d a D D r n n r i a t - ’ P a r t l c u ^-a r l y t h o s e o n
          Cheshire, be r e g S L t e d                               ° f L a n c a s h i re a nd
           in this campaign^                     ° fUlly SUpport and Participate


          AZcffiionVaSkeSlo

          t o ^ f f l ^ t t e iSpporthofPth2r?mr for t h T * * reqUested
          IS being established;               ’ ‘         campaign which
   (H)
          assures     families       that    the    Council      will    initial



   (I)




         the^contents^f £     ^     2                                                      *
         report back to the W o r k f n T p a ^ o ^ t
   (J)
         requisition^                            ?rran9e">«nts be made to
                                                                                               *-

         M    j  US U^ c t tSSf  I“         J “            iJ ^ r S ^ a t e d
         arisen as a S        „?       t “ 10us lssues which have
         "Hillsborough" TV P r o g r a m m e ^ S ^ i ^ p S t i c u l a ? the
         P   r r V have
         Programme   V id ? “ " h ic h r e s e a rc h e rs from th e
                          discovered;                                        “


al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A0612 96
   (K) requests that Jimmy McGovern be invited to address the
       meeting of the Council and that the journalist Brian
       Reade also be invited in recognition of his role in
       raising the national profile of the campaign for
       justice for the families:

   (L) all M.P.'s and M.E.P.'s for Merseyside and appropriate
       parts of Lancashire and Cheshire also be invited to the
       Special Meeting and be requested to provide the^r
       future support to the campaign;

   (M) the Chairman and Chief Executive of Liverpool Football
       Club be requested to meet as a matter of urgency with
       representatives of the Working Party and the Family
       Support Group to discuss any assistance which the Club
       may be able to provide to the campaign for justice; and
   (N) following the above meeting the possibility of
       enlisting the support of other Football Clubs,
       particularly Everton F.C., be considered.




al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A0612 96
