                                                    cc. Mrs Tuck
                                                        Mr W&lmsley

Mr Smith


POLICE EEEPKCMENT EVIDENCE TO IBB TKBXR DQUjRY


Thank you for copying Police Department's draft evidence to the Taylor inquiry
to us. I am sorry that we have not been able to respond sooner. There are,
hcwsver, one or tm points ve should like to raise.

2. Uhder the heading 'The incidence of football hooliganism' it is correctly
stated that annual Criminal Statistics do not identify offences which occur at
football natches or are otherwise related to football. Whilst it is, therefore,
necessary to look elsewhere for information on the incidence of violence at
football matches ve would not agree that the PCEO arrest and ejection figures
also quoted in that paragraph are particularly useful, as is suggested, "as a
guide to the level of trouble at matches". ALthough, for exanple, these figures
may 'include many serious instances of violence and disorder' we cannot know
how nary with any certainty.

3. Perhaps more useful in this context is the recent survey of violent offences
conducted ty statistical department. This suggested that football related
offences ooiprise less than 2% of all violent offences, a finding which also
appears to be supported ty data from the recent British Crime Survey. Having
said this, the ACTO arrest figures taken as a proportion of attendances (0.03%)
also suggest that ve must be careful not to overestimate the 'persistent
incidence of football hooliganism', incidentally, a proportion of 0.03% should
at most be described as 'extremely stall' if not 'negligible'.

4. Finally, there is the question of 'ticket touting'. There appears to be a
growing recognition, certainly within the game (ty football supporters -
particularly on Iferseyside - ty the F.S.A. and ty the F.A. and the Football
League) that effective measures against touting should be a crucial part of the
overall package if successful action is to be taken in relation to behaviour in
or around football grounds. Whilst we would not disagree that tighter controls
over the distribution of tickets are iirportant, would such controls not be more
effective if touting were made more difficult? It is surely not as difficult as
it is suggested in the draft evidence to distinguish between touting and "the
understandable wish of a genuine spectator to sell a ticket he bought in good
faith but can no longer use". Presumably the 'genuine spectator' vrould not seek
to sell the ticket for profit. Interestingly, the growing vrave of feeling

against touting on Merseyside has been acccnpanied ty an assumption on the part
of local fans that tickets may cnly legitimately change hands at face value.
Anyone attempting to sell a ticket at an inflated price is treated as a tout.



Research and Planning Unit                        W.H.T. NEWBUFN
                                                  14 June 1989
