h s .8.24/hillsblO.peb


                                          cc   Mr   Walters
                                               Mr   Mower
                                               Mr   Chilcot
                                               Mr   Turney
                                               Mr   Goddard
                                               Mr   Whalley
                                               Ms   JagoiX/
                                               Mr   Brown


Mr Haslam



HILLSBOROUGH REPORT
You drew my attention to paragraph 5 of the Home Office circular
on the Taylor interim report and its description of the 28
asterisked recommendations requiring implementation before the
start of the new football season or immediately thereafter and
the fact that this was at variance with paragraph 316 of the
Taylor report which indicated that those recommendations which
were asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/1990 season
started.

2.   The   sentence   concerned was    descriptive:     Taylor,   in
paragraph 304 of his report refers^ to his proposal "of instant
measures  capable   of being    implemented   forthwith  and where
possible before the commencement of the 1989/1990 season".     I did
not draft the circular but in my view paragraph 5 is consistent
with paragraph 304 of tfte report which accepted that it might not
be possible to implement particular asterisked recommendations
before the start of the season.     As to the Home Office view of
what should be done, my note of 23 August is I think accurate.

3.   I agree that there is no point in seeking a correction from
the Daily Mirror.

4.   You and Mr Walters were worried that the requests which
I initiated to the Fire Service and to the police through the
ACPO network mentioned that the Home Secretary was concerned
about suggestions in the press that there may be some dragging of
feet on compliance with recommendations in the interim report.
You thought that this might lay the Home Office open to the
criticism that we were motivated only by the press suggestions to
ensure that the Taylor recommendations were being complied with.

5.    I think the line to take if this particular point is picked
upon is that all the indication which we had had (through contact
on   the   telephone  with   individual  clubs,  individual  fire
authorities,   local authorities and the police) was that the
recommendations were being taken extremely seriously and that
every endeavour was being made to comply with them.    I think we
should make a virtue of the fact that nevertheless, in view of
the Home Secretary's concern, we have taken special steps to get
reports from the police and the fire brigades (which are services
for which the Home Secretary has special responsibilities in law)
on  the   extent  to which    the Taylor   recommendations  which
particularly affect those services have been complied with.

6.   You asked me why we had not directed a similar request to
the local authorities who have responsibility for the safety
certificates.   There are two reasons:    one of principal and one
of  logistics.     The  local   authorities   are  not subject to
supervision by the Home Office in the way that they carry out
their safety responsibilities.    (The question whether they should
be subject to central supervision is to be addressed by Taylor in
Part 2 of his inquiry.)    The other reason, which would not bear
press examination, is simply the number of local authorities
involved.   I would prefer to take the line that we are getting
reports from the police and the Fire Service in the first
instance.   If they indicate to us that there are areas where the
recommendations are not being complied with, we shall be prepared
to take that up with the local authorities concerned.

7.   DoE agree that this is an appropriate line to take.




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         G2 Division


24 August 1989
