 From: Peter Edmundson                                  cc Mr Michael
       Operational Policing                                Mr O’Brien
        Policy Unit                                        Mr Howarth
       Room 527, QAG                                       Permanent Secretary
       S 273 - 2621                                        tylr Boys Smith
       9 December, 1997
                                                            |/lr Clifford
                                                            |/lr Granatt
                                                         »4,j/lr Warner
                                                        RYLow en
 Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY: MEETING WITH LORD JUSTICE STUART-
SMITH ON THURSDAY 11 DECEMBER


You are due to meet Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on Thursday 11 December at
14.35 to discuss questions about the publication of submissions and other
evidence from the scrutiny as it nears completion. You may also wish to take
the opportunity to ask the Judge when he expects to give you his report and
to discuss some of the issues which he has been examining.

The main issues to raise are:

• The Judge’s timetable for submitting his report. +■—                                    '


• ififte tb e r anyone criticised in the report will have the opportunity to y
  comment on the relevant draft passages before submission of the final
  report (in line with the Salmon principles). •’            --- ----------------------


• Whether the Judge thinks it likely that he will recommend that any evidence ,
  considered by the scrutiny should not be published by you.                 f


• Whether the scrutiny intends to examine all the police statements which
  appear to have been amended before their submission to the original
  Taylor inquiry. ,*


Timing of the report

2.      The Judge indicated in his recent letter to you that he expects to
complete the report by the end of the year, although it is still not clear whether
this will be before or after Christmas. This followed representations from the
Family Support Group for the scrutiny’s timescale to be extended because of


f: \oppu\complnts\bri ef\mp-0408.doc
delays which the Group claimed to have experienced in obtaining material
from South Yorkshire Police. It would be helpful to know precisely more when
he anticipates submitting his report.


Salmon principles

3.       You may wish to ask Lord Justice Stuart-Smith whether, if the report
will criticise individuals, they will have an opportunity to see and comment on
the relevant passages in draft, in line with the Salmon principles. This, of
course, has implications for the timing of the submission of the final report \^ s >
and its publication.


Amended police statements

4.      We understand the scrutiny has discovered that some of the
statements provided by police officers following the tragedy were reviewed by
the force and the officel^lasi<edlo~rewiFelfr^
Taylor Inquiry. This was supposedly done to remove opinion but it is open to
question whether such editing was appropriate. Some criticisms of senior
officers are also appa7entIy misslng from     rewritten statements. The
scrutiny has recently uncovered about 200 more such statements. The Judge
may decide that there is nothing to be gained from going through every one of
these statements. You may wish to urge him to do so, so that the
thoroughness of the scrutiny cannot be called into, question at a later date.


Publication of submissions and other evidence

5.            In your statement announcing the scrutiny, you said:

             “.... the right hon Gentleman (Brian Mawhinney) asked whether in
             addition to our publishing the advice that I receive from Lord Justice
             Stuart-Smith, I will publish all the evidence that is considered by him.
             My answer to the right hon Gentleman is provisional. I shall do my
             best to ensure that that is the case, but there may be good reasons -
             for example, in respect of criminal or disciplinary proceedings - why
             such evidence cannot be published at the same time as the advice is
             published. However, if evidence is to be unpublished, I shall make that
             clear at the time.”

You later wrote to the Judge stating that it was your intention to make
available publicly the documentary evidence which he considered, probably
by placing a copy in the Library of the House of Commons. You also asked
that if there was material which the Judge considered should not be
disclosed, either because of its potential impact on any proceedings which




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0408.doc
might follow or for other public interest reasons, he should identify such
material and his reasons for not recommending disclosure when he reports.

6.     We are aware that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers that the
transcripts of his private meetings with relatives and witnesses should not be
disclosed, although a summary of relevant evidence may be included in his
report. The BBC has also yet to agree to its video tapes of the tragedy being
placed in the public domain.

7.       You might also ask Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to indicate whether there
is likely to be any other material which should not be disclosed and the
reasons for his recommendation and to confirm that his final report will be
submitted with his advice on what evidence should not be disclosed. The
decision on disclosure, though, is ultimately for you. You have appointed Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct this scrutiny and on its completion, the papers
will be the property of the Home Office.


Other relevant matters - (These need not be raised with the Judge)

8.      Trevor Hicks of the Family Support Group wrote to you recently to
express concern about the terms of reference for the scrutiny, including the
definition of 'new evidence’ - Mr Pugh’s submission of 5 December refers. Mr
Hicks argued that the Judge was wrong to restrict himself to 'new evidence’
which could have affected the outcome of the Taylor inquiry and other
proceedings. Our view is that the purpose of the scrutiny has always been to
establish whether there was any material evidence, not simply new evidence,
which would justify establishing^ new public inquiry, approving the referral of
the inquest verdict back to the High Court or reviewing the possibility of
criminal or disciplinary proceedings.


9.      Another key issue for the families is the decision of the Coroner not to
hear evidence about events after 3.15 pm on the day of the disaster. The
families have argued that this was an arbitrary cut-off point and prevented any
examination of the response of the e mergency a ndh o s pita I services to the
disaster. The Coroner’s decision was based on the findings of the Home
Office pathologist that the victims were effectively dead by 3.15 and could not
be resuscitated. We understand that the scrutiny has considered whether
there is fresh evidence which bears on that decision.




                                                Peter Edmundson


f: \oppu\complnts\bri ef\mp-0408.doc
