                            hcc   Miss Bannister |
                                  Mr Chilcot     S
                                  Mr Moriarty   i
                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                  Mr Turney             H   ome   O   ffice
                                  Mr Addison           QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                  Mr Goddard            LONDON SWIH 9AT
                                  Mr Nagler
                                  Mr Whallev
                                  Mr Mower
                                  Mr Lidington
                                  Mr Godfrey

                                                     JA July 1989




                     «




METROPOLITAN POLICE CHARGES FOR FOOTBALL MATCHES

You may be aware that the Metropolitan Police have been
undertaking a review of the charges they levy for football
matches. As a result of that review, they have asked for Home
Office approval for increased charges for policing London
football matches.

The review has concluded that London clubs have been seriously
undercharged for their policing, for four main reasons:

   i. the Metropolitan Police often have to supply more
   officers than are stipulated in the contract with each
   club;

   ii. the clubs are charged on the basis that each
   officer does 3 hours' duty, whereas in practice they
   usually do considerably more;

   iii. no charge is made for the travelling time of
   officers, despite the fact that this is often
   considerable, and they are paid for it;

   iv. officers' time is charged at standard rate (plus a
   charge for overheads), despite the fact that many of
   them police football matches on overtime.


The Metropolitan Police propose   to remedy points i. and ii. in
their contracts for the 1989/90   season, and point iii. in the
subsequent season, thus phasing   the increases. They do not
propose to charge for overtime,   since the clubs may claim that
it would be possible to arrange   police rostas to avoid it
(though in practice, this would   be very difficult).


                                               /The new

The Hon Colin Moynihan MP
The new arrangements will lead to considerable increases in
charges.  In 1989/90 the rises will range from 15% to 247%;
and in 1990/91, by between 32% and 334%. The clubs suffering
the highest increases will be those which, like Millwall, have
enjoyed but not paid for very high police presence to control
their troublesome fans.

The Met's proposals are in line with Government policy, agreed
with DOE Ministers in 1984, to recover the full costs of
policing inside football grounds. The clubs know that
considerable rises are imminent, though I have no doubt that
there will be protests when they are announced. The clubs may
also claim that the Government is pricing adequate policing
out of clubs' pockets, at the same time as they are urging
improved safety in football grounds.

If there are genuine cases in which clubs are unable to meet
the full costs, I shall ask the Commissioner to look at them
sympathetically; but in general, I fully support the Met's
attempts to recoup full costs.  I believe the Home Secretary
and the Commissioner could be exposed to well founded
criticism if, now the charges      analysed, it were known the
rate and taxpayers were in effect subsidising the clubs,
despite the Government's general policy on charging. Apart
from this and the public expenditure considerations, there is
also a strong argument for encouraging football clubs to
improve the behaviour of their fans. This may be a good means
of doing it. The contract allows the police to scale down
their presence at matches, and hence their charges, if fans;
behaviour improves.

We are anxious that this should be announced early next week,
so there is very little time.  I should be grateful if you
could let me know whether you are content for me to tell the
Met to go ahead, by no later than noon on Monday 31 July.




                            FERRERS


                   (Approved by the Minister
                  and signed in his absence)
