                                      tfi)                       ^
                                                       394,                ^        n O
                                                  2 5jijMggc              ^
                                                          cc:        Mr   Turney (o .r .)
                                                                     Mr   Goddard (F8)
                                                                     Mr   Bolton (G2)
                                                                     Mr   Osborne (LAB)
                                                                     Mr   Mould (Gl)

Mr Watts
Gl Division


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY;            INTERIM REPORT


   - Thank you for copying to me your note of 24 July to
Mr Turney.

     2.   In paragraph 2 of that note you hazard a guess at one
of the recommendations Taylor might make and in the papers
attached to that note you contemplate giving effect to such a
recommendation by an order under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975, as amended (in fact the relevant provision is section 15A
and not section 18 (1A) f to which you refer)

      3:
       . : As respects ■            : :>; ; ,:h an order (paragraph 4(a)
of your note refers) ;                                   ;'the period"" ;
d^^g-WKiclr’consultations are required to take place under"*" ~
sect ten -IB (4) ’of the 197 5 Act. The courts have held that, where"
only a very Brief period'is allowed for consultation, this does
not constitute consultation at all. Accordingly, if an order is
made after an inadequate period for consultation, it would be
liable to be struck down by the courts on an application for
judicial review. During any period of annual holidays, the
period allowed for consultation should be lengthened to take
account of that..

       ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ \.'J..explain. -.'below., I .-think .-there are substantial
.problems.: to .-;be .-:res61ved--.about .the content of an order of the type
 you.-.-en'vis.age.:.- But.,in/.any. event,,. 1 do not think it can come into
'.e£it-ect ,:as>quickly -'-as -you..-e m l s a o e even
  process \^is~'.comt           , ' T h e . o n .capaG
                                                                      -..■SQJTtue^OfJ.
                 : safe:   certificates need to be amended^-^this can---only
                          ;Xct     -After         --^.th-.e.r-e,,..will'lbe”'"an^
                                                                                     Y 't h i n l c * ': ^
           2fi5k,i:in-i±erms,„.o.f„,'..a„Jiuch.,longer, timescale,
     5.   In this context, I was disturbed by paragraph 5 of the
draft circular attached to your note. I do not know what the -
first sentence means. Since the order you envisage will require
local authorities to set maximum capacity for       each"pen", what is
meant by   "abiding voluntarily by the terms of the draft order”?
In any event such a request is improper in the context of a
proposal   which is the subject of consultation and, as such, at
least intheory liable not to    be implemented.
     6.   The final sentence of that paragraph is even more
objectionable. The test in section 10(1) of the 1975 Act (as
substituted by section 23(1) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987) is a very strict one.   If it was safe
in May to admit persons into a part of a sports ground even
though no limit had been set on the number of persons to be
admitted, why is it not similarly safe in September?
Furthermore, there can be no threat to safety so as to justify
the exercise of the power if only 500 persons are admitted to a
part for which a limit of 1,000 ought to apply. It would, of
course, be a different matter if the local authority learnt that
it was planned to actually admit some number in excess of 1,000.
The final sentence of paragraph 5 of the draft circular is
misleading as to the test that local authorities should apply.
If they acted on the suggestion, they would be acting in breach
of their powers.

     7.   If you wish to pursue the suggestion of an order under
section 15A, you will need to provide me with written
instructions for such an order in the usual way. However, I very
much doubt whether the idea of requiring local authorities to set
a maximum number of spectators for each •'pen1' will convert very
easily into legislation that is:sufficiently clear for these
purposes. As you know, breach of the terms and conditions of a
safety certificate is an offence under section 12 of the I§75
Act. Accordingly it is important for us to be sure that the
extent of the condition which will be imported into such
certificates as a result of, the. order under section 15A will
always be clear.

     8.   I will assume for present purposes that the scope of
such an order will be limited to those sports grounds at which
football may be played (you will in due course need to consider
this question). There would be no problem in an order which
required a maximum number of spectators to be set for each part
of a sports ground if entry to every such ground gave spectators
access only to one such area. But there is no legal requirement
that sports grounds at which football is played are to be so
designed. Indeed, as I understand it, part of the problem at
Hillsborough arose because those admitted through a particular
gate surged to the nearest viewing area rather than to the other
viewing areas to which that admission gave them access. it
follows that it is not practicable to translate what you propose
into a requirement of general application in an order under
section 15A.




                                                      R J CLAYTON
                                           Legal Adviser's Branch
25 July 1989
