INQUIRY     INTO       THE          HILLSBOROUGH

       STADIUM                  DISASTER




                     Before


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

                PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

            Friday, 23rd June, 1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               {Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                  INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                   (Morning Session)

                                        Page

W. EASTWOOD Recalled

     Examined by Mr. Collins (Cont)      1
     By Lord Justice Taylor             61
                                  1




                  TWENTY -S EV EN TH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                       FRIDAY,    23rd JUNE,      1989

                             (MORNING   SESSION)

                     WILF RE D EASTWOOD,    re-called

                  Examined    by MR.    COLLINS    (Cont.):

Q. Dr. Eastwood, inevitably a couple of matters that I shall
   just deal with before we leave the barrier.   If I correctly
   understood what you were saying yesterday, the fact that it
   recovered - I am talking about 124A now - the fact that it
   recovered fully on the third application indicated to you
   that the movement on the first and second, that   is to say
   the failure to recover fully, was explicable because of
   c ompaction of the ash,  A.   Not entirely, no.    There
   could have been yield of the stick - could be a c ombination
   of the two.

Q.   But the fact that it came back fully on the third meant that
     there was no danger, that is to say there was nothing that
     needed to put you on enquiry about the stability of that
     barrier;  is that correct?   A.    Not really any more than -
     If we look at the tables of the results, could you give
     m e   ?

Q.   200 in your bundle and 466 if I recall correctly in the
     other. A.     Thank you.   If we can look through these
     tables  off results, firstly there are very many of them
     which had a 100% recovery from the beginning, right from
     the first test, and in those cases obviously neither soil
     nor steel appears to have had some permanent set, permanent
     compaction, and that, in fact, is the great majority.

Q.   Yes, one can see that certainly.    A.   Now, there are
     others which ---   I am seeing if I can find one that had
     as much but even the one after 124A, the 2/3 which had
     the 5, one does not know whether that 5 was in the soil or
     in the steel and one just has to take it on trust that it
     has not meant that something very nasty is happening --
     or not very nasty, something nasty had happened during
     the test and so with a further two 100% recoveries one
     accepts it.   Now, in the case of 124A there had only
     been one 100% recovery but once you get that experience
     testing shows that, for example, many of these are then
     immediately test loaded three times again.    Indeed, it
     so happens that that one was not, the t/2.

Q.   The key one was not, was it?         A.   No, the key one was
     not but so often we find that       it does have to test at,
     say, three more times.

Q.   But you do not record that.    A.   No, well, but you do not
     get a sudden failure.   If you were getting to a stage
     where there was going to be a sudden failure if ever that
     load came on again, then it would show up in those three
                                    2


                                                      W.   EASTWOOD

     tests.   Now, there is always an element of doubt.                It
     is a matter of professional judgment.   This is how
     the test procedure is drawn up.

Q.   Can I stop you there a second, because I do not think you
     are right about what you have just said, are y o u j Pbecause
     if I correctly understood your method the one which was
     recorded would always be the second group of three on the
     particular barrier.   Do you see the point?    A.      Yes.

Q.    Therefore you would not, in fact, have the subsequent             test
     to see whether it collapsed, would you?    A.   Y.~: Any
     internal barrier does get loaded six times.

Q.   But it is the second three that you record, not the              first
     three.   A.  Yes, it is the trailing leg, yes.

Q.   So that point you were making is not a valid one,            is it?
     A.   Well, not fully valid, no.

Q. Well, not at all valid, with respect.              A.     Because we
   don't know the previous history?

Q.   Exactly.   A.    Yes.

Q.    I am sorry, I interrupted          you. A.    Please continue,        I
     have forgotten what I was          going to say.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can I just         follow?     It does
     not get recorded because --- ?

          MR. COLLINS:  Because we have heard it was the second ---
     Let me start from the beginning.   If we look at the
     Photograph 59A, we see that it starts from the end, the first
     one that is recorded and, indeed, that is clear from the
     record of 124A, it is the end one that gets the recording
     first and thus the one next to it has had the first three
     tests at the same time as that which are unrecorded.   It
     is then moved along so that the next one that is recorded
     is the next one along and thus it is the second lot of
     three tests on any particular section which is the one
     which is recorded.  Therefore, Dr. Eastwood's point that
     if there was some sort of a movement there would, in fact,
     be a subsequent three tests, albeit unrecorded, which should
     pick up if there was anything lurking there which was, as
     it were, a prelude to disaster, is not a valid point.

          THE WITNESS:       Yes.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   As far as the left-hand limb
     which you see on the photograph is concerned, that is
     recorded the first time because it is the only time.

           MR. COLLINS:   That is correct and as we see on the
     record of 124A it is that first length that is recorded and
     recorded only once, or rather tested only once and recorded
     once.    One test, of course, I mean three applications.
                                        3


                                                        W. E A S T W O O D

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Then when you get to 2/3 in
     fact unrecorded there has already been a go at that.

             MR.   COLLINS:      Exactly.

             LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:        And then we do not get the
     other    one at all.

             MR.   COLLINS:      Exactly.

Q. Dr. Eastwood, there are, as you have agreed, other possible
   reasons than the c ompaction of the earth, ash, whatever it
   may b e . A . Yes.

Q.   And does not your method exclude the other possibi li ti es ?
     I mean, you simply say, "Well, that is the obvious explanation,
     that is the e xpalnation which means there is no lack of safety
     in the barrier, therefore we can assume that all is well"?
     A.  Shall we put it this way.      We believe the risk to be
     very small in either case.     There has been the full load
     on three times or six times, if it is an internal one.
     No visible deform at io n is left.   Nothing to show that
     there has been serious over-stress.      It is always possible
     that on a re-test there would have been some kini of
     accelerated movement. That would have been something which
     has never happened in our experience on those parts of the
     barriers where it has been correctly done.

Q.   Of course, added to that in the case of this particular
     barrier with which we are largely concerned, it was embedded
     in some fairly thick concrete, was it not?  A.  That is
     true, yes;  two layers, yes.

Q.   So that surely the question of earth compaction and movement
     there is slightly less likely, is it not?       A.    No, I
     think that that is not so, with respect.       I don't know how
     deep the concrete is.       You see, there is the deep block,
     there is the sloping concrete terrace with the steps and
     that is thicker than normal but then there is a deep concrete
     block underneath.      Now, it is that deep concrete block
     which    gives general rigidity and it is that deep concrete
     block    which applies the load to the ground.     Now, there
     may be some sort of secondary help from the fact that you
     have more terrace concrete but it is a secondary factor.

Q.   Can I perhaps summarise it thus:   would you accept
     that although I a ppreciate you have given reasons why
     you have adopted the approach that you did adopt and
     you have justified those reasons, in fact the other method
     that I have suggested is one which is, if you like,
     likely to produce or likely more to eliminate any possible
     danger.   A.   I think thatany new guide which comes out
     of this Inquiry will look very carefully at what you have
     been saying, sir.

Q.   But would      you accept    ---       A.   Yes.

Q.   -- that my suggested method             is a safer method?        A.    Yes.
                                4

                                                  W. E A S T W O O D

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Your suggested method being
     that all readings should be compared with starting point
     readings?

          MR.   COLLINS: Indeed,    yes.

          THE   WITNESS: Oh,   that part of it?       Oh      no, sir,   no.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:         I am sorry, what did you think I was
     p utting?         A.    Iwas going for the one where you had full
     inst ru me nt at io n of all the panels.    The best test of all,
     of course, is to test the whole range of barriers at once,
     because there is always an a rt if icality about testing two
     because that one, that length and that post, are not fully
     stressed;      that post will not go forward so this is
     affected.      There is always difficulty if you do not do the
     whole length.        That is why we do two, which is better than
     one.     That, I think, is better but I was fiddling with
     numbers last night and I think, sir, it is not appropriate
     to waste time but I can imagine certain tests carried out
     your way which might give a misleading result, particularly
     if most of the movement was on the first application of
     load.




                                       /Well,   if it was misleading.
                             5


                                              W. EASTWOOD

Q. If it was misleading, it would be misleading in favour of
   condemning rather than passing the barrier, would it not?
   A.   The result which I got out, there is one where it is
   possible for it to fail, yes.   I haven't got the figures
   now.   I'm sorry, I can't bring them out.  But I was
   beginning to produce a result where it would pass on your
   interpretation and fail on ours;   but no, we mustn't go
   down that road, because I'm not prepared, sir.

Q. Very well, I will not pursue that.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  As I understand it, what you
     said to Counsel a minute or two agolabout his method, in
     general, was this: You are saying that the revision of
     the guide ought perhaps to consider the need to examine
     all limbs of any connected barrier - is thkt right?
     A.   I think the present wording of the guide in this
     particular part of it - and I do respect the guide as
     a whole - is very diffident and much more precise guidance
     is needed.

Q.   Possibly it ought to make clear, ought it, whether on the
     third application recovery means recovery to where the
     third test began or where the first test began?   A. Yes,
     that is absolutely essential.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:   And certainly at the very least it is
     less than clear about what is required?    A. Yes.

Q. I do not know whether you know this, Dr. Eastwood, but there
   are others who test for other football grounds who adopt
   your method and some who adopt the method of back to first
   base?   I do not know whether you are aware of that? A. I
   do know that there are others who adopt our method.

Q. Certainly, yes, I entirely accept that. But equally there
   are others who adopt the ©ther method? A. It is a very
   good point you have made, sir.

Q. I am obliged and I think we can leave it there.  The only
   other point that I should swphasise, as we are looking at
   the barrier, is one which perhaps is fairly obvious but
   which can be brought out, and .that is the fact that a
   barrier passes the load test does not mean that there is
   not something which you can see - for example corrosion -
   which means that you would want to replace it in any event,
   or replace part of it?   A. You will note from I think
   this particular report ---

Q. 133 is a good example, if I may direct your attention to
   it; barrier 133.     That was one on which you commented.
   As you can see, although there was quite a large movement
   and an increasing movement, as we can see looking across
   the page, esiih time it returned to the Starting point?
   A. Yes.
                             6

                                             W. EASTWOOD

Q. There is 100 per cent recovery in each case?      A. That is
   so.

Q    In faet, you noted in your letter ‘
                                       t hat the rail on 133
     was badly corroded and should be replaced?     A. Yes.

Q. So that barrier, of course, passed 100 per cent?        A. Yes.

Q,   Nevertheless there was something visibly and obviously wrong
     with a part of it which required some replacement? A. Indeed,
     and we tried to do that, of course.

Q. And you would accept obviously that it is not only the load
   testing that matters, it is a visual examination of the
   barrier?   A. That is so.

Q. What is your criterion? What do you look for to decide,
   when you look at a barrier, whether it will pass or fail,
   or is it difficult to --- A. There are different types
   of barrier.

Q. We are talking about these sorts of barriers, the ones with
   which we are concerned.   A. With this kind of barrier,
   this clip over the top is the part that needs locking at
   most carefully.

Q. It is a danger point?     A.   A danger point.

Q. Effectively, any corrosion there is something that would
   ring the alarm bells, as it were? A. Not any corrosion.
   Every one of them has some corrosion.  It's not till it
   gets to a certain level, and of course under the test
   loading there will be some deformation under the test
   load usually;  but I don't think there could have been
   here because if there is deformation of that clip, the
   barrier slips inside it and you don't get full recovery.
   So there couldn't have been deformation here but there
   must have been a fair amount of corrosion or something
   which caused it to be replaced, even though it passed.

Q.    Indeed. Of course, the interesting thing about this one
     is that you have an increased movement on the last ---
     A. Well, that was probably part of the picture - not
     just that it was increased but it was a very large one.

Q. Exactly, and the fact that it is a larger than usual
   movement again is  something which you lookat, isit not,
   which you take into account?   A. Oh yes.

Q. Of course, that applied to 124A as well because that was a
   larger than usual  movement.  The first one was 29?   A. Yes.
   I rather think we  were probably influenced by the 1 9 's and
   19's which followed it, which are fairly normal.

Q.   Yes, I accept that.   Anyway I think I can leave barriers,
     everyone will no doubt be glad to hear, and come back to
     your statement at paragraph 41, page 16. We start into
     the issue of perimeter fences and radial fences.    We have
                             7

                                                   W. EASTWOOD

     touched on that already, of course.  You came to the ground
     with the perimeter fence already there?   A. That is so.

Q. And it had to be strengthened?        A. Yes.

Q. We also know, because we have seen the Minutes, that it was
   not treated, in so far as the measurement of capacity was
   concerned, as an evacuation point?   A. That is so.

Q. At that time the green guide, the 1976 green guide, gawe no
   guidance, did it, as to the width of the gates that there
   should be in any perimeter fence?   A. That is so.

Q. If we look at the 1976 version, paragraph 7.9.1 --- A. I
   am sorry, I have left mine at home overnight.

Q. Let me give you a copy.       (landed).   A. Thank you.

Q. 7.9.1:    f*The fence should be designed to keep spectators
   off the pitch but gates or other access points should be
   provided for use in an emergency." We do not need to bother
   about the rest of it. There were, I think, at that time
   what are now numbers 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and probably 7? A. We
   now know, sir, that 7 was not there.

Q. It was not?     A. No.

Q.    There was a little confusion about that. A. Can I just tell
     you, sir, that as I understand it, 7 was put in about 18
     months ago.

Q. 7, in the context of this case, is something of an irrelevancy
   because it was right on the north corner, was it not?
   A. Yes.

Q. Effectively, it went from 2 to 4 to 5?          A.   Yes.

Q. The configuration is slightly odd because 4 and 5 are
   relatively close together and there was quite a big gap
   between 2 and 4?   A. Yes.

Q.   And the gates, of course, were fairly narrow gates?         A.   Yes.

Q.    Did you give any consideration to the adequacy of those
     gates at any stage? A. Oh yes.     There weee many meetings
     of the working party at which these gates, and particularly
     the ones from the Kop, were a matter of discussion for long
     periods of up to an hour.   There was no guidance at that
     time, of course, but the ones from the Kop were to be /used
     as emergency evacuation for a period of a few years until
     the Kop was enlarged and the exits were then improved. So
     the Fire Service, who have a very important role in this,
     were very concerned about those gates and about all the
     gates on the ground, and the professionals, the Police, the
     Fire Service, the Structural Engineers from the Town - and
     we are structural engineers - were all engaged in those
     discussions.
                                 W. EASTWOOD


      Now there are the conflicting if you like purposes.
The Police don't want unnecessarily large gates because if
they have to go in, a couple of Policemen have to go in
and bring out somebody who is misbehaving it is so easy to
have a crowd surge out.

       On the other hand if you regard the prime purpose of
those gates as being for escape then they should be bigger.

      Now this is a matter of much debate over a very long
period and it was decided that those gates were appropriate.

So far as the Kop end was concerned they were made 1.1
metres, a minimum of 1.1 metres, because as you say they
were to be treated as parts of the means of evacuation in
order to get the crowd capacity to the desired level?
- A. That is it.

At the other end that is the Leppings Lane end, of course
they weren't to be used as an evacuation in the sense that
the crowd capacity did not depend upon those gates? — A.
That is so.  Part of the picture sir was that the evacuation
time at the Leppings Lane end was particularly favourable,
whereas the calculated time for the Kop was I believe 16
minutes originally.

Indeed. We have seen the documentation.   I don't think we
need go into the detail? - A. Only 6 minutes for the Leppings
Lane.
But nevertheless it was clearly desirable that there should
be gates in case of an emergency? - A. Yes.

And there should be a sufficiency of gates, a sufficient
number? - A. Yes.

And that they should be of a sufficient width to feope if
they had to without of course being too wide? - A. Yes.

Now 1.1 metres is not enormously wide, is it? - A. No, that
is suitable for two people abreast.

And one would have thought not too wide to defeat the Police
object in not having too large a gate? - A. This is a
matter of balance and compromise as with many of these
decisions which have to be taken by the professional team,
professional judgment, commonsense, and the team spent
much time discussing these matters.

 Of course since 1986 the new Guide has come down in favour,
 clearly in favour of 1.1? - A. Yes.

 We can see that in paragraph 215 of the 1986 version of
 the Guide? - A. Can I say sir of the several grounds where
     'V
    \j

£

                                              W. EASTWOOD


             I have been involved in putting in gates and perimeter fences,
             every gate is at least 1.1 and the other ground in this City
             for which I was responsible we have some which are 1.7.  In
             fact they are not 1.1 they are 1.2 at the other ground because
             it was before the Guide came out.  The 1.1 figure was not a
             figure and I used 1.2 or 1.7.

                   Now at each of these grounds there  has been similar
             discussions.  I don't rule the roost, it is a Working Party
             and when it makes its final decision I am not even there.

          Q. But you presumably can recommend? - A. Oh yes.

          Q. Is it your view that they ought prima facie to be of at least
             1.1? - A. The fact that everywhere where I have put in a
             completely new fence they have been 1.1 is an indication of
             my view, but I do have to have regard to say the Police view
             if it happens to be that they don't want a gate that is too
             wide, they want a gate that is comfortable for one person
             to get through but not too wide.

          Q. Presumably you would advise them of your views, you being
             very experienced, that for safety reasons it ought to be
             1.1 at least, as it now of course has to be? - A. Yes.
             Since 1986 I would have more ammunition than I had in 1976
             and more experience as we all have of course.

          Q. Of course you in fact put in Gate 3 in 1985 as we know? -
             A. Yes.

          Q. And you put that in at a width of .85? - A. Yes.

          Q. There does not appear on the documentation to be any record
             of any discussion about the width of that gate as to why
             .85 was chosen.  Can you help about that?— A. Yes, when
             the arrangements were being considered for putting in the
             extra barrier I had a meeting with I think it was Supt.
             Mosely, but I am very bad at names and faces, and we dis­
             cussed the new fence, amongst other things, and then he
             said:  "And I want a new gate at number 3". "What size do
             you want?"  "Like the other one" and so it was made like
             the other one.

          Q. Did you not put forward whether to him or to anyone else
             your view that it ought to be a wider gate? - A. I did not
             press it.  I said:  "Do you want a wider gate for escape
             or one like the others?" and his view was that ha wanted
             one like the other one and I did not say "the others", I
             think there was a sort of like that.

          Q. From what you say it does not appear that you tried to
             persuade   at all. Is that fair? ~ A. We had gone through
             all that   in 1979with the same Police Force, but the answer
             is no, I did not try to.
    p   ,
v                                         10

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


            Q. I mean the gates were already there in 1979, you weren't
               changing the gates they were simply there.  Isn't that right?
               - A. Oh yes, there was a difference, yes.

            Q. This was a new gate. Now yous s&id a moment ago that Gate 7
               you have checked and was put in 18 months' ago? - A. About.
               When I say "checked" I have not checked the exact date.

            Q. Well certainly after 1986? - A.    Oh yes.

            Q. That is .77 wide? - A. Yes, it is a very narrow one.

            Q. It therefore was put in on the face of it in breach of the
               up-to-date Green Guide, paragraph 215? - A. I don't like
               the word "breach" for a Guide.  One breaks a rule but ....

            Q. It was not in accordance with paragraph 215? - A. Tliat is so.

            Q. Can you help us as to why you put in such a narrow gate? -
               A. I did not even know it was there, or at any rate my
               difficulty was that when we put the quick release bolts
               in in 1988, 15 months or so ago, we ordered six for that
               end of the ground and when the man was fixing them he rang
               to say:  "We are short of a bolt".  My colleague John Strange
               went out and there was a gate.  He could not remember seeing
               this gate before, but there was another gate.

                       Now I have asked the Club since the disaster, I wrote
                 in my report that I felt sure that it was not there originally
                 but did not know whether it had been put in between 1980.
                 It could have been put in any time between 1980 and now but
                 it does transpire it was put in just over 18 months' ago.

            Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That was an initiative of the
                 Club of which you were unaware, was it? - A. Unaware sir,
                 yes.

            q.          MR. COLLINS: Do you know who put the gate in? Nothing
                 to do with Eastwoods? - A. Nothing whatever to do with us.
                 We had no idea in my firm that that gate had been put in.

            Q. Because if you had spotted it on one of your inspections
               surely it is something that you should have drawn to the
               attention of the Club that it was a gate that had been put
               in not ia accordance with the recommendations in the Guide?
               - A. Yes and it is a fact it was not spotted in the summer
               inspection of 1988 by any of the Working Party.

            Q. I think it may be more sensible to come back to the question
               of putting in the gates when we go through the 1985 account
               of the changing of the radial fences.

                       May I go back to   your paragraph 43 of your statement,
                 Dr. Eastwood?
    X

e                                    11


                                               W. EASTWOOD

                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are you leaving gates for
             the moment?

                   MR. COLLINS:  For the moment, yes, I am coming back
             to them.  I thought it was more sensible to deal it when
             we go to the correspondence of 1985.

                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I shall wait.

        Q.        MR. COLLINS:   Dr. Eastwood, you say:

                   "At some later date the Club arranged for
                   cranked extensions to be fitted onto the top
                   of the perimeter fence ...."

             with effectively the spikes.  Presumably to stop or make it
             more difficult for people to climb over? - A. That is so.

        Q. Can you recall when that was done? - A. We were not in any
           way involved in it and I remember going to the ground for
           one of my inspections with John Strange and saying:  "Look
           the fence has been extended upwards?"  I asked him if he
           knew and neither of us knew.

                   Now John Strange did enquire of the Club Secretary
             Mr. England at that time and the Club had arranged for that
             to be done.  Of course it was nothing to do with us.
             In no way would we have objected to it.




                                    /Q. No, but the problem
                               12

                                                    W. EASTWOOD


Q. No, but the problem of the club doing these sort of things is
   that the safety certificate requires notification of any
   changes, does not it? - A. It does, yes.

Q. And on the face of it extension of the perimeter fence in the
   way described is the sort of thing that ought to have been
   notified in advance? - A. I don't know whether it was, sir.
   It should have been, yes.

Q. It should have been.  You, of course, were, as I understand
   it, retained by the club as their link as it were to the
   County Council on all safety matters? - A. No.  No, no.  They
   have a great deal of direct contact.  For example, we never
   deal with counting systems, quite a few things.  Stewarding,
   for example, we don't deal with it.

Q. I am sorry.   You are quite right.  On all safety matters which
   related to the structure of the ground or any of the
   installations in the ground? Is that right? - A. This has
   never been said by anybody.   I don't think that is so.  The
   club have a perfect right to do structural work without coming
   to us.  We don't have a retainer which says Eastwoods will do
   all the work.

Q. Provided that they notify the Council in advance of any
   proposed work?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Which is the relevant part of the
   certificate?

        MR. COLLINS:   Sir, 5.2 is the main paragraph.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        So it is a duty on the club to
   give notice?

        MR. COLLINS:   Yes, and 29 is an additional requirement,
   which requires them to maintain the facilities, structures,
   etc., as they were at the date of the certificate, and no
   alteration to be made unless notified.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Then there is 24, which simply
   requires inspections.  Is that right?

        MR. COLLINS:   Yes.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   But there is no other requirement,
   is there of consultant involvement in any changes?

        MR. COLLINS:   Certainly, it is not required by the
   safety certificate.  I was not suggesting that.  It was just
   that I had understood or I was seeking to discover what the
   terms of the retainer were:

Q. You were explaining when they did anything that was
   substantial you would expect it to come through you, but it
   was open to the club if they wished. - A. Oh, no, sir.  The
   club spent a great deal of money on building under the South
y
                                 13

                                                      W. EASTWOOD


         Stand, a major restaurant and social facility during the
         interim period which is nothing whatever to do with us.

    Q. You could only deal with things if the club chose to inform
       you of what they wanted in advance? - A. Yes, that is so.

    Q.    Otherwise you were met with a fait   accompli? - A. That is so.

    Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  At some stage I would like to know
         the measurement of the return bit of fencing that was added. -
         A. I can't give you an exact figure, sir.   I would guess it is
         somewhere around 350-400 mm, about 15 or 16 ihe&£s.   It
         increased the height, sir, as well as leaning inwards, and
         certainly in my view made the fence much more suitable for
         stopping people going over.   Before that it was very
         vulnerable. It was not so high, and it had not got the sloping
         piece.   As Sir Winston Churchill said, sir, there is only one
         thing more difficult than trying to climb over a wall that is
         leaning towards, and that is kissing a girl who is leaning
         away from you.

    Q.        MR. COLLINS:   May I now come to the radial fence.  As we
         know, when the safety certificate was obtained, the terrace
         was open from end to end.  I think you know it was as a result
         of the Cup Semi-Final in 1981 when there was some crushing
         that consideration was given to radial fences? - A. Yes.

    Q. Initially I think at the request of the Police? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you have no doubt had an opportunity of seeing the
       relevant correspondence? - A. I would not say I have seen all
       of it.  I have had some pointed to me.

    Q. Because it appears when you made your statement, looking at
       paragraph 44, you did not appreciate then that it was as a
       result specifically of that match? - A. That is so.  I have no
       seen the correspondence which shows that the Police requested
       two or three months before the club approached us.

    Q. Yes, indeed.  Were you aware also at that time that it was the
       Police view that the figure of 10,100 in the safety
       certificate was too high? - A. Not at all, no.

    Q. Can I ask you to look at page 136 of our bundle, the black
       one.  I make clear straight away this is not a document I
       suggest you ever saw, because it is an internal Police
       document.  The 4th paragraph:

              "I have informed Mr. England that our consensus view is
              that the 10,100 crowd figure specified in the safety
              certificate is too high".

         Did Mr. England not pass on to you when the question of the
         radial fences came up that Police view? - A. He did not pass
         on that Police view, sir, and I don't think he ever mentioned
         anything about it to me.  He certainly did not do it in
         writing, and I have no recollection of him saying anything to
**>   .

                                        14

                                                            W. EASTWOOD


               me.

          Q. Can I ask you to turn on to page 140 in the same bundle.  That
             is a copy of a letter from I think the Chief Constable to Mr.
             McGee, the then and even now Chairman of the club.  Can I ask
             you look down towards the bottom of the page.  There is a
             paragraph with a letter B beside it:

                     "The Leppings Lane end is not constructed to give maximum
                     aid to the packing and control of the crowd, and the
                     accepted crowd capacity is such that there is no safety
                     margin".

               Again, is that something of which you were aware, that view of
               the Police as expressed in this letter? - A. No.

          Q.   What would be your comment on the assertion that   there was   no
               safety margin? - A. Now or at that time?

          Q.    Well, start at that time and then come to now? - A. Yes. At
               that time we were living in the aftermath of very dramatic
               reductions in the number of people being admitted to the
               standing areas.   Pre-1966 we don't know much about it, but we
               do know that after 1966 the ground designated capacity, and
               this was not under any Act but agreed with Police and so on,
               was 60,000.   After Ibrox there was an agreement with the club
               which brought it down a few thousand.   Then in 1979 it went
               down to 50,000 in round figures.   Between 1966 and 1979 there
               was no change in the seating capacity, which is about 23,000-
               plus.   So that in 1966 the number of people who used to be
               admitted to the standing areas of the ground was 37,000, and
               what is more they were frequently admitted, crowds of that
               order.

          Q. Of course, there was no perimeter fence then, was there? - A.
             There was no perimeter fence, sir, no.  Now, the reduction
             therefore had been from 37,000 to 27,000 over a period of 13
             or 14 years, and during that period we had done a great deal
             of safety work, all the work that was done to obtain the
             certificate in 1979.  So there was a general feeling that the
             crowd limit that was being set was a very safe one in the
             safety committee.  The reduction was only actually 1,000 for
             that end because post-Ibrox I believe the figure had been
             11,400.

          Q. You are quite right, because that in fact we can see if we
             turn back to page 136 we were looking at a moment ago. - A.
             Well, I was told that figure, sir, and I was remembering it,
             and it appears it is right.   So we had reduced the capacity at
             that end by 1,000.   We had put in a lot more safety barriers.
             They were stronger ones.   The entry and exit routes had been
             improved.   So that appeared to be a very reasonable course of
             action.   I think there had been a little bit of wondering at
             that time in the light of recent events, of course.   Now, I
             have no doubt that short of an accurate way of placing people
             in the right positions then 10,100 was too high.   But that is
             with hindsight, sir, fully with the benefit of hindsight.    But
t   .

                                     15


                                                          W. EASTWOOD


           if there had been a method of accurately placing then that is
           different.

        Q. You say, Dr. Eastwood, as I understand it, that when you were
           asked to prepared a scheme for putting in these radial fences
           you were not informed that it was because of the 1981 match
           problems? - A. I possibly was not informed, but I am sure I
           recognised that it was probably as a result, but I was not
           told the Police had said they wanted them.

        Q. No,   I follow that, but you were aware, presumably, that there
           had   been crushing on the terraces during that Semi-Final? - A.
           For   which, of course, there was a very good explanation.  It
           was   a one-off event.

        Q. I follow it was a one-off event, but you knew there had been
           crushing? - A. Yes.

        Q. And it must have occurred to you if you were not specifically
           told that there was some connection between the changes that
           were required to the terrace and what had happened in that
           match? - A. It was fairly obvious that it was as a result of
           the match, but I was not aware as I am now that the Police
           were beginning to formulate a scheme of pens with capacities.
           That I did not know, and it does appear in the correspondence.

        Q. That may be, but the fact is you, as I say, were aware of the
           problem of overcrowding.  In fact, we know that there were
           about 10,500 on that terrace, so it would appear from the
           figures the Police have given us, and that one of the problems
           was late arrivals and inadequate packing, if I may put it that
           way, that is to say people were concentrating in particular
           parts of the terrace instead of being evenly distributed over
           the whole? - A. Was not the picture, sir, that the central
           tunnel was closed that day? This was an experiment or for
           part of the time? Is not that so?

        Q. No, I d o n ’t think we have had any evidence of that.   - A.
           W e l l , it is my impression that for at least part of the time
           the old problem of the tunnel being very popular with a big
           crowd in front of it, very dense, and that at that ;game in
           some way spectators were fed in at the e n d s , and that is why
           for the first time ever and the last time ever there was
           trouble at the ends.      That may be completely wrong, sir, but
           that was my impression.      I have to say that because this
           rather influenced my own reaction to the 1981 incident.

        Q. This was an impression you had at the time, was it, that you
           are talking about? - A. Yes.  It was said to me by one of
           my staff who may have been wrong.

        Q. I think he was wrong. - A. Well, I have looked at the Police
           debriefing notes, and there is a hint there that it is right.
           I have not got the document in front of me, but when I quickly
           read it the other day there was a hint that that may have been
           the case.
                             16

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


Q. Well, I d o n ’t think we need argue the toss about that, because
   we have all seen the documents and we can draw our own
   conclusions from them.     You say your belief that that is what
   had happened coloured your approach? - A. It must have done,
   obviously.

Q. In the sense you mean you thought that this was not a problem
   of overcrowding in the sense that the capacity was too high,
   but a problem created by the inadequacy of distribution? -A.
   Y e s . I d o n 't want to condemn the Police for this experiment.
   It was not a bad experiment to do knowing the problem had been
   in the centre to feed people from the ends.       I am not trying
   to in any way say the Police were wrong to have that
   experiment, but it had not worked, and obviously would not be
   tried again.




                                  /Q. Can I ask you to go.
                                 17


                                                 W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   Can I ask you to go to page 145 of the black!';bundle,
     Dr. Eastwood.      This is a copy of your letter to Mr.
     Vaughan, following your instructions to organise the
     i n st allation of the two radial fences on the terrace
     and you say, "It is intended that these be so positioned
     that they divide the section of terrace into approximately
     three equal areas, each served by its own entrance."
     A.     Yes.

Q.   Which, of course, refers fairly obviously;/to the tunnel
     under For the middle and the entrances at either end for
     the other two.   You then deal at the bottom with the
     gate to give access to m aintenance and you say "also
     policing during a game".   What did you have in mind
     when you were referring to policing during a game?
     Can you recall?   A.    This expression was used by the Club
     that the Police had requested them to aid policing during
     the game and I suspect that -- well, the obvious thing, they
     wanted to be able to get from one pen to another, take
     people out from one pen and so this was one of the reasons.

Q.   It appears that it was envisaged, then, that there would be
     some Police control over the numbers that were going to be
     or potential Police control over the numbers that there
     were to be in each of these pens.   A.   Yes.   Yes.

Q.   You say that very forcefully.   A.   Well, when you say
     Police control, there must be control.   When you start
     penning, there must be control.

Q.   Is that something that you a ppreciated right from the outset,
     that there must be control if you were going to pen?
     A.   That it is important, yes, right from the outset and
     it is essential, not important.

Q.   No doubt you then advised the Club and indeed everyone
     of the need for control of the numbers in the pens?
     A.   Not s pe ci fically because it was always said that
     they were controlled.

Q. What you were creating, quite clearly, was effectively
   three individual pens, was it not?   A.   Yes.

Q.   Of course   there was an access at the back.           A.        Yes.

Q. But quite obviously if someone went into one of those pens
   and if a crowd built up in those pens effectively they
   were s el f- co nt ai de d because it was pretty impossible for
   s omeone down in to get up to the back, if they became
   at all overcrowded.         A.   Yes, if they became very o v e r ­
   crowded.      At 5.7/sq.m, there is good room to move about.

Q.   5.4.   A.     I am sorry,   5.4/sq.m.,   there is good room to
     move about.

Q.   Certainly, but you a ppreciated the importance of capacity
     on the terrace as a whole obviously.    A.   Yes.
                                  18

                                                     W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   And the importance of capacity and it s c o nnection with
     safety, because obviously overcrowding can lead to injury.
     A.   Yes.

Q. And indeed      the 1981   match had shown that all too obviously.
   A.   Yes.

Q.   Therefore,    if these pens were to be created it was of vital
     i mportance   that there should be some control over their
     capacity;     right?   A.  Yes.

Q.   Which meant, first of all, their capacity        should be properly
     de termined individually. A.   Yes.

Q.   And was that done?   A.   Yes, the 2,200 figure was given
     by me to the Club.   It may be just very m arginally over
     the 5.4 because prior to putting in those ---    I don't
     think it is, I think it probably matches 5.4 when you include
     the no-*man's land.

Q.    D epends on what is now the dead area between       4    and 5.
     A.    The dead area was, of course, included.

Q.   It was included?    A.  It was included, oh yes.    If you
     look at the drawing when the new fence was put in, it
     shows you which it was, so it was more or less exactly,
     and in putting that forward - and that meant that it was
     less than 2.4 at the sides because overall it is not
     I am sorry, less than 5.4, overall it is not 5.4, it is
     less than that, and this was bearing in mind that prior
     to putting in the radial fences we know that with the
     average of 5.4 on any big gate you would have s ig nificantly
     over 5.4 in the centre and fewer to the sides.     These
     fences now, if properly used, could, of course, give more
     control over that central area and this was the prime
     object of it.    This is what I was told it was to be.
     One assumes if this is the object, they are going to do
     it.

Q.    In fact, on the face of it this could have had the beneficial
     effect, if properly organised, of avoiding crushes in the
     centre behind the goal where people usually want to go because
     you could control the numbers to a limit of 5.4.   A.   That's
     it.

Q.   Whereas before people tended to              A.   I am sorry, no,
     you couldn't control to 5.4 because        there is no means of
     counting.

Q.   This is the problem,     is it not?   A.      Yes.

Q.   That it is all very well to have this but who is going to
     decide and how are they going to decide whether capacity
     has been reached.   A.   Yes.

Q. Was any thought given to that?    A.   Yes.  At the same
   time I put forward my outline schemes for routing the
   p assengers in in 1981 - the first of my schemes.
                                19

                                              W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   What was the     way in which you anticipated then or you
     devised that     there should be control over the numbers            that
     would go into     those pens?   A.   You do not know the
     numbers of my     pages?   I will just have a look.

Q.   Yes, I can easily find them, if you will forgive me a
     moment.   It is about 155, I think.      No, I am sorry, I have
     gone too far ahead.    Page 69 is the letter that we have
     just been looking at of 2nd September, 1981, and a little
     further on we have your Drawing 3563/1;    is that what
     you are referring to?    A.  Probably.   Could you give me
     the page number, please?

Q.   Page no. 73 in yours or 149 in ours.   A.   Yes.              Yes,   sir,
     there is the embryo of a dividing up scheme.

Q.   Yes, I follow that but was that a scheme which was allied
     to the putting in of the radial fences?    A.  It was
     contemporary.  The thought was sparked off by the radial
     fences and the object of a pp ropriately packing the
     spectators and I should say that I do not claim that this
     was entirely at the i nstigation of my firm;   it was
     discussions with Hr. England and we got out this embryo
     arrangement.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just looking at this embryo
     arrangement there seems, if we look at 3563/2, the next
     page, to be a firm figure of 4465 in the stand which,
     of course, is the figure seated.    I cannot make out
     whether the numbers in the three new pens are crossed out
     or meant to stand or what they are.   The bottom one is
     2,400 plus 550 and looks as though it is not crossed out
     but the crucial middle one, I cannot make out whether
     that is just blurred or crossed out.    A.   I think all
     the other three are crossed oat, sir, but ---

Q.   What was going on there?      A.   I have no idea,        sir,
     because, you know, it is    a long time ago.   This       is exactly
     as it was on our file.

Q.   But the main reason I asked you to look at this is we were
     talking about your figure of 2,200 to see when that comes
     in but you talked about that including the dead area.
     A.    Yes.

Q.   The dead area being, as I understood    it,   the area which           is
     now called Pen 5.  A.  Yes.

Q.   But that had not emerged    on the scene at all at this stage,
     had it? A.   The 2,200?       No, sir, it had not.

Q.    And when it was the second fence which created that very
     narrow pen was put into Pen 6 rather than into Pen 4,
     was it not?     A.   It was put ---

Q.    Pen 4 was not   reduced by it, Pen 6 was;  is that right?
     No, it is Pen    5 we are looking at.   There are now two
     fences there.    Which was the one that was added, the right-
                                 20


                                                    W. E A S T W O O D

     hand one or the l eft-ha nd one as we look from the field?
     A.   As you look from the field the one that was added
     was the left-hand one.      it bit into the 2,200.

Q-         HR. COLLINS:      That is what I u n de rs to od you to be
     saying and ther ef or e the 2,200 was at the time correct
     but it was not, unfortunately, changed, as we will see
     when the dead area was ---       A.   No, that was the origin
     of that figure of 2,200.

Q.   Indeed.   It looks actually, looking at 3563/1 on page
     73 of your bundle, as if whoe ve r had drawn this had assumed
     one-third, one-third, o ne -t hi rd but ----- A. Yes, but at
     that time there were no dimensions.

Q.   Exactly.  But this suggests, Dr. Eastwood, that you were
     aware of the impo rt an c e of being able to m an ipulate, monitor
     the numbers that were going to go into that, indeed into
     each of the pens, but more p a rt i c u l a r l y the central one.
     A.    This was the b egin ni ng of the period of e v ol ut io n which
     has come about because of change in s p ec ta to r behaviour,
     perhaps#  so that you now have to have fewer people, look
     after them much better and it was the b e gi nn in g of it and
     this was the embryo in my mind.

Q.   Indeed, but it was an obvious point, was it not, that if
     you are going to create a pen, that pen must have a safe
     capacity.   A.   Yes.

Q.   And m easures must be taken to ensure that that safe capacity
     is not e xceeded because if it is exceeded, beca us e it is
     a smaller pen it is even more dange ro us than if you have
     got the large terrace or likely to be even more dangerous;
     is that fair?    A.   What I should add to that is that
     I would not pretend that I could c a lc ul at e the capac it y
     of those pens.    I could do it with the Guide but whether
     that figure would be right would, if we had had this lovely
     scheme of p utting people in the right place, we would
     probably, after a few matches, have been a dj us t in g the numbers.

Q.   I am not c oncerned with the precise numbers.       What I am
     con ce rn ed with in these quest io ns is the means w he re by you
     control w hatever the right number is, because I think you
     have agreed with me that it is in your view e ss en ti al that
     you should in some way be able to control that because
     o the rwise you create, as we have seen in this Inquiry,
     a sit ua ti on of danger.   A.    Can I just extend a little
     and say that in d ecidin g our right numbers later it would
     be done on the judgment of some bo dy looking at the crowd
     and saying, "We have got to incr ea se that or reduce that".
     Now, that same process can, if prop er ly c ar ri ed out, be
     applied to a game.

Q.   Yes, I follow that but you must not have a capacity, must
     you, or rather you should not have a capa ci ty in excess
     of the 5.4.   A.  That is so, yes.

Q.   And if you have a given area ---        A.    Average.
ZSM
                                          21


                                                          W. E A S T W O O D

      Q.   Yes, of course, but if you have a given area in the new
           pen - and let us c o nc en tr a te on the centre one, because
           that is the important one - you know by simply m u l ti p ly i ng
           5.4 by the known area what is the limit of capacity.
           It may be that you have to reduce below that beca us e it
           may become obvious that that is too high.        A.   Putting
           in radial fences could c on ce i va b ly have the effect of
           upsetting the distribution.

      Q.   Exactly, because the barrier.                A.     Making     p ac king   difficult,
           yes.   It could happen.

      Q.   The barrier   c o n f i g u r a t i o n could change.        A.     Yes.




                                               / T h er e fo r e   you have a maximum..
                             22


                                              W. EASTWOOD


Q. And therefore you have a maximum that you know is about
   2,200?   A. Yes.

Q. That is why, of course, you reach that figure.  Although
   this embryo scheme was put forward, it never at that time
   developed into anything, did it?   A. No.

Q. Can you recall why it ran into sand, as it were? A. No.
   There is nothing in writing.  Obviously there would be the
   odd comment when I met Mr. England, but I think it was just
   that the Club were spending a lot of money every year and
   this was one of the things that would count.

Q. You must have made it perfectly clear to the Club and indeed
   to the Safety Committee Working Party, surely, that it was
   important that there should be some means of ensuring that
   the centre pen did not become overcrowded?   A. Everybody
   at the working party talked about the importance of making
   sure that you got even distribution of the crowd.

Q. But how was thhtcto be achieved, as you understood it?
   A. It was going to have to be by control by somebody,
   the Police or stewards or whoever;  that was not for me.

Q. No, but you surely advised that there must be some control?
   A.  I didn't have to advise. I was told that there was.
   I was told, "We control it". "We try to control it" were
   the words.

Q. You see, we know in fact that thesee?has been no control.
   That is one of the problems. There was no control in the
   semi-final? A. Yes.   I was just going to say I don't think
   that is so.  I have been aware ---

Q. We know that at League matches there was some means of
   control but when we have got capacity crowds, and that is
   the danger point,  is it not?   A. Yes.

Q. There has been no control and it has simply apparently been
   left by both police and the Club that the fans can find
   their own le^el. Now, that is ridiculous, is it not?
   A. If   that is the position, it is ridiculous, yes.

Q.   And if  you had known of that and been asked for advice,
     you would have said that it was ridiculous?    A. Of course.

Q. Did you not know that that was happening?    A. No.

Q.    What would you have done if you had realised that there
     was in  fact no monitoring and no control over the numbers
     going into those pens? A. Had a very serious but friendly
     talk with the appropriate people.

Q. Who would have been ...?   A. I would have had to go through
   the Club but that would have meant that we would have had
   a discussion at the working party.
                                              W. EASTWOOD

Q. Did you have any reservations about putting in these radial
   fences at all?   A. I vacillated.

Q. How did you show your vacillation?   A. Not to the extent
   of showing it openly, but one has discussions in the
   working party and you come to a consensus.  Lettme say
   that shortly after they were in, I became in favour.

Q. You approved of them after they were in?     A. I became in
   favour of them.

Q. Why was that? What changed yourlmind?    A. I saw this as
   part of the developing scene. With a relatively long,
   narrow piece of terrace like this, to achieve even packing
   you were going to have to feed people in as soon as it
   could be achieved physically, accurately into place, but
   in the meantime there had to be control of a different
   kind and this was a measure, a means of increasing«the
   control.

Q. So you became in favour but only because you believed that
   there was control over this numbers?  A. Yes, there was
   potential for control.

Q. Of course, simply monitoring by looking is a very inaccurate
   way of Controlling, is it not? A. Yes.   It is obviously
   better to feed in like this embryo scheme and then you have
   got perfect control, and then by looking you can say "Now
   we will adjust it".  It is the two together.

Q. The reason being, as I think a witness said yesterday or
   Xthfe day before, football crowds on terraces have got used
   to being squashed up together and it is something that they
   are prepared to put up with, overc®»wding?    A. They like it.
   They don't want a seat.   They don't want to sit down.

Q. That may be, but that means, of course, that those who look
   tend to be conditioned to accept a much greater density
   than in fact is safe?   A. I don't know who those are, sir.

Q. Well, the Police, the Club officials, everyone concerned,
   because they are so ysed to high densities they are inclined,
   are they not, to accept a density which is greater than 5.4?
   A.  I don't think I've met anyone who has said that fete thinks
   that densities on average greater than 5.4 are tenable.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I should not think there are too
     many supporters who have even heard of 5.4? A. I am not
     meaning supporters but people ---

Q. Well, they are the people who are being squashed or not?
   A. Yes.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:  These figures that you have mentioned
     before 1966 clearly meant, did they not, that people were
     being packed on those terraces at a much greater density
     than 5.4, particularly at the Kop end perhaps?   A. Yes.
                              24

                                                 W. EASTWOOD

Q. And it follows    Chat supporters were quite prepared to put
   up with that?    A. They were conditioned.

Q. They, were conditioned, and those who were responsible for
   the running of the ground were also conditioned to accept
   that sort of density, and it follows, does it not, that
   unless there is enormously good progeganda and education
   about the 5.4 density (and there had not been), that the
   likeljhood was that if you did it simply by visual
   monitoring you would permit a density greater than that
   which ought to have been allowed? Is that correct? A. Yes.
   The overall control to keep the average to 5.4, of course,
   was still there.

Q. Yes, but the point is that once you create the pens, then
   you have the problem that people want to go behind the goal.
   That is the problem of the pens, is it not?   A. Yes.

Q. And that is why you have got to be so jolly careful to
   ensure that the centre pens are not overef&wled, and
   sadly that was never done, as it would seem, certainly
   not in these semi-finals, although you say you were not
   aware of it?   A.  I was not aware and I have not been at
   a semi-final in the last ten years.

Q. You say, Dr. Eastwood, that after initial vacillation you
   came to approve of the pens?   A. Yes.

Q. Can I ask you to look at a copy of a magazine called The
   New Civil Engineer please.  (Handed to the witness).

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Collins, I know that I have
     seen this at some time, but it is not in any of our
     bundles, is it?

          Mr. COLLINS:   It is not in any of our bundles, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I know that I have had it at
     one ti m e .

          Mr. COLLINS:   It was circulated separately, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:  Dr.   Eastwood, I do not want to put anything
     unfair to you, because   we all know the problems with mis­
     quotes.  This purports   to be a report of an interview with
     you by the author, Mr.   Heywood?   A. Yes.

Q. Doyou recall having an interview with       him?   A. Indeed.

Q. What is said in the first paragraph is this:   "The
   consulting engineer responsible for safety at Hillsborough* -
   which I do not think you would entirely accept as a true
   label for your position, is that right?    A. It is typical
   of many of the statements in this article;   it is inaccurate.
                            25


                                             W. EASTWOOD

Q. - "was worried by crowd control fences there long before
   thfe incident. Fences were asked for by the ground's
   licensing authority following a direct request by the
   Police".   Again that is not wholly accurate?  A. No.

Q. Because the Police indeed requested and the ground thought
   it was a good idea and the working party agreed? A. Yes.

Q. Can I ask you to look down a little below the picture of
   the destroyed crush barrier.  There is a bit in quotes.
   This papopts to be you speaking.  It says this:

        “I have long objected in general to the need for such
        radial barriers which in an emergency prevent
        spectators moving away from a source of danger or
        trouble, and I was unhappy about their installation
        at Hillsborough, but they were asked fo±rb^ the then
        licensing authority, South Yorkshire, following a
        recommendation from the Police".

   Dr. Eastwood, have you been correctly quoted there? A. I
   doubt it. Having said that, sir, I was in a very shocked
   state and what one says in those circumstances sometimes
   isn't very circumspect;  but I doubt if I used those words.

Q. Did you convey the impressiveithat you had always been
   against the radial fences because you had always thought
   that they were potentially unsafe?   A. Yes.  At that time
   I was so overwrought and I had, of course, had reservations
   about various fences and I possibly said things which
   w e r e ---

Q. I will not press you on that, Dr. Eastwood.   That is a very
   fair answer.   Of course, the problem is that wbfen you say
   things and they are put in public, then can mislead, can
   they not?    A. They can, and that is very regrettable.

Q. Yes.   Over on the right-hand column, about a quarter of
   the way down, it says:   "The senior partner with Eastwood
   & Partners said the ground complied fully with the Act and
   its accompanying green guide settinggout specific standards".
   I think we have already seen that there are certain ways
   in which it does not meet the standards of the green guide?
   A.   Provided you read the one which says you can bring
   professional judgment and common sense to bear, which is
   part of the guide, I think that the statement is true but
   the word "fully" shouldn't be there.

Q. Very well.     I will not pursue that article any further.
   Dr. Eastwood, can I ask you now to look at page 162 in the
   core bundle, your page 81. This is a record of a telephone
   message of the 13th November, 1981, recording a police
   visit #rerfeiiiteeradial fences had been erected. Have you
   got it?     A. Yes.

Q. Is that a record   of a conversation between Mr. Strange and
   Mr. England? At     the top it has got a tick against "Dr.
   Eastwood", which   presumably means that you were shown it
   and saw it?   A.   I saw it.
                               26


                                                    W. EASTWOOD

Q. It records that the Police had visited the fences and were
   not happy that the existing barriers went through the
   fence?   A. Yes.

Q. This, of course, is because people climb on the barriers and
   get over the fence?   A. Yes.

Q.    There is then a   square bracket bit which we have already
     been told mteant   that Mr. S t r a n g e A. Was speaking to
     me.

Q. --- was recording      his thoughts?   A. Speaking to me.

Q. Then we go on, "I explained about calculated loss of
   spectators would bring capacity below 50,000"?  that is
   if you cut the barriers and create gangways?   A. Yes.

Q. "He said that crush during last semi-final made him
   suspicious of crowd calculation at that end anyway. Said
   that perimeter fence was cause of this", etc.?   A. Yes.

Q.   There is a memo which clearly you saw at the time where
     there is a record of the query about the capacity of the
     ground at that end? A. Yes.

Q. Is that something that you took on board, as far as you can
   recall?   A. Took on board?   I think that even before this,
   other people had asked about this capacity and I felt that
   the incident at the 1981 semi-final was a direct result
   of the attempts to change the way in which the crowd came
   in, the spectators came in, and that that should not be
   taken as evidence of the capacity being wrong.

Q.    But did you reconsider capacity in the light of that comment
     and in the light of your knowledge of the events at the
     semi-final, and more particularly in the light of the
     creation of the pens?    A.  If the fence was going to be
     beneficial and help, which is what the purpose was - this
     was the time when they were putting them in and the whole
     object was to help, not to make it more difficult - I was
     beginning to warm to the idea that this was a way of
     evening out the spectators and so this was beneficial and
     would make it easier to have the 10,100 even safer, because
     I did regard it as safe if there weren't these one-off
     incidents like the 1981 incident, which I believe resulted
     from the way in which the spectators were put in.

Q. You knew, of course, that the safety certificate said 10,100
   on the terrace?    A. Yes.

Q.   Did it occur to you that the safety certificate had become
     out of date with the creation of the pens and ought to
     descend to the particular capacities of the pens? A. I
     had no knowledge of the fact that the safety certificate
     was not changed annually until very recently.

Q. It clearly ought to have been, ought it not?       A.   Yes.
                                 27


                                                 W. EASTWOOD

    Q. And again if you had been asked for your opinion on that,
       you would have said that it roust be changed to reflect
       the capacity in each of the pens?     A. Yes. Well, if
       the pens became self-contained and if there was a proper
    Q. system of   ladling them in.

    Q. Well, they were self-contained.  That was the whole point.
       It does not depend on the system of    ladling. The fact
       is that they are there and they are self-contained.   We
       have already established that, have we not? A.   Yes,
       By self-contained, I mean have their own routes, theix
       onw turnstiles.  As I said earlier, there is no means of
       counting 2,200 people without that.

    Q. That, with respect, Dr. Eastwood* makes them dangerous.
         If you do not have that, they are dangerous unless you
         are very careful to ensure that they are not overcrowded?
#        A. Yes.

    Q. You have agreed with that?     A. Yes.

    Q. And theffact is, whether or not you segregate them properly,
       which ought clearly to have been done but was not, if you
       do not do that, you have got them there and they have got
       to have their individual safety capacities established,
       have they not?   A. Yes, but it is quite meaningless to
       put a number on it if you have not got a means of counting
       the number of people in each pen.

    Q. The answer to that is that you must not have pens, then,
       is it not?    Unless you have got some method —   A. As
       I have said, I have vacillated about having pens.

    Q.   But you said that you came down in favour and you came down
         in favour only because you believed that there was a proper
         control and monitoring of the numbers in the centre pen
         in particular?    A. Not by counting.

    Q.   I appreciate not by counting, but by policing or stewarding
         or whatever?    A. Yes, that was an essential corollary.

    Q. It was essential.    It was not happening but it was essential?
       A. Yes.

    Q. None the less, you surely have to have some figure - and I
       ktacw it is difficult to achieve it - and the Club knows
       that if they are found to have exceeded that figure, they
       are committing a criminal offence?   A. And we gave the
       Club the figure.

    Q. Indeed, you gave the Club the figure.  It was not put into
       the Safety Certificate.  I appreciate that you say you knew
       nothing about that, but all I am putting to you is that if
       you had been asked for your view, you would have said, would
       you not, "That must be put into the Safety Certificate",
       because it is essential to ensure, by whatever means you can,
       that there is no overcrowding?   A. Yes.
    1
'                                    28
                                              W. EASTWOOD


        Q. That there is no overcrowding? - A. Yes.

        Q. I appreciate all the defects that you have referred to, but
           at the very least if you put a figure there you then have
           a criminal sanction hanging over the Club which may mean
           they are that much more careful to ensure that there is no
           overcrowding? - A. That is so.

        Q. But nothing appears to have been done to reconsider in
           detail the capacity, the total capacity of 10,100, despite
           this note we have just been referring to? - A. No, nothing
           was done.

        Q. Incidentally looking at your page 18 of your statement,
           paragraph 46, towards the bottom of paragraph 46 you refer:

                   "Also, spectators tend to congregate at the
                   top of the west terrace rather than at the
                   bottom ...."

             A. Yes.

        Q. That is presumably because of the sump, the well, you can't
           see so well at the bottom? - A. Yes, you have to look through
           the fence for may be the bottom five metres, you are looking
           through the mesh and that is not as good a view.

        Q.    So this is simply your experience of going to Hillsborough
             over a number of years that this is the pattern of viewing
             from that part of the ground.    Is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q. Of course that means that anyone looking from the pitch side
           and seeing perhaps some gaps at the very front may be fobled
           into believing by that there is not crowding in that pen
           whereas in fact if he had checked up at the back and appraised
           it from the back it would be perfectly plain that there was
           capacity? - A. He should stand back.

        Q.   Indeed, he should look at the whole.   He should not just
             look at one part? - A. Yes.

        Q. And the fact that there may be gaps in part does not mean
           the capacity has not been reached.  I don't know whether
           you have seen the Fire Brigade photographs in this case?
           - A. No, I have not sir*

        Q. If you could be provided with a bundle it makes the point
           rather graphically, that is all.  Can I ask you to look at
           this photograph.  That shows 54 people in a 10 sq.m. cage
           and what they have done there is to shuffle backwards to
           put themselves not uncomfortably but closer together and
           we can see from that there is quite a substantial gap
           left in front? - A. That is a very interesting photograph.

        Q. But that illustrates the point, the faet there is a gap
           at the front may not mean it has not reached capacity? - A.
           Yes.
                                  w. EASTWOOD


       MR. MULLER:  Sir, I wonder if I may just make the
point.   I don't know how it has come about but I hope your
bundle has now been corrected because Photograph 2 does
not show what the index purports it to show.   In the
original bundle Photograph 2 indicates that that is the
pen full with the people covering the whole area of
10 metres.   In fact one can see quite clearly if you look
where their feet are, that they are some way back from
the chalk mark and I hope the new photograph has certainly
been put in your bundle because I gather new photographs
have been sent round.

      MR. COLLINS:  I simply don't know, but it does not
detract from the point I was just making.

      MR. MULLER:   Not at all.

      MR. COLLINS:   Dr. Eastwood, finally on this radial
fence installation can I ask you to look at your paragraph 48
which leads into our page 169 In the black bundle or your
page 86 in your bundle which is your letter of the 26th
January 1982 dealing with the radial barriers.   This of
course is largely concerned with the point of cutting
the barriers off and creating the gangway.   You make the
point over the page:

      "However from the point of view of safety a
      strip of that width without a single crush
      barrier would be a major hazard."

Because, of course, of the pressure of people going down.
You go on:
      "It should be kept in mind that the introduction
      of these radial barriers has effected a very
      great improvement from the point of view of
      segregation of spectators but to achieve
      perfection from the point of view of
      segregation brings with it other disadvantages.
      I believe that what we have done is a reasonable
      compromise between the various interests."

Can you help now as to what were the "disadvantages which
you had in mind, or was it only the question of being
able to jump over the barriers? - A. Yes, it was that
primarily.  May be the wording is not very precise there
but this matter had been discussed and corresponded about
for three or four months, as you will be aware, and in
these discussions .... The Working Party got on very
well sir in the sense there were conflicting views some­
times, different professional interests and we did try to
come to compromises.  I had cut one or two of these barriers
and did not want to cut any more for safety reasons.   The
Police for control purposes wanted them cutting and m the
end this was in fact the compromise that was reached.
                                 W. EASTWOOD


Yes, I see.  Can I now come on to 1985 which is the changes
then proposed in relation to the turnstiles and also the
addition of another radial fence, in fact another two radial
fences on the terraces.  The two I think can conveniently
be dealt with together because they were contemporaneous,
were they not? - A. Yes.

We have already referred to the tentative suggestions in
1981 but in 1985 following that embryonic scheme ....   I
think it was February 1985 this started, your paragraph 85
on page 36 of your proof, our page 205, your page 100,
which is a letter from the Club to you asking for a discussion
of the suggested improvements at the beginning of 1985.
Can you recall now what led to the decision to make these
possible improvements? - A. No, it was just that Mr. Chester
said that the Club had in mind that as part of its conr
tinuing programme of improvements it was time that we
looked at this matter of the entrances at Leppings Lane.

You produced some designs and if you turn to page 107 in
your bundle which is the letter of the 2nd of April, which
is a copy of your letter to Mr. Chester.  You say:

      "I have pleasure in enclosing three copies of
      our sketch 6705/2 showing a possible layout
      which segregates visitors from home supporters
      reasonably well.  It also allows flexibility
      in allocating varying amounts of accommodation
      to visitors."

Now it looks from that as if what had motivated the Club
was the desire to be able to segregate? - A. I think that
was part of it, obviously.  I don't think it was exclusively
that.

No, I am simply reading that letter and clearly, well at
least on the face of it that would have been the major
matter because that is the one you specifically refer to?
- a . Yes, this is how it started but perhaps we were
beginning to push out to make it much more comprehensive.

Yes indeed.  The proposal you devised, which we can see
over the page on your 108, 6705/2, is to increase the
number of turnstiles to 29, and as we can see to have
dividing walls with gates inside the turnstiles which
effectively segregates the spectators to the various
areas? - A. Yes.

That of course would have also had the advantage, would it
not, of enabling there to be a mechanical means, a counting
of those going into the various pens? - A. It would have
been absolutely precise.

Exactly.  Now had any consideration been given to the question
of the capacity of the turnstiles and problems of flow of
spectators as part of this? - A. Turnstiles were never part
                                  W. EASTWOOD


of my province sir.    I do recall at the very beginning
when we firere first appointed perhaps there might have been
a little discussion at one of the Working Party meetings
about turnstiles, but the general impression was that
because a number of spectators was being reduced and there
had not been difficulties in the past with turnstiles,
this was not a major thing.

Can we turn over to your page 109 please, our page 208,
Dr. Eastwood.  There is your letter to South Yorkshire.
It perhaps makes rather clearer the motivation behind the
Club's requirements:

      "The club is anxious to segregate the visiting
      team's supporters as they enter the ground, and
      also to enable the police to control their exit
      at the end of the game."

Again those would appear to be the major matters. Is that
fair? - A. Yes, that is the major matter mentioned, yes.

You have agreed that the added advantage of this scheme
would have been the ability to count and control the spec­
tators going into the various parts of the West end of
the ground? - A. Yes.

Is that something you raised at the time with the Club
the desirability of achieving that as well? -IA. Oh yes.

It is not in writing anywhere, I think, that is really
why I ask this? - A. No, it is not in writing but it is
in the drawings.

Well it is apparent from the drawings that there is the
segregation but that is consistent with segregation, is it
not, as much as with numbers and control of numbers? - A.
Yes, we could segregate but the scheme that was eventually
put in this was segregation plus other benefits.

Were the other benefits expressly spelt out? - A. Oh yes.
In discussion over the table you look at these and say:
"This gives us five separate routes to three separate
pens and two lots of seating" and this gives very good
control.

If we look at the telephone message on the following page
or the following page but one, page 111 in yours, 209 in
ours.  This is a note of a conversation between Mr. Chester
and Mr. Strange which you saw because there is a ^W.E."
and a tick at the top? - A. That is so.

It says:

      "Turnstiles at back of West Stand.

      1)   He will speak with his colleagues to
                                  W. EASTWOOD


      decide how many turnstiles are required.

      (Fundamental to scheme)."

That is of course Mr. Strange's comment.  "Fundamental" for
what purpose? - A. We regarded it as fundamental that the
number of turnstiles should be right.  It was not our
expertise because the Club runs the turnstiles year in year
out; knows how many need to be open for a given size of
crowd and we relied on their experience and expertise.  We
wanted to build in the right number because it was fundamental
to the scheme's success that there be the right number.

You appreciated no doubt that one of the things that was
important was to provide enough turnstiles to ensure an
adequate flow so that there would be not a build-up of
people in Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, the schemas that we
prepared did of cours© have additional turnstiles.

Oh certainly, but had any consideration been given in the
course of all this to the effect upon the situation outside
and the need for adequacy of turnstiles simply to provide
sufficient flow as opposed to numbers to segregate? - A.
Yes, this is an abbreviated memo, of a conversation.
Obviously we say we need to know because we have got to
get the right number of people through in the right time
and can we have your instructions on it because we don't
&now?

But did you in any way raise with them and tell them that
they ought to bear in mind the need to have a sufficient
number of turnstiles to cater for those who were going to
go into particular areas.

      For example, if you are going to have a part of the
terrace with capacity of 2,000 and you are going to have
to have a number of turnstiles which 1st limited to that,
there is no point in having one turnstile for 2,000 people
because obviously that is going to be inadquate? - A. Yes
obviously.  I can't speak for Mr. Strange but it seems
clear to me that what he had said to Mr. Chester was:
"The schemes we have just sent you, we have set out these
turnstiles.  We have provided 29 as against 23 and we
divide them into blocks.  Can you comment on whether the
numbers are right because it is fundamental to the scheme?

In fact as we know they originally said 34, that is on the
next page .... A. They then came back and asked for 34,
yes.  Sorry, Mrs. Lane asked for 34.

And you prepared a scheme which divided into 34? - A. Yes.

You confirmed that in your letter on our page 213, which
is your page 113, a letter of the 19th April 1985.  I
say "your letter", it is Mr. Strange'S letter in fact butg
M
/\ '
!
                                        33
                                                W. EASTWOOD



            under your supervision as we can see from the reference?
            - A. Yes.

       Q. That also refers to the end of the last paragraph on the
          first page, the suggestion of ".... a central fence to
          divide the middle section rather than provide a 2 m wide
          sterile area to one side." Because the Police were wanting
          further division, as it were, sub-division of the pens in
          order to provide for a greater degree of control? - A. Yes.

       Q. I don't think I need go into the scheme in any detail at
          all.
                    Can X ask you to turn on to our page 221,    your page 116.
             This   is the reference to the central fence.

                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Can I just be clear.   Up to
             this time there has been a suggestion of 23 and then 29 and
             now 34 but on the ground we still only had 18.   When did
             18 increase to 23?
                    MR. COLLINS:    Sir, it was always more than 18, I think.

                   LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR: Theie was once a time when it
             was 18.
                   MR. COLLINS:   A long time ago.  Sir, if we look at
             the drawing 6705/1, which is the drawing which shows the
             position as it then was, which is to be found at page 258
             of the black bundle, it shows the 23 existing turnstiles
             as they were ...   I think speaking from memory that the
             next one round the side was 22, I think, or was it 21,
             which suggests that at some time in the dim and distant
             past there were less than 23 at the Leppings Lane end.
             see Dr. Eastwood nodding.
                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    My understanding was that I
             think it is the very first map we saw, shows that number
             starts along the south side and the refson why we have
             A-G is because there were originally 18.

                    MR. COLLINS:    I think   that probably is so.

                     THE WITNESS:   That is so, sir.

        n          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I was just wondering when we
             went from 18-23 that is all.   Do you know w h e n that was.
             Dr. Eastwood? - A. I don't know sir, it was before         °
             over,  it was before 1979, sir, before I became involved.
             There was no change during my tenure until this suggestion
             in 1981 which in terms of numbers was not carried out.

        O.     So there have been 23 all the time you have been involved?
              - A. There have been 23 the whole time sir, yes.

        Q.    And that has not altered? - A. No, the layout has      altered.
                                  W. EASTWOOD


      MR. COLLINS:   I have been treating it as 23 for all
material purposes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I just wanted to be clear about
it because I had read somewhere we started with 18, that is
all.

      MR. COLLINS:  I suspect, and I am probably entirely
wrong, that it may have been increased to 23 at the time of
the improvements in 1965 but I don't know, that seems quite
likely? - A. Yes.




                     /Q. There were still ....
                               35

                                                  W. EASTWOOD


Q. There were still problems about the number of turnstiles, and
   then there was a scheme - can I ask you to turn over to our
   page 228, your page 117.  There is Mr. Chester requiring some
   detailed layout of turnstiles.  Effectively what he is after -
   No. 2 on the right-hand side - effectively what he appears to
   be after is turnstiles with gates beside them so the gates can
   be used for all-ticket matches, and presumably also for exit
   purposes as well? - A. Yes.

Q.   Mr. Strange says in his view that would be a disaster, as we
     can see from the note? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was that your view as well, that that would have been a
     disaster? - A. When one writes on a memo to a colleague,
     "disaster", one does not of necessity foresee the kind of
     disaster we had.

Q.   No, no, I was not suggesting at all it had anything to do with
     this disaster. - A. Yes, but obviously Mr. Strange thought
     this was an awfully bad idea, and sodid  I.

Q.   You did, too? - A. Yes.

Q.    But nonetheless you provide a scheme which caters for it, as
     we can see from our page 230, and a couple of pages on in your
     bundle, 6705/4. - A. No way did we envisage that those gates,
     particularly gates of that width, were going to be used for
     this purpose.   We did not believe that the working party would
     permit it as a matter of principle.

Q. Why did not you say to Mr. Chester, then, "Look, this is a
   completely absurd idea.  There is no way it could get through
   the working party, and in any event it is thoroughly dangerous
   and undesirable"? - A. The scheme which we prepared over the
   page - are you now referring to scheme 4?

G. Yes. - A. I believed with those arrangements and the 30
   turnstiles that there would not be any difficulty anyway.

Q.    No, but the provision of the new gates where they are.... - A.
     Oh, the gates would have been there anyway.

Q. I see.  The only disastrous part of it would have been the use
   of the proposed use of the gates to let people in at all
   ticket matches? - A. Yes.  Oh, yes, the scheme is a very good
   scheme, I think.

Q.   The scheme itself is all right because those gates can be used
     for exit purposes in the normal way? - A. Yes.   The gates are
     essential. Each of these exit routes had to have its own
     gates, and so the gates were put there for ingress and exit,
     and of course these were then commented on by the Fire
     Service, as you will see one of the schemes which we actually
     put up, the Fire Service gave us advice on their views on the
     widths of those gate s . That was exactly what we envisaged
     would happen with this.
                                 36

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


Q.    Did not you conceive it to be your duty to   tellMr.   Chester,
     ’’Look, this idea of using the gates is a complete non-starter.
     The scheme itself to have the gates there is fine, but your
     suggested use is a non-starter"? - A. If it had come to the
     stage where it might have happened the answer might have been
     "Yes".    With this scheme that we put forward I did not have
     doubts about thi s . We were providing another 7 turnstiles.

Q. Can I go on to our page 240, which is your page - the letter
   of 8th May.   I am not sure it is in your bundle. - A. I have
   the letter of 2nd May.

Q.   8th May, 128. - A. I have        got it.

Q. It is the longer letter of 8th may from you to the Department
   of Administration of the South Yorkshire County Council. Have
   you got that? - A. Yes.

Q. You say:

          "In the interim period several of the points which you
          raised had already been incorporated in our latest scheme
          which has yet to be considered by the Club Board".

     Pausing there, what had happened was the original scheme, 29,
     had been put up to the working party and they had been
     considering it, and in the meantime it had been modified as a
     result of your discussions with the club? -A. That is right.

Q.   But it had not yet reached a position where it was to be put
     to the working party:

          "However, I would ask that further consideration should
          be given to the request in paragraph (c) of your letter
          for a second gate to be installed in the radial barrier
          and for the new radial barrier which you have asked for
          to have two gates".

     Pausing there, what they had said was that if there was to be
     a radial barrier put down the middle of the existing centre
     pen, that should have two gates, one at the top and one at the
     bottom, and so should the other radial barriers? Right? That
     is what had been requested? - A. This is a radial barrier in a
     very odd place.  That is the one, I think, is not it?

Q. No, what they were asking for was that the existing radial
   barriers which you put in in 1981 should have extra gates put
   at the bottom, and that the new barrier, which is the one
   running down from the middle of the tunnel to create what are
   now pens 3 and 4, should itself also have two gates? Is not
   that right? - A. No, sir, I don't think that is so.  Can we
   look at the letter I am replying to?

Q.   Yes, of course.   It is may fault. I have no doubt wrongly
     short-circuited.   The letter is at our page 235. - A. This is
     item (c), the right hand area of the terrace.
3
                                   37

                                                         W. EASTWOOD


    Q. I beg your pardon.  It is a different radial fence.  You are
       quite right.  It is not the one down the centre of the tunnel.
       - A. Yes, and it is one which I was just not able to see.-w . .

    Q ......    the point of. - A. How it could possibly work.

    Q. I follow that.  That perhaps is a red herring, but what they
       were also asking for was extra gates in the existing radial
       fences, as it would seem? - A. No, sir.  They were asking for
       two gates in that particular fence.

    Q.   Isee.  I take your point.   It was a bad point I     was making
         and you are absolute right.   You go on:

               "If these gates are meant for use in emergency it would
               mean having a steward in attendance on each occasion, the
               expense of which would hardly be justified.   It is our
               view that in the event of emergency, spectators can be
               evacuated quickly enough by the gates on to  the pitch and
               by the normal exit gates at the rea r ".

         The normal exit gates at the rear being....? - A. If I can
         just find the letter, sir.    This is the normal gates in the
         tunnel, or wherever. Y e s , in the tunnel, p l u s , of course,
         sideways evacuation through the 1.1 m wide gates which go
         along the terrace.

    Q. Let me pass on from there.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That radial fence there, is that
         the one that was going to create pen 5? This is not the one
         down the middle.  Which one is it? - A. It was one that was
         never put in, sir, and unfortunately I am always using
         different pen numberings from you, but....

    Q. If it was never put in let us forget about it. - A. Right,
       sir.  It was never put in, sir.

    Q.        MR. COLLINS:   Can I ask you, in fact I was not wholly
         wrong and you were not wholly right.  Can I ask you to go back
         to the letter of 2nd May and look at (c) again.  It says:

               "(c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as
               home supporters’ terrace) also to be divided in half by a
               new central radial fence running from back to front with
               two gates....”

         Now, that, as you point out, was one that you could not
         understand the need for and was never put in? - A. Yes.

    Q. It goes on:

               "(the existing radial fence dividing the present two
               Terrace areas - neutral area and home supporters to have
               a second gate installed).”

         Now, that would have been a second gate in the fence dividing
A
                                38

                                                    W. EASTWOOD


       what is now pen 3 from pen 2, I think, or may be the other way
       round. - A. I never realised before that that is what that
       sentence meant, and yet it is very clear.

    Q. Of course, your reply to that.... - A. Was about the wrong
       fence.

    Q. You do say:

            ".... request in paragraph (c) of your letter for a
            second gate to be installed in the radial barrier” .

       That is the existing radial barrier? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you go on:

            ”If these gates are meant for use in emergency it would
            mean having a steward in attendance on each occasion, the
            expense of which would hardly be justified."

       What you appear to be saying is you don't think a gate at
       the bottom of the fence is necessary because people if
       necessary can get out at the back? - A. Get out at the back
       and out on to the pitch.

    Q. And you would have to have a steward if there were a gate in
       front? - A. Yes.     I didn't see the point of that second gate
       at the bottom which would not be used by people wanting to go
       to the toilet or whatever.     Might I just refer to a drawing,
       sir? No, I d o n ’t know what you are coming to yet.  Can I just
       leave it at that? That second gate in the fence at the bottom
       of the slope I did not see a lot of point in it connecting
       these two small areas.

    Q. Can I ask you to come forward as this continues to your letter
       of 17th june 1985, our page 252, your page 138. - A. 138.

    Q. This records a meeting which you had had with the Police and a
       Councillor, and is specifically concerned with the division of
       the terracing? - A. Yes.

    Q. Now, it is as a result of this letter if we look over the page
       on 253 that the suggesting has arisen and indeed has been sold
       to the Police of the creation of what is now pen 5, the
       neutral area with the gate at the bottom? - A. Yes.

    Q. At the bottom of that page you say:

            "I should point out that it will mean losing about a
            metre of advertising space because the hoardings carry
            straight on past that particular gate at present.  There
            will have to be a gap in the hoardings to enable the
            police to get in and out and of course, to evacuate the
            crowd in emergency".

       That could give the impression that the gate as it stood was
       not capable of being used because it was blocked by an
r
                                 39

                                                      W. EASTWOOD


         advertising hoarding? - A. I am not sure whether it was.   I
         should explain that the loss of a metre is not what matters
         but that the club sells the whole of the metreage in standard
         blocks at sc> many hundreds of pounds each or whatever, and if
         they suddenly bring them along and there is a metre they can't
         use and it is halfway along one of these hoardings they are
         suddenly in difficulty.   It was an administrative warning
         rather than a financial one.   Having said that, I am not sure
         at all, I don't think I checked whether they do put the
         hoardings across the front or not.

    Q. The point I am making is it could be read into that that the
       gate was rendered inoperable because of the advertising
       hoardings at that time.  Is that it as you understood the
       position or not? - A. The situation is that the hoardings do
       go past the front of that gate, if that is the one.

    Q. It is gate 5. - A. No.    It is quite likely there were
       advertising hoardings.    This is the new gate, is not it?

    Q. It is the existing gate which is going to go to the new
       sterile area. - A. Yes.  Those high stairs inside that gate
       are because the concrete wall was not cut and because of that
       the advertising hoardings may still be there.  I don't know.

    Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    There is a gap between the fence
         and the hoardings, is not there? - A. I don't know, sir.   I
         have not got the photographs.

    Q. On the photographs people seem to be standing in it.   Is that
       right? - A. Yes, sir, it could be.  I have not got the
       photograph.  I did not know whether they were leaning against
       the concrete wall, the hoardings.

    Q.        MR. COLLINS:   I think all one can say is it would be
         clearly thoroughly undesirable to say the least if the gates
         which were there for the use in possible emergency were in
         any way blocked by advertising hoardings, would not it? - A.
         At that time.

    Q.   At any time. - A. Yes. I was warning they must not   in future,
         and it may be they were not anyway.

    Q. You can't help about that as to what the position was? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You would agree with me I hope that that is perhaps a little
       ambiguous? - A. Writing this letter in June, it is in the
       middle of the summer, there are no hoardings there and you
       can't go down and look what happens.   You think about it, and
       if they sell their hoarding space for next winter and suddenly
       find that in the middle of them they have to saw it in t w o . ...

    Q.   You were effectively giving a warning? - A. Yes, it is an
         administrative point rather than anything else.

    Q. Can we go on to your page 144, our page 256.     This is a memo
                                4G

                                                    W. EASTWOOD


     which is clearly passed on to you because it has clearly your
     writing at the top, of a conversation between Inspector
     Calvert and Mr. Strange, referring to the proposal.  The first
     one is.- "Could personnel doors be fitted into the two new
     walls".  I will come to that in a moment.  That is the wall
     behind the West Stand that has been talked about. - A. Yes.

Q.        "2) Wants central radial fence in addition to the one 2
          metres away from the R.H. fence.  Don't necessarily
          agree.  He said that Inspector Moseley and Dick" (Mr.
          Chester) " said yes".

          3)     Gate in perimeter fence between 2 m gap OK.".

     At the top you have said:

          "John, include central fence for time being if it does
          not make packing of spectators impossible".

     - A. Yes.

Q. It had originally been your intention in your conversation
   with Mr. Moseley as I understand it that instead of the
   dividing fence down the centre there should be instead this
   creation of the sterile area? - A. Yes.

Q. What Inspector Calvert was saying is, "No, we want both"? - A.
   Yes.

Q. And what he is apparently saying is that the Inspector and Mr.
   Chester had agreed to that? - A. Yes.

Q. And your comment is, "Yes, OK, if it does not make packing of
   spectators impossible"? - A. yes.

Q. What were you meaning by that? - A. We had already had this
   experience with the first radial barriers where there had been
   this long running discussion and correspondence about sawing
   through the crush barriers and so on, and here we were now
   putting another one in which would create similar difficulties
   and pressures to take out lengths of crush barrier, and this
   would make it difficult to get the necessary number of people
   in the right places.  The word "packing" should not be
   misinterpreted.  This is just the colloquial expression that
   is always used for getting the spectators into the right
   place.

Q. I don't think anyone would suggest and I certainly don't
   suggest you meant by that getting as many in as possible. - A.
   No.  What I had in mind is it might again create difficulties
   in the way spectators had to be routed if we had to alter
   crush barrier layouts.

Q. That is exactly so.  By this time I think it had become clear
   to you that the club was not going to be likely to put into
   operation your scheme because of expense? - A. 26th June.
   Yes, that is so.
7
                                 41

                                                     W. EASTWOOD



    Q. And that meant you were back in the old position of probably
       being unable to have any proper means of packing? - A. Yes.

    Q. And therefore it was still important and still a matter that
       was surely to be raised and taken into account that what would
       now become two small pens should themselves not be
       overcrowded? - A. That is so.

    Q.   Now, you had a figure of 2,200 for the existing? - A.   Yes.

    Q.   You were taking a bit of that away, which reduced its
         capacity.  You were putting a fence down the middle which
         split it into two? - A. yes.

    Q.   And you were having a possible effect upon the configuration
         of the crush barriers by doing that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was any consideration given to the capacities that ought to be
       assessed for the new pens? - A. Yes.  I can't tell you where
       but I am sure you will know from reading the documents that
       from time to time I raised the question of the effect on
       capacity if we took out barriers and so on.  I did not regard
       it as my job to try to make a calculation of these, certainly
       not in advance.  We did not know what we were going to be
       doing, but I did have in mind that there should be a
       downgrading if we took out important barriers, according to
       the then Green Guide.




                          /Q. And you were still very much
                                        42


                                                            W. EASTWOOD

    Q. And you were still very much aware, as you have told us,
       no doubt, of the need for control to avoid o vercrowding.
       A.   Yes.

    Q.   And that it could not be left to the s pe ct a to r s           to   find
         their own levels.  A.   Yes.

    Q.   You say that I must be aware of your r ef er en ce to capacity.
         I will be cor re c te d if I am wrong but I c er ta i nl y have not
         seen in the doc um en ts any record of your c on cern about
         capacity, other than one which appears at page 380 of our
         bundle.    Perh ap s we should read it with 379.         It goes
         on to the year of 1987, jumping ahead a bit.           A.    Yes,
         what page in your bundle?


#   Q.   It is 178 in yours,     Dr.    Eastwood   and 379 in ours.           A.     Yes,
         thank you.

    Q.   This is a record of a t el ep ho ne c o n v e r sa t io n b et ween Mr.
         Strange and Sharon - that is -----           A. Mrs. Lane.

    Q. Mrs. Lane and, as we see,             it is ticked    as having been seen
       by you.  A.   Seen by me,             yes.

    Q.   It is No. 3 that I am c on ce rn ed about.          This is in the
         context of, I think, some further i m p r o v e m e n t s ;     I am
         sorry, this was in the context of the holding of the Semi-
         Final that year at H i l l s b o r o u g h which was, I think, the
         first as it were c ap ac it y tsatch that was expected.         A.   Yes.

    Q.   "(3) Has any account been taken for a l t er a ti o ns done in
         Leppin gs Lane over iast few seas on s?   Is the 10,200 or so
         figure still c o rrec t? I said that in my opin io n it
         needs to be adjusted, better tlo it now than later.          It
         would also affect ticket sales for Cove nt ry game.        She
         will speak to Graham."    That is Mr. Mackrell.         A.     Yes.

    Q.   So there is Mr. Strange o b vi ou sl y aware that the figure
         is in need of some adjustment, no doubt, apart from anything
         else     because you have taken out a small area of the
         a va il abl e terrace.  A.   Yes.

    Q. And,    of course,    bec ause   of the pens.         A.   Yes.

    Q. And then over the page we have a note of a further con ve rs at io n,
       o b vi ou sl y Mr. Strange r in ging Sharon back.         "(3) Dr.
       East wood says leave the c ap ac it y at Leppings Lane end as it
       is, p r ovid ing police have gates under West stand open so
       that people can d is tr i b u t e t hr ou g ho u t the terr ac e evenly."
       What you appear to be saying there, Dr. Eastwood, is
       apart from, "leave the c ap ac it y as it is" that if the
       gates are left open the fans can find their own levels.
       A.      No, no.    Not entirely.

    Q.   That is what it a ppears to say.             A.     There was a
         c o n v e r s a t i o n between Mr. Strange and m y s e l f and now we
         were into the era of the new Guide which c ha nged the way
         in which you look at the c a pa ci ty of the terrace.               In the
                                     43


                                                      W. EASTWOOD

     old Guide it was a strict c a lc u la t io n init ia ll y on the
     width of a crush barrier times the dist an ce times 5.4
     and so on.      That produced, just to digress slightly,
     quite u nsuitable c o n s e q u en c es because if you took out a
     critical crush barrier you lost 30 s p ec ta to rs in a
     pen for 1,000.      You had taken it out, you took 30 off,
     970 came in and v irtual ly the same number stood in that
     place, even though you had taken it out, and so it was
     not a good system and so under the new Guide it had been
     changed and under the new Guide, p r ov id ed the barriers
     are gene ra ll y up to specifica ti on , you then look at the
     area as a whole and you apply a c or re c ti o n to the 5.4 s pe ct a to r s
     per metre, and in a pply in g that c o r r ec t io n you take account
     of such things as the slope of the t er race - and this is
     e x tremely good, this terrace, in terms of slope.           It is
     not good for viewing.

Q.   14°.        A.      14° which is very low compa re d with 30° at
     the other end of the ground and so on, so it is very safej
     it had at that time and has still what are the ideal step
     widths, so it is a good terrace.           My view was that the
     Working Party - and I did not know that the Safety C e r ti f ic a te
     was not being re- is su ed each year.        I thought that a Safety
     C e rt if i c a t e for this number -- well, it was in existence,
     of course, but I thought that it was being u p -d at ed each
     year, so I was under the i mp re s si o n that it was 10,200
     on the Safety Certificat e, so in that sense we were
     per fe ct ly alright.

Q.   Yes, but you knew that it was 10,100 on the Safety
     C e rt if ic at e but you knew it did not desc en d to the pens,
     did you not?         A.   I knew it --- ?

Q.    You knew itdid not descend to               the figures of the i n di vi du al
     pens?   A.There were no figures                  for  the i nd iv i du a l pens.

Q.   T ha t   is the   point.   A.        Yes.

Q. Why were there not?

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, I cann ot quite
     see what you thought would have been chan ge d by the u p -d at in g
     of the Safety Certificate.    A.   The total of 10,200
     bec ause we had taken out a bit of no-man's land.

Q.   I see.    You thought a c o rr ec t io n would have been made
     for that?    A.   Yes.

Q. But that would        not have ---            A.   About   140,   sir.

Q.   140?      A.   142, I think, to be precise.          Now, this is
     what we had in mind, that that 142, it could be argued,
     should be taken away from the 10,200.             As I u n de rs to od
     it, the Safety C e r t i f ic at e had not been chan ge d so the
     W orking Party - and we are not at their meetings;               we are
     not at any of their m eeting s but I had i ma gi ne d that the
     Wo rk in g Party at its p eri od ic m ee ti ng s would have been
1}

                                      44


                                                        W. EASTWOOD

          d is cu ss in g this matter and each year the C e r t i f i ca t e was
          being issued with a number which was, they considered,
          c or rect each year and we were not being consulted, but why
            should we be?        Now, Sharon had told John that the
          C e rt if ic at e said 10,200.   Here was this no-ma n' s land
          being created of about 140.         Now, b ec ause there was no
          means of co un ti ng people into the v ar io us pens, if you
          took off 140 there was no means of keeping the number
          in that slightly reduc ed pen below the 140.            You would
          still make a judgment as to w he th er it was packed and
          at 140 earlier you would say, "Stop".           Somebody was having
          to make a j udgment in front of that pen as to when it was
          full and it did not matter whet he r it was a s li gh tl y
          bigger pen or this one.         He was not c o un ti ng heads;
          it would be when it a ppea re d to be full.

     Q*        MR. COLLINS:         I am sorry, Dr. Eastwood, it is
          probably my fault but I do not follow that e x pl a na t io n
          at all because we are concerned, are we not, so far as
          the Safety C e rt if ic at e is concerned, with the m ax im um
          numbers that should be on that terrace?         A.    Exactly,
          it is the m ax i m u m on the terrace as a whole.

     Q. As a whole, I accept that, on the a s s um p ti o n that it is
        a t err ace which is undivided;   right?     That was the
        a ss umpti on upon which the original Safety C e r ti f ic a te
        number was granted.      A.   Not tf’&t I was w or k in g on.   I
        assumed that there was a new Safety C e r ti f ic a te based
        on the new arrangement.

     Q.   But if you had assumed a new Safety C e rt i f i c a t e based
          on the new arrangement, it should have been, as you have
          already agred, split up so as to identify and isolate
          each indiv id ua l part of the terrace that was d i vi de d into
          s e l f - co n t a i n e d pens; right? A. It should have ---

     Q.   That is what the Safety C e rt i fi c at e should have indicated.
          A.    I believe there was a Safety C e rt i f i c a t e for the pens,
          for the whole terrace as it now stood, which took account
          of the penning, etc., and which for some reason had been
          left at 10,200 and I asked myself, "Why has it been left
          at 10,200 when we have clea rl y taken away the space for
          142 people?"         And my thoug ht s were that the W or king Party
          had c o n si de re d all this and had decided that now, as they
          were allowed to under the latest Guide, to make an assessment,
          they had decided that all the i mp ro ve m en t s that they had
          made since 1979 were such that they could now say the 10,200
          is still alright, and bear in mind that the 10,200 is less
          than 5.4 and so my i n t e r p r e t a t i o n was that the Working Party
          had c o n si de re d it, they had said 10,200, they had taken that
          d ecisi on p roba bly beca us e it would either be m ed d li n g to
          knock off 142 or that they had decided that b ec ause of all
          the i m pr ov em en ts 142 was not of great c o n s e q u en c e and so
          it had been left.         So on that reas on in g I said to John
          Strange, "This is fine but do make sure that means of escape
          are alright, that the gates must be open betw ee n all the
          pens."
IM
i    i




                                           45

                                                               W. EASTWOOD

         Q.   Why do you say "so that people can d is tr i bu t e      thro ug ho ut
              the terrace evenly"?  A.   And that as well.

         Q.   That is the one thing which you reali se d was absurd and
              would not happen and was not a means of control.     A.   I
              wouldn 't have w ritten those words just like that.   I didn't
              write them.

         Q.   I know you did not but that was what a p pa re nt ly       you had
              conveyed to Mr. Strange ---

         Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       I thought the whole object
              of the pens was to stop people d i st r ib u ti n g t h em se lv es
              along the whole of the terrace.        A.   It was not for
              d is tr ib ut io n but I said this was because of people being
              able to get out;        they must be open - those gates.

         Q.          MR. COLLINS:     What you are saying is you have been
              m is qu ot ed by Mr. Strang e?  A.   I think that's it, yes.

         Q.   Is that what you are saying?    A.   Yes§   I am saying
              that, yes.    And the fact that I was possi bl y m is qu o te d -
              the i mportant thing is the gates must be open.

         Q. But, Dr. Eastwood, I can u nd er s ta n d your a rg um en t about the
            numbers if the terrace had been left as a whole and open
            as a whole but the one thing you did realise was that the
            Safety C e rt if ic at e was not d e s c e n d i n g to the i n di vi du al
            pens and the numbers in the indi vi du al pens.             A.      Yes.

         Q. And you have told us earlier today           that it ought to have
            done, in your view.  A.   Yes.

         Q.    Since you realise that it did not, why did you not follow
              that up, because here was the golden o pp or tu n it y ?
              A.    At this instant or at some other time?

         Q.   Yes, because here is the golden opportunity.      Here is
              the Club i tself saying, "Look, we had better see that
              ever yt hi ng is alright on the face of it" and asking for
              your advice and you are not giving it.      A.   But there
              would be no point in saying, "There must be 2,100 or
              2,010" - nobody could count them.

         Q.   Dr.   E astwood --    A.Please,   let me       finish.

         Q.    Of course.      A.  Here  we have got one big pen split into
              three or four and in no way can you count i n d iv i du a ls
              going into those pens.       On the day the t u r n st i le s are
              going to be used, or the tickets, to control it at 10,000-
              w h at ever it is, and the s p re ad in g of those people then are
              subject to Police control or who ever is r e s p o n s ib l e for
              control.      Now, they have to put them in the pens and
              get them as near as they can and then, with P o li ce me n on
              duty at those gates as is w rit te n or at any rate when the
              a ut horit y to put the pens in was given they had to be
              under Police control with Police at those gates so that
              only an e mergency or some bo dy with a good reason going
                                                         W. EASTWOOD

     through.    There you would have packed a pen, packed a
     pen, the others were filling up and e ve nt u al l y they would
     all be full.    Now, it was very i mp or ta nt that at that
     stage these gates should be open all the time.         I believe
     that is p erfectly logical and reasonable.

Q. But, Dr. Eastwood, you have already agreed with me earlier
   this m orning that, as I have said, there ought to be a
   c apacity put to the pens in the Safety C er ti f ic a te
   because that would provide at least a crim in al sanc ti on
   if it was o v er lo ad ed and would e n co ur ag e the Club, to
   say the least, to take steps to ensure that there was
   not overcrowding;       right?   A.     Yes.

Q.    Now, that being so, here you are info rm ed - it is made
     p e rfectly clear to you        - that the Safety Certificate,
     w hatever else it may do or may not do has not divided
     the c ap a c i t i e s on the West terrace into the c a p ac i ti e s of
     the pens; right?            A.    Yes.

Q.    All I am s u g ge st in g isthat, knowing that    and the Club
     having clearly asked you w het he r s o me th in g should be
     done about up-dating, you should not have said, "Well,
     look, wait a minute.           It is clear the Safety C e r ti f ic a te
     has not des ce nd ed to the pens.        We had better check
     this out and make sure that all is in order b efore you
     stage the Semi- Fi na l" or whatever.       A.    Can I go back
     to what we said before, earli er this morning, then*,
     when you asked me w hether it would be d es ir a bl e to have
     the numbers on the S fety C e r ti f ic a te b ec ause this would
     have made it p ossible to p r o se c ut e ?    That, of course,
     is not the kind of thing which natu ra ll y spri ng s to my
     engi ne er 's mind, the prosecution.        I am t hi nk in g of the
     logic of the sit ua ti on if the s ystem is prop er ly carried
     out.     I am not w orking on the a ss um p ti o n that somebody
     is going to break the law            -

Q.   No, of course not.      A.     The Police have been a s su ri ng
     us that they will control      the packing in these pens,
     the swi tc hi ng from one pen to another.       This is the whole
     object where the central barrier was put in.                We made
     those gates so that they could close one part              of that
     central area if one was filled before the other.                It
     was all in place for the control and so the q ue s ti o n I
     am being asked is,„ the C e r ti f ic a te which I had every
     reason to believe was an u p- do -d at e C e r ti f ic a te ---

Q.   It did not occur to you to ask to look at it?
     A.   No.     No.    This is not the normal thing.       I doubt
     if any c o n su lt in g engin ee r has looked at the Safety
     Certificate.        flaybe the first one because I saw the first
     one but after that the Club gets it and you do not go
     saying, "Can I call and see your Safety Certificate,
     please."

Q.   Or to check, simply to ask, "Has it been up-d at ed ?"
     A.   I would have expecte d to be told if it h adn't but,
                                               W. EASTWOOD

no, if that is c o n si de r ed to not be appropriate, the
fact that I didn't ask to see the Safety/Certificate,
then I was in error.

You see, it may be suggested, Dr. Eastwood, that the
reality is that neither you nor anyone else really appl ie d
your mind properly to the p ro bl em that was being created
by these pens, namely that they t he ms e lv e s were likely
to become o v e r c r ow de d unless very care fu l m o n i to r in g
was carried out.          A.    I was w o rk in g on the a ss um p ti o n
that good m o ni to ri ng would be carried out.           I had every
right to it.         It was a n on se ns e that these pens were
c o ns tr uc te d if it wasn't and we were assu re d all the
time that this is the whole object of the exercise.
When we put in the gates at the top we fixed those hasps
so that you ctuld fasten one when that was full and that
now needed a few more.          This was the whole object of the
exercise and I had every right to expect that it would
be carried out.

Indeed, but here it was being made clear that the Safety
C e r ti fi ca t e had not a pp ar en tl y been up-da te d to cater
for the cr ea ti on of the pens.            That is the first thing.
A.     Made clear to who?

To you, bee ause you knew that the general n umber was still
10,100 or 200 ---   A.  W ha te ve r the number is, yes.

And there was no s u g ge st io n that each i nd iv i du a l pen had
been i nd iv id ua ll y numbere d but one thing, surely, that
would have o ccurred to you when you c re at ed this new
radial fence in the middle of the pen was to say, "And
we must get numbers for each of the new pens."               A.    I
disagree.       I thought it was a useless exercise.            There
was no way of c ounting them in so from the sheer m ec h an i cs 0 f
i t     Probably from the p r o s e c u ti o n point of view it had
some merit but from any other point of view it would, with
respect, have been a useless exer ci se because there was no
way of c ounting the number of p eople in there.             It is just
in the same pos it io n as when it is the great -- when there
is a great open pen.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Dr. Eastwood, then does it
not come to this, that the a l t e r a t i o n   of putt in g in the
fences really fell bet ween two stools because you say
that if it had created the kind of totally separate entrance
and pen w a te rt ig ht comp ar tm en ts , then the Safety C e r ti f ic a te
should have had the numbers in and you could have m on i to r ed --
A.   It had to have, yes.

But what h appened was that you got the fences with ou t
the related s e gr eg at ed entrances; is that right?
A.   Your word - falling b et ween two stools, sir.

That s i t ua ti on really made it more i m po rt an t to moni to r
who went in because people could come in from a number of
diff er en t places into one of these now much smaller
sections of the terrace.        A.   Yes.
                               48

                                                 W. EASTWOOD

Q. And only by visual asse s sm e nt could anyone monitor
   how many were going in.            A.   This was the difficulty.
   It d ep en ded on visible assessment.         Neve rt he le ss , the
   Police and the Working Party had clearly believed, and
   I was never in on their d is cu s si o ns - had clearly believed
   that by putting in, by c o n s t r u ct i ng these pens that they
   were going to have better control over the nufflber of
   people c on g r e g a t i n g in that central area.




                                    /G o n II/   I   ask   you.
                             49

                                            W. EASTWOOD

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Could I ask you, what was the
     point of giving figures for the individual pens? A. The
     figure for the individual pens which was given in 1981 -
     and this was before the central barrier was in, and no
     other figures were given after that - the intention was
     that on a fairly frequent basis perhaps two of the pens
     would be allocated to one club and the other one to the
     home side;  that might happen.  If there wer£ going to
     be ticket sales or if they were to count in, what should
     the totals be for two pens, whichever two*

Q. So it is only ff you were going to use those pens? A. Yes,
   those two pens?  not just one,pen, sir, two.  So these
   were the figures that we gave them.  Now,if it was an
   all-ticket game where they are counted on the turnstile
   for just that one pen, the away supporters are only being
   given one pen and now they have got a figure which matches
   the certificate.  Those figures have caused so much
   confusion over the last six weeks, but they were issued
   for that purpose only.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:   Can I just follow this on? Could you
     turn to our page 278 which is a letter of the 15th August
     198S which is your page 164.  It starts at our page 277
     and your page 163.  Do you have that?   A. Yes.

Q. Can I ask you to turn to (c)? Incidentally, in fairness,
   perhaps I ought to refer to (b).   "This refers to the
   existing gate between the new 2m wide gap ..." and that
   is what is now Gate 5?   A. Ye»*>:
                                    -

Q. You say at the bottom:   "You will notice from the wording
   of David's minute that I persuaded them that steps could
   be used.  I have interpreted this as being from the inside
   only which means that we will not lose any of your
   advertising space".    A. Well, that w a s n ’t correct anyway.

Q. I see.    A. The adv@tfeisd.ng space wouldn't have been taken
   away.

Q. "(c) The other radial fence forming ttefe small visitors'
   pen has left a length of terrace without a direct access
   on to the pitch".  That, of course, is what you are
   referring to, what we have been calling pen 3?     A. Yes.

Q. ®TheEe is of coucfee ^ .ga§e at the top of the terrace
   connecting into the next pen and we had hoped that the
   police would accept that as an adequate means of exit in
   emergency.  However at the meeting they made the point very
   strongly that if someone had to be got out of the pen
   which has no gate or if there was misbehaviour, the police
   would only be.able to get in via the neighbouring pen,
   passing up the terrace..." and so on ... "They considered
   this unacceptable".   I just really wanted to question
   with you, Dr. Eastwood, your approach which appears to have
   been that there was no need to make an extra gate, or you
   are trying to argue that there was no need for an extra
   gate, to have an aecess from that new pen to the pitch?
                           50

                                            W. EASTWOOD

   A.  I don't say that.  I am explaining the background.
   Maybe the wording isn't very good.  I t ’s maybe not a good
   letter but I'm explaining the background.

Q. Well, you say "...we had hoped that the police would
   accept that", i.e. the gate at the top, "as an adequate
   means of exit, i.e. they would not need a new gate in
   the perimeter fence.    That is what you are clearly
   saying?   A.   Yes, but I don't think there was any argument
   about it.   I think that this was something we hadn't thought
   about very well, we had a meeting with the Police and
   I think the word "hoped" is wrong; we had "assumed"
   perhaps.  Then jthe Pdlice come along and say *©h no"
   and so we say "All right";   and then I say to him, I
   don't say I have put it in hand but I say it can be paid
   out of this contingency sum and I'm not asking for any
   more mon e y.

Q. Dr. Eastwood, when you say that, that suggests that you
   yourself had not of your own accord thought that such a
   gate was necessary?    A. That is probably so. That is
   so.   I don't pretend that I make the right decisions first
   time.   You know, on this sort of complex issue we are
   always feeding ideas to each other and in the end we hope
   that we get a very good consensus, good professional
   judgment and common sense;   the gate went in.

Q. I accept that the gate went in.  I was slightly surprised
   at your approach that the gatf«would not in any event
   have been necessary, because one would have thought if
   you are creating a new pen, the one thing that was
   clearly necessary was some means or emergency access or
   indeed ingress for Police purposes from the perimeter?
   A.  Yes, it is obvious I wasn't doing very good that day.

Q. I see.   I want to go on in time to 1986, if I may, to a
   letter of the 1st October 1986 which appears at our page
   372.   I do not think - I may be wrong - that it is in your
   bundle, this particular letter.   It is page 372 in our
   bundle.    it is a letter from you to Mr. Chester? A. Yes.

Q. It is signed by a member of your firm on your behalf?
   A. That is so.

Q. So presumably you were aware of the contents of the letter?
   A. Yes.

Q. You say, "During the summer inspection" - and by now of
   course we are in 1986 - "Inspector Calvert asked for some
   of the barriers at the Leppings Lane end of the ground to
   be removed so as to allow easier access into the various
   pens.  Rather than ask Ackroyd & Abbott's sub-contractors
   to do the work, who were at that time working overtime, we
   instructed George Shaw Engineering Ltd. to have the work
   completed before the Everton game.  This they did and today
   we have forwarded a certificate ... The original certificate
   is enclosed ... Payment should be received ..." We know,
                                          W. EASTWOOD

Dr. Eastwood, that one of the changes that was carried out
as a result of Mr. Calvert's request was the removal of
barrier 144, that is the barrier which was originally at
the mouth of the tunnel into pen 3? A. Yes.

That created a diagonal run down effectively from the
mouth of the tunnel to tthe barrier which collapsed?
A. Yes.

First of all in so far as this work is concerned, we have
no previous correspondence and certainly it does not
appear from any correspondence that I have seen - and
you will correct me if I am wrong - that the County Council
(or by then it would be the City Council) were ever notified
of this proposed work ---

     Mr. TOULSON:  Sir, before these matters proceed on a
false premise, at page 341 in the core bundle there is
John Strange's note of the working party meeting on the
7th August 1986, and the removal of 144 is item 2. Mr.
Strange apppars to have been the only person who made a
note, but I note that the statement of the Sheffield City
Council records that all other people were present there
and that this was a working party approved matter.

      Mr. COLLINS:  My friead is quite right.  It is my
fault.   I had mis-flagged that.  I withdraw that, of
course, Dr. Eastwood.   It does appear that certainly
 there was a reference to it at the working party meeting?
A.   It was a direct request orally and unfortunately it
seems it was never minuted except that we have a very full
minute taken by Mr. Strange.

Which is what Mr. Toulson has just referred to?      A. Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Thank you very much.

    Mr.   COLLINS:   But it is not entirely clear from   that ---

    Mr.   TOULSON:      The 7th August.

     Mr. COLLINS: It is a minute of the 7th    August, yes.
It is my fault entirely.   I knew of that.   I had simply
mis-flagged it.   Presumably, Dr. Eastwood, you told the
Club as well before the work was done?    A. Oh yes.   It
ILs now clear from the police records that the police had
told the Club about two or three months before that at the
next working party meeting they were going to request that
the barrier concerned was going to be taken down.    I had
not had any forewarning that that was going to happen. I
was not at this working parity meeting, though I was in fact
in the ground at the time. Mr. Strange was my representative
there.  He talked to me afterwards with this minute and he
told me that he had been impressed by what Inspector
Calvert had said and had not objected to the proposal.
Mr. Calvert or his colleagues in the police force are the
men actually absolutely on the ground at that glace and
they are the people wno nave to Bring their juagment to
                                              W. EASTWOOD

 b e ar , and they were very adamant that this was going to
 be very beneficial.

Of course, it had an important effect upon the safety
capacity of pen 3, did it not?   A John Strange cannot
remember exactly what he said, but what Inspector Calvert
had said was that in his view this would make the pen
safer.

Yes, but you knew, of course, that configuration of the
safety barriers was critical so far as capacity was
concerned, did you not?   A. Hot in the same way as it
had been after the 1976 guide.

Maybe, but it was still important? A. Inspector Calvert
apparently made the statement that in his view the safe
capacity of spectators would be increased by this rather
than reduced.  You are now at the stage where you assess
rather than doing stuns behind safety barriers.

I follow that. A. Now, that had been his view, that this
was such a beneficial thing from the point of view of
safety.

The reason, as I understand it, was because people coming
out of the tunnel were liable effectively to trip over that
barrier, if you see what I mean?  It was creating a block
to people coming out of the ----    A.  Creating a block,
not that they were to trip over it.

I am sorry, that was just an illustrative phrase. What I
mean is they were going to come into it and it was going
to create a block  at the tunnel mouth?   A. There was a
blockage occurring and it was preventing proper paekiea
further down.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am not quite clear.  Was this
a blockage which was causing trouble on egress or ingress?
A. Coming in, sir.

     Mr. TOULSON: Sir, I hesitate to rise again but I think
we have an idea of what the internal police thinking was ---

     Mr. COLLINS:    Yes, we do.

     Mr. TOULSON:        from page 319 in the core bundle.
                     -




     Mr. COLLINS:    Which is precisely why I was putting what
I was putting.

       M r . TOULSON: It is n o t , of course, a meeting which
D r . Eastwood had been at but what clearly led up to the
working party, the raising of it at that working party
meeting.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I am sorry, what page?
                              53


                                                    W. EASTWOOD

          Mr. TOULSON:    Page 319, "West Stand", half way down
     that page, sir.

          Mri,,COLLINSt   "...to assist the flow of fans..."

          Mr. TOULSON:    "into the ground".

         Mr. COLLINSf!    Yes, precisely.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What concerns me, Dr. Eastwood,
     is that the phrase "assist the flow of fans" sounds
     attractive, Jaut it could also have the effect of assisting
     the flow to an extent which caused crushing, which is what
     crush barriers are for, is it not?   A. Indeed, sir, it is.

Q. Would you like to respond to that?          A.    So many decisions
   of this kind ---

Q. No doubt if you took more out, you would get an even better
   flow?    A. So many decisions of this kind - not just to do
   with crush barriers but all other aspects of the ground -
   have to be made where there are conflicting benefits and
   disbenefits.  The working party is comprised (particularly
   someone like Inspector Calvert who has been involved with
   the ground for many years) of people highly experienced,
   professional people;  the working party is a very weighty
   one compared with some other authorities that I have the
   privilege of working with, and the views are respected.
   No way can I, as a person who doesn't have to police that
   pen, override Mr. Calvert.




                                   /Q. Yes, but Mr. Calvert is not...
                                54
                                         W. EASTWOOD


Q. Yes, but Mr. Calvert is not necessarily an expert in crowd
   safety on terraces, is he, he has a certain view that it
   would ease the ingress of spectators? - A. Well Mr. Calvert
   was putting forward a Police point of view.

Q. As my Lord has pointed out, the whole purpose of a crush
   barrier at that point is in part at least to prevent
   people being able to go straight down, isn't it? - A. It
   is so.  I think at some stage, my Lord, you might care to
   go and look.  It is very difficult to assess when you go

Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, go and look at what?
        - A. At where the barrier was taken out.

Q. Well I have seen it. - A. Well now sir I have looked again
   there and I can see the great dilemma - you can see where
   the barrier was - and I can see the great dilemma and I
   believe that there was a discussion as to whether another
   barrier could be placed elsewhere and this was not going
   to solve the problem and this very strong feeling on the
   part of the Police that there was going to be greater
   safety if it was taken out.

              Now we can all with hindsight know, but I have looked
        at that terrace and I was not at the meeting but I can
        understand exactly what Mr. Calvert was saying.

q   .         MR. COLLINS:  But Dr. Eastwood, you were being asked
        to approve this work.  You were yourself an expert.   Did
        you not consider it sensible that you consider it yourself
        and give your advice as to whether it was something that
        was desirable in safety terms? - A. I talked at length
        with John Strange.  I should explain that two days later
        I went on holiday, but I talked at length with John Strange
        after it.  He told me what had gone on.  I respect his
        judgment because he works not only at this ground but
        several others and he is very immersed in it. He felt that
        what was being said was reasonable and did not feel that
        we should object.

Q. Did you also consider the effect upon the safe numbers
   that ought to be allowed in that side? — A. Part of the
   conversation had been about safe numbers and Inspector
   Calvert had the used the words that in his view the safe
   number would be increased rather than reduced by this.

Q. What no one seems to have borne in mind is by creating that
   long corridor down, indeed you had referred to the vertical
   corridors as being an argument against the severing of the
   barriers? - A. Yes.

Q. True this was not a vertical but it was a diagonal corridor,
   wasn't it? - A. Well it is a corridor and not a gangway.
   It is very diagonal, not very diagonal it is quite diagonal
   and it is obvious that it does create a line along which
   pressure can flow.
                                 W. EASTWOOD


And sadly pressure clearly did flow on the afternoon of the
15th of April? - A. Yes, this is very sad and awful to think
about but this decision of the Working Party in my view
was not taken lightly and it was taken on good advice from
the Police.

Well whatever one says about the advice or whatever one
says about the lightness or otherwise of the decision,
the fact is that sadly that appears to have contributed
to the collapse of that barrier, doesn't it? - A. It is
quite likely that it did.

Can I finally deal with one or two miscellaneous matters
in relation to the Green Guide and what I would suggest
were certain defects in this ground.

      I will refer to the '86 because that is the one that
is applicable and according to the Safety Certificate
paragraph 15(1) which appears on our page 113. There is
a duty laid upon the Club to "maintain all structural parts
of the stadium in sound order and to the appropriate and
relevant standards in the Guide and in all cases to the
satisfaction of the Council."

      If we go back to the interpretation on page 109
we see that the Guide is defined in the middle of the page
as:

      "means the 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'
      as from time to time amended, issued by the
      Home Office, or such other code of practice
      as may be so issued."

So it would of course include the amended Guide as from '86,
and at the bottom:

      "Structural Parts - includes structures,
      components, installations, fabric and associated
      parts of the Stadium."

Which would include of course crush barriers and virtually
every fixture in the Stadium.  Right? - A.Yes.

So the duty is not to come near but actually to comply
with the Guide insofar as it deals with those matters.

      Now let us see one or two respects in which it does
not comply.  I am not saying necessarily these are or were
causative but it is perhaps symptomatic of an approach.

      Can I ask you for example to look at paragraph 65
of the new Guide which reflects 614.2 of the |76 one
if anyone is interested which says this, dealing with
exit doors:

      "Sliding or roller shutter gates should not
      be used because they are incapable of being
                                 W. EASTWOOD


      opened when pressure is exerted in the direction
      of crowd flow and have mechanisms or runways
      which are vulnerable to jamming.”

Now the exit gates at the Leppings Lane end were all, were
they not, sliding? - A. Sliding is the wrong word,no, they
are folding shutter.

They were not the sort of gates that ought to have been there
according to the Guide, were they, because there should have
been gates which opened outwards? - A. Yes.

And yet no one at any time had done anything  to change those
gates? - A. It had been a conscious decision. The matter
of gates at grounds has been taken extremely seriously by
South Yorkshire Fire Service who of course take prime
responsibility and what is more they take a firm grip on
it and they do do what they want.

      This matter was taken extremely seriously by their
representatives in '79, one of whom is now the Chief Fire
Officer Mr. Wright.  There was one occasion when he met
me at the ground at 5.30 in the evening and we were there
till after 9 going round the gates and so on.

      Now these gates work extremely well.  They (io slide
easily.  We know that on the day Gate 3 could be opened
easily despite the crush outside.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I think if you will forgive me,
Dr. Eastwood.  Counsel is only asking whether they complied
with the Green Guide? - A. In terms of opening outwards,
no.

      MR. COLLINS: And that therefore on the face of it
was a breach of the Safety Certificate, wasn't it, we have
just looked at paragraph 15(1).  There may have been reasons
for it, but it was on the face of it a breach? - A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose practically speaking
it would have this effect, wouldn't it, if the idea of
an exit gate is for exit and therefore it should open
outwards, it would become that much more difficult to
use it to let a pressing throng of people from the outside
who wanted to get in in, wouldn't it? - A. Yes, but it
made it impossible to open Gate 3 properly.

Well it may have cut both ways, one doesn't know ....    A.
One does not know.  There may be an occasion when you
genuinely want to use it.

      MR. COLLINS:  Paragraph 44, I appreciate you say the
turnstiles weren't directly your concern, but they are
part of the structure.  No, I think perhaps it is not a
fair point to put this against you.  I will raise this
with the City Council.
                                          W. EASTWOOD


     Can I go on to 57:  "Comprehensive system of signposting".
     There was not a comprehensive system, indeed there was
     hardly any system at the Leppings Lane end of signposting
     as to where people should go. Was that ever anything that
     you considered to be your concern? ~ A. No.

           MR. COLLINS:       It may be arguable that is not structural.

            MR. GLASGOW: With the greatest of respect I would like
      to know on behalf of the Club whether it is being put that
      a signpost is a structural part because if it isn’t we are
      playing games.

           MR.     COLLINS:   No, I think probably not.

Q. 215,sorry to jump   around a bit but this is a point effectively
   I have already made.  The perimeter gates ought to have been
   1.1 metres, they were not? - A. Yes.

Q. A clear breach of the Safety Certificate requirement.          That
   may have been a causative one too.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry, Mr. Collins, I keep asking
      you this:   are you coming back to gates any more.

            MR.    COLLINS:   No, I don't think I was going to.

Q.          LORD   JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I would just like to ask you
      this:  you   were talking about the conflict between the Police
      desire not   to let too many people out but to be able to let
      themselves   in in that kind of situation and the need too let
      people out   in an emergency? - A. Yes.

Q. There may be various designs which we have heard about in
   France and goodness knows else we will perhaps hear about,
   but in ordinary terms there is not a lot of difficulty
   is there in doing what one finds in many garage gates, of
   having a large gate when you want to get something big out
   and a small one in the middle of it when you want to get
   one person in? - A. That is a very good point sir.

Q. No problem? - A. No problem, no. Only one, of structural
   strength but that can be overcome or two different gates,
   one big and one small.
 q.         MR. COLLINS:  Yes, one thing I should have come back
      to on gates, you put you remember your special bolt on?
      - A. Yes.
Q. I am not going to go into the details of that, * A. Could
   I come back to my Lord?
 Q           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, by all means. - A. Just
       so that you should be clear sir, if you don't mind, as to
       what the thinking was about the gates, could I pass this
       to my Lord?
                                 W. EASTWOOD


      MR. COLLINS:   Is this a new one? - A. It is a new
one and it is something big enough to be able to hold up and
look at.   (Drawing produced)  In my own consideration of gates
on to the pitch, my Lord, in looking at these two central
pens and wondering what escape routes were needed, the first
consideration is that the 5 unit tunnel and when I say
"5 units" this is the 550mm of width through which one
person can go and it could be argued that it Is 6£ It was
6 before the radial barrier was put in because there is a bit of
encroachment, but it is either 5 or 6.




                      /Now that would be the
L)
                                   59

                                                       W. EASTWOOD


          Now, that would be the normal way out, and it gets you out
          well inside the 8 minutes which is required in emergency.     My
          thoughts when we were putting the gates at the top, the 2
          units and so on, were rather like this.    Suppose there was
          some emergency that shut that tunnel. Obviously there could
          not be a fire in that particular tunnel but say somebody put a
          bomb there, you have now got to get people out in 8 minutes.
          If you look at the 2 units to the top left, 2 units to the
          top right through these gates, that is 4, and if you count the
          gates on to the pitch, which are very adequate for 1 unit, you
          have 6 units of exit from that area.   My belief was that even
          if somebody blocked the tunnel there were 6 units of exit,
          which at 360 per minute, 60 per unit width, would take
          something like 6 minutes to completely empty those two p e n s .
          This appeared to me to be very reasonable secondary emergency
          exit.   I had no idea it could possibly happen that gates could
          be open, that gates would not be open, and that there would be
          people trapped there for a long time as there were.   I
          believed I had a very reasonable secondary escape system in
          place, even though only two were on to the pitch.   With the
          other two you could completely replace the tunnel and get
          everybody away.

     Q. I am not sure that can be right, with respect to you, because
        the one thing we have made absolutely clear throughout all
        this is that the exist gates or the gates on to the pitch were
        not treated and were never treated as emergency evacuation
        gates for the purpose of determining capacity?

     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Speed of evacuation. - A. A gate
          is a gate.  The gate has a quick release device.  It has got
          somebody outside.  It could therefore in my thinking become an
          exit gate.

     Q.        MR. COLLINS:   If it was to be an exit gate then even
          under the 1976 Guide it must be 1.1 m at least, if it is going
          to be used as an exit gate.  That is paragraph 15.5.3. - a.
          This is looking at it, if you like, legalistic is the wrong
          word, but the common sense view is that there is a gate with a
          quick release device, a Policeman standing beside it, and if
          people want to get out they can get out of that gate.

     Q. But all I am suggesting is that this is a ex post facto
        justification for something which was not actually part of the
        thinking at the time? - A. That is completely incorrect.  At
        the time when these radial barriers were put in I had great
        cause for concern to think what the effect would be, and I did
        think about it.

     Q. Particularly when in pen 3 you were concerned that it would
        have been perfectly all right for there to be no exit gates
        through the perimeter fence? - A. We still had 5 units of exit
        just like the tunnel.

               MR. COLLINS:  Sir, I have very little more.  Do you want
          me to finish it? I have got about two or three minutes, I
          hope.
                              60

                                                   W. EASTWOOD



          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     That would be the best thing, I
     think.

Q-        MR. COLLINS:   Can I go back to the 1986 Guide, paragraph
     110.  Before I do, those perimeter gates, the device, can I
     ask you this.  Were they designed so they could open if there
     was sufficient pressure from inside? - A. No.

Q. Do you know whether that is in fact possible? I think you
   have done some tests? - A. We have done a test with the full
   test load applied, the same that you would put on a crush
   barrier, and the gate did not push open.  It was fairly easy
   to open it with one hand, your left hand, standing aside so
   when it flew open.

Q. The reason I ask you this is that we have had evidence from at
   least two witnesses and may be more in this Inquiry that that
   gate did open spontaneously, gate 3, as a result of the
   pressure from inside? - A. This is not inconceivable, the
   principle.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Do I gather you would have to have
     a pressure substantially greater than your test load pressure
     to do it? - A. Yes.   We have tried to - we have not tried to
     design it so that it will fly open, but it has to be a very
     balanced situation.   The effort required to open the gate must
     be fairly constant whether there is pressure on it or not.
     So what we do is to arrange the two sliding parts to be
     roughly at the angle of friction, which Prof. Maunder will
     know about, so that if there is pressure on them they can
     still slide relative to each other, and then to make sure it
     stays shut we have a control spring, and we hope that that
     spring keeps the pressure required to open the gate constant,
     but if we get our angle slightly wrong then either it becomes
     more difficult to open the gate or it could conceivably under
     extreme pressure go open on its own.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:    110 of the 1986 Guide, heights of crush
     barriers.   Indeed, that is the same as 7.76 in the old one.
     The heights are in a number of these crush barriers below what
     they should be, no doubt because of the concrete that was
     built it. - A. Yes.

Q.   Again, that is on the face of it a breach of the safety
     certificate? - A. On the face of it a divergence from.  I have
     a very good reason for it, and if this were being taken as a
     serious point I would like to talk about it, sir, now or after
     lunch.

Q. We can come back to that if it is considered necessary. - A.
   Yes.

Q.   Finally, the ramp, 87 to 88.  I d o n ’t want to go into this in
     detail because you argue this in detail in your proof. The
     only thing I want to ask you is this.      Did you consider that
     at the time? - A. Yes.
                             61

                                                  W. EASTWOOD



Q. Did you ever raise or was it ever raised to you in any of the
   meetings that this tunnel had a gradient that was too high? -
   A. Yes.   I discussed this I am sure with the Fire Service the
   night I went down with Mr. Wright, because I remember going
   through the tunnel with him.   There was also a day when the
   full working party went round when we discussed a series of
   matters to do with ramps, three of them, and this was one of
   them.   The other two something was done about them, and this
   one was left.

Q.   I appreciate what you say about it being for egress rather
     than ingress.  Of course, the distinction is not made in the
     Green Guide? - A. No, but the Guide is not perfect though.

Q.    No, but the fact is if it ever should happen as it happened
     here that a large number of people happened to come down, then
     it is a potential danger, is it not? - A. Yes.   One does not
     foresee this kind of thing happening.   With hindsight one can
     see, but one has to use professional judgment and common
     sense, and you get caught out sometimes.

Q. It may be expensive, but it looks as if that tunnel may have
   to be re-engineered or redesigned.

          MR. COLLINS:   I think I can leave it at that, subject to
     anything I think of over the adjournment.

                       Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. Do you want to say what you want about the height of the
   barriers now, or would you rather do itat quarter-past-2? -
   A. It might take 5 minutes or so, sir.

Q. All right.   It seems a very proper time before we adjourn. -
   A. Could I please pass some photographs to my Lord and to
   counsel.   (Photographs produced bv witness) The essence of
   it, my Lord, is that the Guide says that the height of the
   step should be measured from the top of the step behind the
   barrier.   In other words, assuming that the person who is
   leaning on the barrier is going to be standing on a step
   above.   Now, the first two photographs show typically first
   the old barriers and then my barriers. M r . Strange is shown
   on the third photograph standing on the step with a scale
   beside him, and the fourth photograph shows Mr. Strange
   standing on the step behind. That is a most unnatural
   posture, and certainly in a crowd there is no way your feet
   would stay there.   You would end up in the position of
   photograph 3.   There is always an edging forward.     You move
   your foot and somebody e l s e ’s foot goes in behind you.  From
   observation that is how people stand, photograph 3.

          Now, if those barriers had been further back the Guide is
     right, but when as you see - we are not near enough - but you
     see the photograph over there, or these, you see that in
     general these barriers are set sufficient forward on the steps
     for the natural position to be on the same step.  Now, that
                        62

                                              W. EASTWOOD


makes 4 inches difference to the height of the barrier.  My
barriers are the ones that are too high, sir, because they are
designed in accordance with the Code, my barriers come on me,
and I am a tallish man, there. the most damaging part of my
anatomy, just below my rib cage with all the organs inside.




                             /If I were a woman
                                  63

                                                     W. EASTWOOD

     If I were a woman, it would be t h e r e :        a child, it would
     be t h e r e . and my barriers, in a c co rd an ce with the code
     are too high for safety.            Those barriers that are there
     are much safer.         In general, the pres su re comes across
     the hip-bones.         It depends how rounded one is but pres su re
     is through your hip bones, with the s t re ng th of the bone,
     the p res sure from behind, I do not beli ev e there w ould be
     nearly so much damage to the anat om y for a p at ho l og i st
     to say.         In other wor ds , my b elief is that the Guide
     should say due care should be taken to make sure that it
     is the step behind that is a p p ro p ri a te for that p a r t ie u la r
     barrier.         You should make a judgment of it.         Also the
     r eq ui re me n t for 1.1metres should      still be look ed at because
     1.1 metres is still there for me, and I am tallish,
     which is a dang er ou s place, but the 1.1 metres may be
     alright but c e r ta in ly not if you are on the wrong step.

Q.   I follow that.         Of course, you cannot    p o ss ib ly get it to
     fit everybody.          A.   No, it is a most   d if f ic u lt p ro bl em
     but I believe the balan ce has not been         struck in the Guide.
     C e r t a in ly the one about the step needs     re-writing.

Q.   What it comes to is that t ec hn ically, if we are going to
     look at the Guide as the criterion, there were breaches
     here, but you say the Guide shou ld be changed.    A.  Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:      Thank you,     we will break now.

                           (Luncheon adj ou rn me nt )
