From: Peter Edmundson                                       cc Mr Boys Smith
      Operational Policing                                     Mr Pugh
      Policy Unit
      Room 527, QAG
      9 273 - 2621
      4 March, 1998


Home Secretary )
               )      Simultaneously
Mr Howarth     )

HILLSBOROUGH: MEETING WITH LIVERPOOL MPs

You asked for updated briefing on Hillsborough for the meeting with the Home
Secretary and Liverpool MPs. This is attached.

2.     Only part of the material considered by the scrutiny has so far been placed in
the House of Commons Library. In particular, we are still in the process of
photocopying some 1000 statements from South Yorkshire Police officers and do not
expect to have this completed for another week. (We have to provide six copies of
each document). Since we are dealing with the original documentation, this work has
to be done with some care.

3.     The specific points raised in Ms Rushton’s e-mail commissioning this updated
brifing are covered in the attached material. In short, we cannot say yet whether the
DPP will take over any private prosecution. The courses of action open to the DPP are
included in the briefing.

4.    The briefing covers Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s unfortunate comments about
Liverpool fans and his apology.

5.     We have added to the video evidence section what Lord Justice Staurt-Smith
had to say about the CCTV system and Mr Houldsworth and have added to the
aftermath of the disaster and the inquest section the quote from Counsel to the Family
Support Group in their submission to the scrutiny about the impracticality o f covening
new inquests.

6.   We have added a line to take about why the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire received an advance copy of the report.

7.    I also attach the Hansard extract of the Home Secretary’s announcement.




                              Peter Edmundson



f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: INDEX OF BRIEFING

Chronology of events

GENERAL ISSUES

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry of Bloody Sunday
either?

Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
comes to light?


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?


THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

What about the new evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards?

Why not order a fresh inquest?

Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy
of the emergency care provided to the victims?

What does the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the inquests?

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

Inquests and disasters general

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of
the Hillsborough disaster?


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing
statements about the disaster?


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered before
being submitted as evidence?


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

Why haven’t you published appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

Is the Home Secretary aware of complaints of material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
WIDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t escape
punishment?

Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?


BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - min-inquests to identify each of the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174
witnesses at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently
passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating
to the incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the
absence of the more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s
proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard
promised to consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FOR THE STATEMENT

GENERAL

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Yes. It was important that there should be an independent and thorough examination
of material which the families and others had brought to our attention, so that it could
be determined conclusively whether earlier proceedings should be re-opened.

I hope that everyone, including the families when they have had the chance to read the
report in full, will accept that these matters have been fully investigated and that there
is no further action which it is appropriate to take.


Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

No. LJ Stuart-Smith has carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive
report sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his
conclusions, with which I agree.

It is, of course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish. But there
can be no justification for calling it a whitewash.


Why was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire given the report before it was
published?

The Chief Constable is mentioned in the terms of reference for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny as the disciplinary authority for South Yorkshire Police and therefore
one of the parties to whom the report is directed.

It was entirely proper that the Chief Constable should be given the opportunity to
consider the report once it was submitted by LJ Stuart-Smith.


Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry of Bloody Sunday
either?

The decision to establish a fresh inquiry into an incident such as Hillsborough or
Bloody Sunday cannot be taken lightly. It is only justified when there are grounds for
believing that the conclusions reached originally may be in doubt.

The Prime Minister made it clear that the weight of material now available about
Bloody Sunday is such that the events require re-examination.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

LJ Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference were very wide. They tasked him with
establishing whether any material evidence was overlooked in the consideration of the
causes of the disaster or the consideration of criminal or other proceedings. He was
also able to recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I am satisfied that he has been able to carry out a thorough scrutiny of all the evidence
which was submitted by the families and others.



Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been aired publicly before.

What the scrutiny had to consider was, not only whether the evidence put forward was
new, but also whether it was credible and of such significance that it would justify a
new inquiry, or some other action. This is what LJ Stuart-Smith has now reported on.


Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

West Midlands Police submitted a full report on their investigation o f the
Hillsborough disaster to the DPP. The DPP announced in September 1990 that no-one
would be prosecuted.

The DPP took advice from two experienced Queen’s Counsel [one being the present
Lord Williams] and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to bring charges
against either Ch. Supt. Duckenfield or Supt Murray.

This was a decision for the DPP on the fevidence available. LJ Stuart-Smith has found
no grounds to recommend that the DPP reconsiders this decision.


Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

That is a matter for the Director and the CPS. It would be inappropriate for me to
speculate.

If pressed

If there is a private prosecution, the CPS could consider whether to intervene. The
options available to the CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it; or to
take it over and discontinue it.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
If the CPS decided not to intervene, the prosecution would remain with the private
prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.


What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Following his appointment on 30 June last year, LJ Stuart-Smith examined the
evidence from the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as well as other material from police
records.

He visited Hillsborough Stadium and went to Liverpool to meet many of the families
of the victims.

He received submissions from Counsel for the Family Support Group and others. He
also had meetings with a number of other people who contacted him or who he felt
could help him with his scrutiny.

A list of those whom LJ Stuart-Smith met or received representations from is set out
in Appendix 1 of his report.


Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from
the start?

LJ Stuart-Smith said, on the record, that he deeply regretted this remark, which he
made off-the-cuff and without any intention for it to be taken seriously or to offend.


Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

LJ Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected judge from the Court of Appeal whose
experience has been invaluable in assessing the evidence presented. He has produced
a very comprehensive and detailed report and I am very grateful to him for looking at
these issues so carefully.


Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further
evidence comes to light?

It is very difficult to imagine what material new evidence could emerge after the
exhaustive inquiries which have already taken place and the length of time which has
elapsed.

I cannot rule out the possibility that new evidence will come to light, in which case I
will consider it, but I am strongly o f the view that we have investigated the material
events at Hillsborough as far as it is possible to do so.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
LJ Stuart-Smith is clear in his report that there was nothing which he considered
which added anything significant to the evidence already considered by the Taylor
Inquiry and the Inquests.


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

LJ Stuart-Smith has examined all the available video evidence. He has concluded that
there is no new video evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry,
the Coroner or the other authorities investigating the disaster.

He has established that the 'missing’ footage obtained from Yorkshire Television is
taken from copies of the police tapes supplied by the force and that the police tapes
were made available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Coroner and to the legal
representatives at the Inquest.

What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

The theft o f two video tapes, stolen from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s
Control Room on the day of the disaster, was investigated by the West Midlands
Police. They are still missing. These were not police tapes but contained pictures
from the club’s CCTV cameras. LJ Stuart-Smith’s view is that the tapes did not
contain any significant material.

What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?

LJ Stuart Smith has considered the evidence of the technician (Mr Houldsworth)
responsible for the club and police CCTV systems, and that given by the police
officers at the Inquest.

He has concluded that there is no evidence of the police blaming a faulty camera for
their failure to establish overcrowding.

In his report, LJ Stuart-Smith states 'The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s
evidence is new and might have an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to
submission 5. [That is to say that Mr Houldsworth could see from monitoring the
police cameras that the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx of extra
spectators through Gate C would create a dangerous situation.] For the reasons I have
given I am unable to accept that his recollection of events is now accurate. Even if it
was correct, it would not have any effect on the previous proceedings. It would simply
have been the evidence o f one more person who thought that the central pens were full
at 14.52.’




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

What about the new evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards?

Dr Walker made a statement which was available at the time (contained in Appendix
5). His evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not add significantly to that
(C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 21). Mr Edwards also gave a statement at the time
(Chapter 3, paragraph 34). His latest statements and evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith add little of substance to his previous account (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 40).
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that Mr Edwards’ criticisms of the ambulance
service are misplaced (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 100).

Why not order a fresh inquest?

That is a matter for the Attorney-General who has the power under S. 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988 to make, or give authority to an application to the High Court to
hold a fresh inquest and to quash the original verdict. LJ Stuart-Smith found no basis
to impugn the accidental death verdict or for the Attorney-General to exercise his
powers.

Counsel for the Family Support Group stated '... it is accepted, eight years and a half
years after the event, that it is impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh inquests
to be convened.’ It was argued, though, that the the Courts should be invited to quash
the verdict of accidental death. LJ Stuart-Smith says that the effect of quashing the
verdict without substituting any other verdict would be the same as if the jury had
returned an open verdict and that is only appropriate where there is insufficient
evidence to record any other suggested conclusion. In practice, he says, there were
two alternative verdicts - unlawful killing or accidental death.

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function o f a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame. An
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the
inquest verdict does not deprive any person of any civil remedy which otherwise
might be available. (As the Taylor report made clear, the main cause of the disaster
was the failure of control by the South Yorkshire Police.)


Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

LJ Stuart-Smith found no reason to criticise the use of the cut-off point. It was never
suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before 3.15pm or that the
medical evidence was to this effect. (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 12). The jury heard
evidence about people who did not die until after their arrival at hospital or who
regained consciousness after resuscitation, or who were otherwise treated and
recovered (C h a p t e r 3 p a r a g r a p h s 58,59 a n d 60). Evidence that some people died
after 3.15 would not therefore effect the outcome of the inquest.



f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
As the Judge’s report notes, this issue was thoroughly examined by the Divisional
Court in 1993 when it refused an application to have the Inquest verdicts quashed.

The use of the cut-off point at the Inquest applied to the consideration of how the
victims died, not the other questions before the Inquest. The evidence was that all
those who died had suffered their injuries by 3.15pm. There was no other cause of
death. The use of the cut-off point in these circumstances was, therefore, considered
reasonable.


Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the
adequacy of the emergency care provided to the victims?

The purpose of an inquest is solely to find out who the deceased was and how, when
and where he or she came to their death. The response of the emergency services to
the disaster was covered by the Taylor Inquiry and its findings are the set out in that
report. _

The Taylor Inquiry looked at this extensively. In addition to oral written evidence
from many supporters and police officers, and many written statements, Taylor took
oral evidence from: four St John Ambulance personnel; the deputy chief ambulance
officer from South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) who was in
charge at the ground; two other SYMAS officers who were at the ground; two senior
ambulance officers from headquarters control; five fire brigade officers; and five
doctors (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h s 79 - 84).

LJ Stuart-Smith has reported that he found no evidence of lack of care on the part of
the emergency or medical services and that a further investigation of this aspect of the
disaster would be of little purpose.


What does the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the
inquests?

LJ Stuart-Smith highlights the exceptionally difficult task which the Coroner, Dr
Stefan Popper, had in conducting the Inquest into this disaster. He did not find any
substance to criticisms about the conduct of the Inquest or to suggestions of bias on
the part of the Coroner.




Inquests and disasters

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
findings of a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of
the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report
provided the fullest possible examination of the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.


What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so.

The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.




INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into
changing statements about the disaster?

LJ Stuart-Smith investigated allegations that investigating officers from West
Midlands Police pressurised certain witnesses into changing their evidence. He
interviewed three witnesses, Derek Bruder, Debra Martin (a former special constable)
and Paul Taylor but concluded in each case that there was no improper attempt to
affect their evidence.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A number of statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions of the Director of Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events of 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority of cases, no recommendations were
made on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove
comment, hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of a
similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does
not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he
believes it would have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made,
because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were
implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or
other proceedings.


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada
drama “Hillsborough”?

LJ Stuart-Smith has addressed each of the ten questions in appendix 10 of his report,
either by direct reference to the Taylor report or to the available evidence.

He is satisfied that the answers are quite evident and that they support the main
conclusion o f the Taylor Inquiry about the failure of police control.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

I made it clear when I announced the scrutiny that I would publish as much of the
evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as possible.


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
Much of the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result
of the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. I am placing in the Library copies of material which
is not already publicly available and which it is appropriate to publish.

We are still in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to
material which they supplied being placed in the library.


Why haven’t you published appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

A number of families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent
evidence of the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases
in appendix 9 of his report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of
evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I have decided
that it would be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the
families concerned direct and not include them in the published report. I am sure that
the House will appreciate my reasons for doing so. If the families wish to make public
the material in appendix 9, that is, of course, a matter for them.


Is the Home Secretary aware of complaints of material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?

LJ Stuart-Smith addressed this complaint as part of his scrutiny. He invited any of the
families who felt that material had been withheld from them to contact him so that he
could investigate. Two families did so, but the Judge confirmed in both cases that
nothing of significance had been omitted by the police.

LJ Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he was given unrestricted access to the records
held by South Yorkshire Police.


WIDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

As I indicated in my statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police
discipline system.

I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its
recommendations for closely. I hope to respond shortly.


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

There is the potential for the disciplinary process to be brought into disrepute by the
inappropriate use of medical retirement. I am considering the recommendations of the
Home Affairs Select Committee for tightening the discipline rules and I will respond
shortly.

The existing police pensions regulations provide for retirement to be held over until
discipline proceedings have been concluded, but where there is no prospect of an
officer recovering his health to face discipline proceedings it is right that he be
allowed to go.


Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for
any hurt or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a
decision for the individuals concerned and the courts.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
BACKGROUND


The Taylor Inquiry

• The terms of reference for the Inquiry were:

   To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April
   1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
   sports events.

• 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

• 71 hours of film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  and the BBC.

  Interim Report

• The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
  stadium on the day of the disaster.

• The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match
  arrangements, such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield
  Wednesday’s arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It
  also considered the build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of
  the terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts,
  events in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for
  example tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency
  services.

• A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

  - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
  - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
  - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
  - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
  - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
  - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
  - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

• On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
  reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

• The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.



f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
• In the view of South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised
  in the Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
  recommendations being made in respect of eight of them.

• In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he
  considered to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could
  be safely used in the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to
  be carried out with immediate effect.

  Final Report

• The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It
  concentrated on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of
  measures to improve safety at sports grounds.

• The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment
  of all seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect of
  the top divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of
  spikes and overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

• Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number of
  spectators to be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety
  Certificate. There was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should
  be reviewed.

• The report recommended a written statement of intent be agreed between the club
  and the police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control,
  with particular reference to the filling of each pen.

• There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role of the
  police and the responsibilities of senior officers.

• The co-ordination of the emergency services and the provision of first aid, medical
  facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations of the final
  report.

• The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord
  Justice Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or
  towards the pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and
  going on to the pitch without lawful authority or excuse.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:

1.     Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21
days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.     Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build
up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

3.     Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it
should have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the
Liverpool fans safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.    Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when
eye witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the
problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

5.      Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
full, the procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.       Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order
for it to be opened?

7.     Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10
foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the
pitch too small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as
to what was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the
ground to help - until 3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the
pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical
help?

10.   Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
            1085
                                                                          18 FEBRU ARY 1998
                                                                                                                      Hillsborough
                                                                                                                                                          1086

                                     Hillsborough                                           T h e m ain cau ses o f the disaste r h a v e lo n« been clear

         3.31 pm
                                                                                          he b E              •   ?   JUSt'Ce T ayl0r did not ^ tr ib u te all
        ™The, S<;Cretary 0f State for the Home Department                                ’ 78 ot
                                                                                         -78  o fhis
                                                                                                  ? report
                                                                                                       3 S1u§  ° aUSe
                                                                                                           he made    ° r Pers0n'
                                                                                                                   it clear that but in P^agraph
        I^hniiiHCr t            !raW)L Wlth Permission, Madam Speaker,
                                                                                         "the main reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control".
        stadium S t e r                 2             ab° Ut the Hillsb°rough

                                                                                        have ^ 7         ayl0r' a n d un0W L° rd Justice Stuart-Smith.
        manevWr , 3 STh refCent,.years have touched the lives of so                     o ffiL   n       T nmg inu        condemnation of the senior
        fans who The.familiesifn d friends of the 96 Liverpool                           tticer in      charge that afternoon, the then Chief
       immeasurably TlL "h ,HlllsborouSh have suffered                                  »Uf m i ninKh                         L° «             S tu a n -s S
                 l   ?    Wh0le natlon has been profoundly                              rerers      nis report to
       disturbed by what occurred that day. Although almost
                                                                                        "Mr. Duckenfield's disgraceful lie"
       0 hers         C n° W paSSCd’ many of the families and
       ataHable fhlf*7    u"® Y mdeed that new evidence was                             about one o f the gates at Hillsborough—
       H o m fi     f W°, d cast new HSht on the events. As                             "Gate C being forced open by fans".
                          WaS determined to do all that I could
       to establish whether that was indeed the case.
                                                                                       m J ! 16 h ° Uth y ° rkshire police have in turn accepted the
         On coming into office in May last year, I gave that                           V u L ir ?         fe^ 0? sibility for the disaster. Sheffield
       question intense and urgent consideration, and on 30 June                       Wednesday jotball club and the local authority were also
                                                                                       criticised by Lord Taylor.                         Y
      1                   H° USe 11131 1116 Attorney-General and
      I had decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
      a senior Lord Justice of the Court o f Appeal to conAici                            With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that.
                                                                                                   S° me nCW ‘"formation may become available,
      re fe r e n c e ^ e r e " “ n '“ ny ° f                  H is ttrm s ° f          but that does not necessarily mean that the outcome of
                                                                                       any previous inquiries would have been different. What is
      at 1 °               wh.ethcer any evidence exists relating to the disaster      crncial is not just whether the information is new, but
      available;         roUS          "" ° "   15 April 1989 which was not                        f °I       significance— to use the phrase in
                                                                                       the terms of reference—-as to justify a new inquiry.
      (a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or
                                                                                        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail
      (b) to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                                                                                      al the evidence put before him. That included all the
                                                                                                    Ch h°e f refented t0 ^ earlier inquiries and
                                                                                      inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
  X                                    s“ h v» ksSi» —           <* —         »       information presented to him, by individuals and official
                                                                                      „;°h 'e S
                                                                                              . : lnclu<Jmg those representing the families of those
  and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not w ev io u slv
                                                                                         ho died and others who have acted in support of them.
  W t a ^ o ^ S t a t f f 5'8 ^ ' 0^ 06 “ t0 juStify establishm ent by the            He has produced a thorough and comprehensive report
  ;ne" f tai7 ° f . Statf for ^ H om e Department o f a further public
                                                                                      and goes into immense detail to analyse and reach
  -     d      ^                                                                      conclusions on each of the submissions made to him.

                                                                                                             y summar*se what Lord Justice
                                                                                      Stuart-Smith says on the key allegations relating to video
 whirh i        Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report,                            evidence and the cut-off time of 3.15 pm for the inquest,
 Office h " 1 P f Sh'n g utoday- 11 is available in the Vote                          and allegations of interference with witnesses. I refer first
             scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and                        to the video evidence. Two sets o f allegations were made
 nnW      exanunations of the evidence in this case. The                               o Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about video evidence. They
 public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor                                  were, first, that video tapes were stolen from the club’s
 considered fully the causes of the disaster and made                                control room to conceal material evidence from the earlier
 wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and                                inquiries. There is no dispute that the theft of two tapes
 S S?        ° rtS CVuntS- Those have had a Profound and                            took place. The tapes were pictures from the club’s closed
 anH nVefh      l 0n   ? Crowd safety at football grounds                           circuit television cameras, not from p o lic e cameras.
 and on the policing o f football matches.
                                                                                    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that, in any event, the
      The deaths that occurred were also the subject of                             tapes would have shown nothing significant. Moreover,
                                                                                       e is satisfied that all the police tapes were made available
oT soifthY t Cht?d by thC C° r0ner for the Western district
  South Yorkshire in two parts in 1990 and 1991 Those                               m their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and to the
                                                                                    coroner.
A T n h V ^ 01^    m° re than 80 days o f Public hearings.
            myest'gation was conducted by the West
                                                                                        The second allegation relating to video tapes, with
Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints
                                                                                     which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals at considerable
Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds
                                                                                     length, was made principally by Mr. Roger Houldsworth.
or criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the police.
                                                                                    a video technician at Sheffield Wednesday football club.
s ta lZ f I f T      mV° 1Ved taking more than 5,000                                It was that the police had blamed their failure to s e e .
review of rh^ 3       S>tagC’ m November 1993, a judicial                           overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 beine
v e X If       C° r0nf ’s Proceedings upheld the inquest                            defective, when it was not; that evidence of the video
p r^ e e d in L w   i   death and the conduct of those                              tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately suppressed and
scmttnv hv a      • have "fow had this further detailed                             concealed; and that two police officers gave deliberately
scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.
                                                                                    false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.
       553     cdi ;:. pag:/’
            1087
                                                       Hillsborough
                                                                                                    18 FEBRUARY 1998
                                                                                                                                                     Hillsborough
                                                                                                                                                                                                ION
           I Mr. J a c k S tr a w )
                                                                                                                        authorities that could cause them ^
                                                                                                                        decisions that they have already taken H re.conslder '1:
             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith savs that the nolice Hi i
                                                                                                                        that none of the evidence that'he was ^ 1 ^ ° Concludc
           not try to blame their failure to spot overcrowding
                                                                                                                        added anything significant to the e v i d e ^ c ^ h ^ '* ’1'
                                                                                                                        available to Lord Taylor s inquiry or I0 ^ T n , ^ . “ “
                                                                                                                        I. the Attorney-General and the Director of Pnhr
                                                                                                                     Prosecutions have considered Lord J u s t i c e s L e
                                                                                                                     report very carefully. We have no reason 0 ^           ^
          M          s       v           i       i : ; 0r           t a ',r,hs • * »            -       -            conclusions. That will, I know be deenlv h,               .hl>
                                                                                                                     tor the families of those who died at H nilh       ? P0,ntln-
                                                                                                                     ™ n y who have c a n - p a i ^ S                      ^ f° r


                                                                                                                                                                          l0SI loved « * ■

         inquest6 anrf ,allegationf about the conduct o f the
         T % r. ’ ^        Particular about the cut-off time of                                                     S        =      5        &       t t s          =         3       =   M
                                                                                                                    that such a disaster will never happen a g ain .^
         caused’ m o°n|is°rLshB ir eSh,ha‘ h“
              the decision of                    Z,
         who h ad dtS T d r e ^ e d T e " !'“ • ralf
                                                    “                     “Kd                       " 4
                                                                                                                    hasH f S      r; h r S l i s b X h2h T ' r m                      ,he sys,e,n
                                                                                                                   Stuart-Smith                         7                         ^
         deaths by 3 l s nm i                        a r        • nJunes that caused their
         •he c o i dfd S i " dlhl“S,,“ S.uar,-Smith says that
         before 315 pm £ \ £ ? *'           who * * « »                                                                                                 f c y .hr       ,ta                   i»»


      r : r „ 7 by                   t r          s sds              ir ^ 1
      S - S m U h ^ r t h a f t h " 16 Was im P°Ss e d CLOTd*Justice




                                             i t s                   “' "              o    f       t
     - L      i e d              S           S         U        ' t o             S d



     w i» e L r te al? s ^ V r w r e S s h"adtred                                                   W"h          aP H l e ' T S c e He            *    « n                     « o n ° f„
                                                                                                                 in m S s          u 7 ° rk' ng grouP on                      disasters and
                                                                                                                 inquests— published in March 1997— that                      the ml<* of th»
     S        S          ^           ^       M                s           S        S        S                    coroner after such a public inquiry should                   be limited.
                   officers in an unacceptable manner.
                                                                                                                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report emohaskps tH<»
    co S u d * ,hrr » ,e r e w a s ^ o ^ JUS““ s '“»'Smi.h                                                       exceptional difficulty of the coroner’s t a s k T c o T d u c t £
    ■he eviden “ 0f 1 * “ ^ s T S I T " * *                                                                     u n n ^ S " 1 ,nqueSti 11 placed an unreasonable and I think
                                                                                                                unnecessary burden on the families involved, given tSat
                                                                                                                        aylor report had covered substantially the same
                                                                                                                ground. Certainly, I am sure that Hillsborough proved that

 m                       m                                 r n                m
 r»f fh                      ’                     ^        referred to in appendix 7

 c o ^ e n 'T w S                                                    W“ e"her faC'Ual "
 says that                                                  atters were lmPlicit. He
    it would have been preferable"
                                                                                                                b e s t^ tn 1 instigated the scrutiny, I said I would do mv

                                                                                                                Lord Justice ^Stuart-Smith^wa^fHib^islied^McfsT^f the
 S            “     2            H               S          £         s       y     . t y
                                                                                                             he has considered is alreaHv in                   "   tnat
                                                                                                             consisting o f transcripts o f public hearings or m a t S
£         r i£          i£           S               »          “     “                 -   -
                                                                                                             Home S«re,Llhe,Tay,0r                          As 1                  “
theTaokveraltlh°cSona?d 311   considerations into account,
reaches ? t H ^ H US,° n that L° rd Justice Stuart-Smith                                                    r     , i S       K         ' J “r   “
                                                                                                            reasoisrdoig ofteSTerm'' ,h'rc                                      0vmldi"S
of^P ubH c mprenal th3t Sh° Uld be Put before ‘he Director
o f Pubhc Prosecutions or the police d iscip lin ary
                                                                                                            T a y l„ " „ q u t                       V" S,0" S SUbn,i,“ d 10 « *
    554 CDlJ)2*PAG»/!
 1089                      Hillsborough                     18 FEBRUARY IWX                        Hillsborough                       HWO


   All hon. Members will have profound sympathy                          how it happened in the worst tragedy in British sporting
with the families and friends of those who died at                       history are now closed u.s far as the Government are
Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend what                   concerned.’
they have suffered. In his report. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith says:                                                          M r. S traw : 1 am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman
   "I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment    for his opening comments. Of course, the whole House
to them"—                                                                agrees with the eloquent and compassionate words that he
                                                                         used to express some understanding of the nightmare that
the families and friends of those who died—
                                                                         the families have faced since that afternoon. He asked four
"especially since they have had lheir hopes raised that somethin!;       questions, the first of which was whether I am personally
more could be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my            satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully examined the
judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and objectively at
                                                                         new evidence, or the claimed new evidence that has
what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence w hich
had previously been considered”.
                                                                         emerged. Yes, I am satisfied, and so is my right hon. and
                                                                         learned Friend the Attorney-General.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General,
                                                                            It does not follow that when one establishes an inquiry
the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have had to                    of this kind, one is bound to accept its conclusions, bu’ as
consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report in the same                  the right hon. Gentleman will have seen from the
light, and we accept its conclusions.                                    summary in chapter 7. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
   The entire country is united in sympathy with those                   conducted a most careful examination of the evidence and
who lost loved ones at Hillsborough. We cannot take                      has reached clear conclusions. It would have been
the pain from them, but I hope that the families will                    extraordinary if my right hon. and learned Friend the
recognise that the report represents— as I promised— an                  Attorney-General and I had not followed those
independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny of all the                   conclusions in those circumstances.
evidence that was given to the committee.                                   The right hon. Gentleman asked whether I am satisfied
                                                                         that the families' complaints about the 3.15 pm cut-off
   Sir B rian M aw hinney (North-W est Cambridgeshire):                  point have been dealt with satisfactorily in the report.
I thank the Home Secretary for his courtesy in letting me                I am satisfied about that so far as the report is concerned.
have early sight o f his statement, and even earlier sight of            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith states on page 41, paragraph
the report. It is a long report, and. as the right hon.                   12 that in his view the coroner had been “widely
Gentleman will understand, I have not had the opportunity                misrepresented” about what the 3.15 pm cut-off point was
to read it all, but I have read carefully the chapter that               meant to mean. He states:
summarises the findings in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s                      "It should be noted that the Coroner did not say that all those
own words. I also thank the right hon. Gentleman for his                 who died did so before 3.15. or that the medical evidence was to
                                                                         this effect."
willingness to publish all the material, both unamended
and amended. I am sure that that was the right thing to do.              The point about the 3.15 pm cut-off was much narrower.
                                                                         I do not think that that will be accepted by the families.
  We, like Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, express great                      The combination, the conjunction, of the coroner's inquest
sympathy for the relatives of those who died, and the                    before and after the major public inquiry raises concerns
spectators who were injured. We, too, find it difficult to               about the purpose of such inquests when there is such a
imagine anything more horrific than the experience of                    major inquiry, about which I commented in my statement.
those who endured it, and of those who lost their
                                                                            The right hon. Gentleman asked whether the families
families— including children— in that appalling incident.
                                                                         will be disappointed. Inevitably, there was always a risk
   I have four questions on the report. First, is the Home               that in accepting, as I did, that there was, prima facie,
Secretary satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully                 sufficient new evidence needing this kind of scrutiny, the
examined all the so-called new evidence that has emerged,                families' hopes would be raised and that that could lead
not least from the families, since the Taylor inquiry? Is he             to one of the four possibilities that are mentioned in the
personally satisfied that none of it was newly significant?              terms of reference. That was inevitable. I do not in
Secondly, is he satisfied that the families’ complaints                  the least think that it was wrong to set up the inquiry,
about the so-called 3.15 pm cut-off point have been                      and I know that the right hon. Gentleman supported me
comprehensively addressed by the judge? No doubt the                     in doing so.
right hon. Gentleman realises that, although his decision                   The families are disappointed. With Madam Speaker's
to establish this independent scrutiny was broadly                       permission. I saw them at 2.15 pm this afternoon and.
welcomed, it always carried the risk that it would heighten              again with her permission, I gave them copies of the
expectations, particularly those of the families who were                report. They are upset, disappointed and angry about its
involved. That brings me to my third question. Does he                   conclusions. They are also angry that I have accepted
accept that they will be disappointed by the outcome of                  those conclusions. I understand that, but what I ask them
the inquiry and that some of them may feel let down?                     to do— and, obviously, what they were not able to do in
   My fourth and final question to the Home Secretary is                 the three quarters of an hour that I had with them— is to
this. By agreeing that there is no basis for a further                   read the report carefully and, I hope, in time, to come
judicial inquiry; for a reopening of Lord Taylor's inquiry:              to understand that the establishment of this further
for a renewed application to the divisional court: for                   scrutiny and the way in which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
the Attorney-General to exercise his powers under the                    conducted it show great respect for their bereavement, and
Coroner’s Act 1988: or for any new material to be put                    continuing concerns.
before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police                    Finally, the right hon. Gentleman asked me whether
Complaints Authority, is he suggesting to the House and                   I believe that, as it were, this matter is now closed.
the country that matters relating to what happened and                   We are announcing; today that there are no grounds for
«


      1091                       Hillsborough                     IK FEBRUARY IWS                     Hillsborough                   1092

      I Mr. S tr a w !
                                                                              followed by a comprehensive inquiry, which, in practice,
                                                                              would include the purposes of subsequent main inquests
     reopening a further lull public inquiry of the sort that was             under a senior judicial figure, and a final, formal inquest,
     conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, the coroner's inquest,                 which would simply receive the main inquiry’s report.
     disciplinary matters against the police or certain other                 In our judgment, that would be a far more satisfactory
     matters. Those are our decisions and they will have to                   w ay of dealing with these matters, and far less frustrating
     stand.                                                                   to the relatives and friends of the bereaved.
        The feelings o f the families will live with them forever,
      so the matter is not closed in that sense. All o f us who                  M r. A. J . Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Although the
      have lost children in any circumstances have some                       report has not provided the Home Secretary with support
     understanding of the way in which people never get over                  tor a further general inquiry, does he recognise that this
     the deaths of children, even if they die from natural                   outcome will make it even harder to lift the'cloud of grief
     causes: it is still more terrible if they die from violent              and frustration that hangs over the families and friends o f
     causes such as this. However, there are other lessons that              those who lost their lives? Bearing in mind Lord Justice
     we have to learn. As I have said, those relate to the                   Stuart-Smith's reference to the "disgraceful lie"’ of a
     purpose of coroners’ inquiries, to the fact that we should              senior police officer, the evidence o f material omitted
     not put families through the mill twice, as happened in                 from police evidence and Lord Justice Taylor’s assertion
     this case, and to the need to change the police                         that the principal cause was a police failure, is it not
     disciplinary system.                                                    understandable that the families will be bitterly
                                                                             disappointed that the door seems finally to be closed on
        M r. Eddie O ’H a ra (Knowsley. South): One has to live              any disciplinary action against particular individuals who
     on Merseyside to understand the palpable sense of grief,                should bear some responsibility? Will the right hon.
     resentment and anger that still exists in our part of the               Gentleman look again at that aspect of the issue and give
     world at what we regard as the continuing injustice as a                priority to a reform of police disciplinary procedure?
     result of the Hillsborough affair.
       My right hon. Friend has rightly pointed out that Lord                    M r. S traw : The right hon. Gentleman asks whether
    Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider two questions: was                   it will not now be even harder to lift the clouds of grief
    there new evidence; and was it sufficiently strong to be a               over the bereaved families. I cannot speak for them, but
    basis for reopening the inquiry? I draw my right hon.                    it would have been far worse had I not set up this further
    Friend’s attention to paragraph 14 and related paragraph                 scrutiny. They came forward with serious new allegations £
    13 on page 41 of the report, which deal with the 3.15 pm                 and it was important that they were examined by someone '
    cut-off, which is one o f the most important sources of                  of the experience and distinction o f Lord Justice
    anger. Referring to new evidence about whether people                    Stuart-Smith. However, the right hon. Gentleman is
    were alive after 3.15 pm. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says:                right— there can be no dispute about it— that the families ?
     it is difficult to see the relevance o f further evidence that person
                                                                             are bound to be bitterly disappointed by the fact that no
    A was alive at 3.15 pm but died subsequently"—                           one has taken the blame for what happened. Lord Justice
                                                                             Stuart-Smith makes that clear and shares the bitter
    referring to whether people might have survived if they
                                                                             disappointment o f the families, as do I and, I believe, the
    had been given better medical treatment. He justifies that
                                                                             House. As I said in my earlier remarks, that underlines
    conclusion by referring to the divisional court, which
                                                                             the need for there to be significant changes to the police
    rejected such grounds, concluding that such questions                    disciplinary system.
    "were not relevant to the inquiry into how— i.e. by what means—
    the deceased had come to their deaths."
                                                                                M r. A ndrew M iller (Ellesmere Port and Neston):
    If a person had a cardiac arrest in hospital and was not                 My right hon. Friend has mentioned in the context o f the
    satisfactorily treated, would that be regarded as simply                 report his consideration of the future conduct o f inquests.
    death by cardiac arrest, or would the consideration of                   Will he extend his review to consider carefully the way
    neglect come into it?                                                    in which relatives are treated during inquests? They are
                                                                             treated in a most dispassionate way, which results in much
       M r. S traw : The point that my hon. Friend raises is                 of the grief that is expressed vocally by many of the
    often raised in relation to the conduct of inquests. It comes            people, including my constituents, who suffered in this
    up when, for example, there have been allegations of                     terrible tragedy.
    deaths in custody and in many cases when there has been
    a violent or unexpected death. The relatives believe that                   M r. Straw : Yes, I will. We have the helpful report of
    part of the purpose of the inquest is to allocate blame for              the disasters and inquests working group, established
    what has happened, whereas the purpose o f the inquest                   under the previous Administration, which made
    is much narrower: to try to identify the cause of death. It              recommendations in March last year. Part of the reason
    is in that context that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith makes his              for the frustration— often anger— at inquests, of relatives
    remarks. It is important to recognise that all that he says              and others who are bereaved, goes back to a
    in paragraph 14 on page 41 follows the decision of the                   misapprehension about their purpose. To some extent, that
    divisional court, which followed a thorough judicial                     will be dealt with by the kind of changes that I have
    review hearing, not to grant a reopening o f the inquest.                already outlined for inquiries into major disasters.
       Again, my hon. Friend flags up a need for changes in
    the way in which investigations are held into major                        M rs. Louise EUman (Liverpool, Riverside): My right
    disasters such as Hillsborough. I repeat that we believe                 hon.   Friend      acted  promptly   and   properly in
    that, in future, there should be what are called                         commissioning the scrutiny., for which I thank him.
    mini-inquests into the immediate causes of death.                        I agree th a t. the bereaved parents will remain upset.
       *5hcd.::p\a: 4
 1,)y3                   Hillsborough                 18 FEBRUARY 1998                     H illsborough                   1094


 disappointed and angrv and. in that knowledge, will he            aside, as the families would have wished him to do. It is
 give the matter further consideration? Does he accept that        a matter of huge frustration that no one has been brought
 it is not possible tor all of us at this early stage to assess    to justice. That represents severe defects in terms of police
 the report's full implications and to read it in detail to        discipline, and I have spoken about the need for that to
 form our judgment? Therefore, will he support calls for           be changed. It is not possible to put the clock back nine
 an opportunity for the House to consider the report               years to do so.
 further, so that we may give a reasoned assessment of the
 report and attempt to deal with the unresolved problems              M r. R obert N. W areing (Liverpool. West Derby):
 and traumas faced by the parents? I support them in not           Does my right hon. Friend accept that there will be deep
 wishing to leave matters simply as they stand.                    unease on Merseyside and elsewhere, and that people will
                                                                   feel that there is no justice in this world? Does he further
   M r. Straw : I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her            accept that because few of us have had the opportunity to
opening remarks, and I fully understand her concern—               read the report— although he was kind enough to analyse
which is widely shared— that there should be a debate on           it with the parents— far more scrutiny is required by the
the matter. I am probably one of the few who has had an            House of Commons: possibly by the Select Committee on
opportunity to read the report thoroughly, and I shall pass        Home Affairs, which should be asked to report?
on my hon. Friend’s remarks to my right hon. Friend the              Furthermore, I add my voice to that of my hon. Friend
President of the Council. I hope that my right hon. Friend        the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) and
will take them into account.
                                                                  ask that there should be a proper debate following a
                                                                  reasonable period to allow us to read the report. For
   M aria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): I thank my right            example, it would seem that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
hon. Friend for his statement and for his consideration in        ruled as not significant a couple of videos stolen from
seeking your permission. Madam Speaker, to speak to the           Sheffield Wednesday. How on earth could he say that they
families first before making it. He has accepted the deep         were not significant if he had never seen them? Many
disquiet that they feel as a result of the report by Lord         questions have been raised by the report, and the parents
Justice Stuart-Smith, and I know that it is deep.                 will not feel that justice has been done until they are
I particularly welcome my right hon. Friend’s                     answered.
undertaking to publish all the available evidence. What
would his attitude be if, at some stage, the families were           M r. Straw : Lord Justice Stuart-Smith explains why he
to consider private prosecutions or taking further action?        came to that conclusion and how he could judge that the
                                                                  videos were not significant when he had not seen them.
   M r. S traw : Subject to certain constraints, individuals      One of the videos was from a misplaced camera angle.
in this country may take private prosecutions. That is            It was known that it had been pointing at a wall.
entirely a matter for them and for the judicial processes.        Therefore, the tape was of no value, even though it was
It would be improper for me to comment.                           stolen. As for the other video, two points are made. One
                                                                  is that it was a club video. Police videos in part covered
   M r. D erek Twigg (Halton): I speak with some                  the same area. In addition, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
knowledge, as I was on the terraces at Hillsborough that          makes the point that the police admitted that they could
day and not in some directors’ area. I had to wait for two        see with their own eyes what was going on on the terraces
hours to see whether my friends were alive, and I know            and did not need this crucial video evidence. That is one
that a number of people from my constituency and that of          example of why it is very important that everybody should
my hon. Friend the Member for Weaver Vale; (Mr. Hall)             read the report’s details. When they do, they may be
were killed on that day.                                          reussured that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has gone into the
                                                                  matter in great detail and with great care.
   May I express my bitter disappointment— not at the
Home Secretary, whom I thank for organising                          That brings me to my hon. Friend's first point. I have
the scrutiny— but at the conclusions o f the report?              already accepted that it is a matter of fact— there is no
The families will be bitterly disappointed by the fact that       question about this— that there is great disappointment
no one has been brought to justice, and such an injustice         among the bereaved families and friends of those who
does not give confidence in our judicial system. I ask my         died on that terrible day. I do not think that it is correct
right hon. Friend for his comments on that. If we cannot          to say— to pick up my hon. Friend’s words— that there is
have a debate on the Floor of the House on the report,            no justice in this world. On reflection, he will perhaps
would you. Madam Speaker, be prepared to allow an                 accept that Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry was conducted
Adjournment debate on the subject in the future?                  impeccably, with great thoroughness. There has been no
                                                                  criticism of either the way in which he conducted that
   M r. Straw : O f course. I understand my hon. Friend’s         inquiry or his conclusions. That may be only partial
personal feelings in the light of the fact that he was            justice in the context of this terrible tragedy— it is partial
present on that terrible day, I understand, too. that those       justice. I understand that the conduct of the inquests was
feelings will live with him for the rest of his life. The         controversial, but that has a great deal to do with the
families are bitterly disappointed and. as I said, I hope         system o f inquests, and that was not found to be unjust.
that their disappointment will be directed at my right hon.         It is inevitable that an inquiry’s conclusions may be
and learned Friend the Attorney-General and me as well            uncomfortable to one side or another. I hope that those
as at Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, because it is our view that      who read the report will understand that it represents a
he has done a thorough, comprehensive and detailed job            thorough inquiry in the best traditions of British justice.
with the utmost integrity. He has gone into all the
allegations carefully and, as he said, it was his job to look      M r. V ernon C o ak er (Gedling): As one of the
at the evidence presented to him and to put compassion            Members of Parliament who represents the Nottingham
«



      1095                         Hillsborough                   18 FEBRUARY 1998                   Hillsborough                    1096

     / M r. Vernon C o n k e r /
                                                                              why he was chosen to hold the inquiry. When my hon.
                                                                             Friend has had a chance to digest Lord justice
     area, may I take this opportunity, on behalf of those                   Stuart-Smith's report, he will appreciate that it has aone
      Members. to express our sympathy with the families and                 into the allegations with great care.
     people of Merseyside? Does the Home Secretary agree
     that the people of Nottingham, along with those on                          M r. Tony C lark e (Northampton. South): Does mv
     Merseyside, will want a full and frank debate on the                     right hon. Friend accept that it is that clear evidence that
     report, which amounts to more than 200 pages and has                    will make it impossible for the families to accept
     only just been published today? Will he do all that he can              disappointment, inasmuch as they know that the police
     to ensure a full debate, so that people will have                        failed and that nothing is being done about that? Will he
     the opportunity to express their views’ and opinions to me              say a few words about the evidence that Lord Justice
     and other Members of Parliament, and we can express                     Stuart-Smith put forward in respect of the stolen tapes?
     those views in the Chamber?                                             Surely, if the stolen tapes are missing, we must ask two
                                                                             questions. First, who was responsible for that theft and.
                                                                             secondly, for what reason were they stolen if not for
        M r. Straw : I accept my hon. Friend’s point. I should               concealment? It is for that reason that I add my support
     have made the point in response to my hon. Friend the                   to the call of my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool.
     Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) that                     Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) for a full debate in the House to
     there is obviously considerable feeling about the need for              examine the individual pieces of evidence and missing
     a debate. I shall pass that on to my right hon. Friend the              evidence before coming to a conclusion.
     President of the Council.
                                                                               M r. Straw : I appreciate that I am one of the few people
                                                                             who have had the benefit of reading the report. If my hon.
       M r. D ennis S k in ner (Bolsover): Is the Home Secretary             Friend reads it, as I know he will, he will see that the
    aware that I find it difficult to believe that 95 people were            question of the two missing tapes is dealt with in some
    killed but nobody is to blame? Is he further aware that                  particular detail. I have explained why Lord Justice
    inquests on the deaths of many people, such as after                     Stuart-Smith reached the conclusion that he did about
    mining disasters and for this matter, are not fit and proper             whether the fact that they were stolen was significant.
    places to start the procedure? He would do well, during                 This goes back to the point that I made at the beginning of
    this Parliament, to introduce measures to ensure that                   my statement. When we consider whether a major public^
    inquests are fit to deal with not just the death of three               inquiry into events that took place nine years ago shoula
    people in a house fire but with mass disasters. I have                  be reopened, with all the inevitable problems caused by
    never believed that inquests are competent to do the job.               the effluxion of time, the issue has to be not only whether
                                                                            there is new evidence— which there might be— but.
       Will the Home Secretary do me a favour? If, perchance,               whether it is of such significance as materially to alter the
    there is another unfortunate incident of this kind, will he             conclusions of the first inquiry. That is what Lord Justice
    not invite these tinpot judges and justices— distinguished              Stuart-Smith has examined. He has come to the
    though they may be— to deal with the problem? I have                    conclusion that I have described about the two missing
    never believed that they understand working-class culture.              tapes.
    Over the past few years, all these people— Lord Justice
                                                                               It is a matter of supposition why the tapes were stolen.
    Scott, Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—                  People steal things for the purposes of concealment or for
    have been investigating matters. What do they really                    more prosaic reasons. They may have wanted the tapes
    know about what makes working-class people tick?                        for their own use. No one has ever been apprehended for
                                                                            the theft of the tapes, but in the circumstances described
                                                                            and set out in the report, it is palpable that they were not
       M r. Straw : My hon. Friend makes the point that no
                                                                            material to the question whether the police were to blame
    one is to blame. It is not the case that the earlier inquiries
                                                                            for failing to recognise that a serious disaster was taking
    found no one to blame. Indeed, on page 49 of his interim
                                                                            place at the Leppings lane end. That was the issue. If Lord
    report— Cm 765— Lord Justice Taylor was explicit and                    Justice Taylor had said that the police were not to blame
    damning. He said:
                                                                            and that the tapes were likely to disclose why. the tapes
    "the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control".   would have greater significance. However. Lord Justice
                                                                            Taylor said that the police were to blame. He also pointed
    There has been no cover-up of that. There was a failure of              out— this Was confirmed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—
    police control, and Lord Justice Taylor pulled no punches               that one of the reasons why the police were to blame was
    whatever in reaching that conclusion. I hope that that                  that they did not have to rely on video evidence:
    gives the lie to my hon. Friend’s suggestion that judges                they could see with their own eyes what was going on
    are incapable of holding investigations into matters of this            and they failed to make proper decisions following that.
    kind. I note that whenever there is a call for an inquiry,
    there is a great demand for members of the Court of                        M r. Ross C ran sto n (Dudley, North): May I take my
    Appeal to hold them.                                                    right hon. Friend back to the issue of police discipline and
                                                                            the feeling among the relatives that no one has been
       It is inevitable that not everyone will be satisfied by the          brought to justice? May I ask him specifically whether
    result of an inquiry because such judgments defy human                  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith addresses the issue of early
    behaviour. However, Lord Justice Taylor’s report showed                 retirement by police officers to avoid disciplinary
    great understanding of soccer and soccer culture. He was                procedures? May I press him for a speedy response to the
    an ardent soccer supporter himself. I had the occasional                Select Committee on Home Affairs report on police
    discussion with him about it. That is one of the reasons                discipline?
1097                   Hillsborough                 18 FEBRU ARY 1<W8                                                         1098

   M r. Straw : 1 have already referred to Lord Justice
                                                                                     Point of O rder
Stuart-Smith's remarks about the tact that no one has been
brought to justice and that no one has suffered any
                                                               4.21 pm
disciplinary proceedings or even lost their job as a resuit
either of those terrible events, or of Lord Justice Taylor's      M r. A ndrew R obathan (Blabyr. On a point of order.
clear conclusion that a failure of police control was the      Madam Speaker. 1 have given you prior notice of this
principal cause of the disaster. By implication, it is clear   point of order, which concerns the accuracy of statements
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is not happy with what          recorded in the Official Report. We all judge the Official
happened, and neither are we. I have looked in great detail    Report to be of immense use when we write our speeches
at the helpful report from the Select Committee, of which      or assemble arguments, and it is important that
my hon. Friend is a member. As I said earlier, we intend       statements recorded in it are accurate, so I ask your
to make an early announcement about that matter, with a        guidance. On 21 January, the hon. Member for Broxtowe
view to improving the system of police discipline.             (Dr. Palmer) introduced a ten-minute Bill about air
                                                               weapons. I have spoken to the hon. Gentleman and we
                                                               have discussed the matter, although sadly he cannot be
                                                               here this afternoon. I should say that I wish him no ill
                                                               and I am sure that it was confusion of facts, rather than
                                                               any other cause, which led to this point of order.
                                                               The Official Report states:
                                                                  "In the past few years, one police officer was killed and another
                                                               7.000 injured by airgun attacks."— [Official Report. 21 Januarv
                                                               1998: Vol. 304. c. 1014.]
                                                               However, in response to a written question from me. the
                                                               Home Secretary said that, although he had no figure for
                                                               the past two years, he could find no fatal injuries and a
                                                               total of 22 injuries recorded during eight o f the past
                                                               10 years. I can find no other evidence of anybody being
                                                               killed. Every policeman injured is a serious matter, but the
                                                               discrepancy between 22 and 7,000 is large and I wondered
                                                               whether you could give your judgment on that. Madam
                                                               Speaker.

                                                                  M adam Speaker: The answer is a polite no. It is not
                                                               a point of order: the hon. Gentleman is challenging the
                                                               figures used by another hon. Member and that is not a
                                                               matter for the Speaker, but a matter for debate and
                                                               argument. It is not for the Speaker of the House to
                                                               determine the figures or to become involved in arguments
                                                               about the substance o f debates. The hon. Gentleman may
                                                               try to use other methods to bring the matter to the
                                                               attention o f the hon. Member for Broxtowe (Dr. Palmer).
