22 September 1997

Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

I am the mother o f Philip Hammond a loving, caring fourteen year old, an active member of
the Boys’ Brigade, whose life, hopes and dreams were so needlessly taken from him at
Hillsborough on 15,h April 1989. My husband is the Vice-Chairman/Secretary o f the
Hillsborough Family Support Group.

My purpose in writing to you is to express my concerns about the investigation into the
disaster, the Inquest and the verdict. It is my belief that the jury was totally misled and I
would like if I may, to itemise some o f the misleadings pertaining to Philip’s death.

Philip was lucky insofar as he was actually taken to hospital. Dr Wardrope, on the opening
day o f the Inquest, after being invited by the Coroner to give the jury his ‘best guess’ as to
what happened to Philip, assumed he had no cardiac output and was taken to the temporary
mortuary. This assumption was then left with the jury despite West Midlands Police having in
their possession several statements to the contrary. I refer to the two South Yorkshire
policemen who helped Philip and took him to hospital. Police Officers Taylor and               state
that a doctor at the hospital treated Philip for about twenty minutes.

Indeed, myself, husband and son Graeme went to South Yorkshire when we found out that
these officers had tried their best to help Philip, to thank them. They reinforced the fact that a
doctor did all he could. We will be eternally grateful to these officers.

I would like to ask why did the jury have to be given an assumption when that person (Dr
Wardrope) was not present at the time Philip was admitted, and there were witnesses that
were there but were not called to give evidence.

Dr Slater, the pathologist, stated to the jury that Philip was probably already dead at the
ground and that the police officers and ambulance personnel had probably felt their own pulse.
Again an assumption, and again it later transpired that there existed statements by ambulance-
woman           and ambulanceman            to the contrary.

Dr Ed Walker, in his statement says that he resuscitated a blonde haired boy aged between
twelve and fourteen. Philip was blonde, small for his age and was the second youngest to be
taken to hospital. Yet due to the evidence o f Doctors Wardrope and Slater, the jury were led
to believe that Philip was dead on arrival. It would have been a simple task to establish which
of the thirteen victims who died in hospital, Dr Walker had treated, as he describes his
patients in his statement. Yet we were told he was an unidentified doctor. But had his
evidence been called it would have discredited Doctors Wardrope and Slater. I am simply
amazed that Dr Wardrope did not refer to Dr Walker at the Inquest in view o f the way he had
commended him shortly after the disaster.

The Coroner said he would call to give evidence the last person to see the deceased alive
before the crush. In Philip’s case this was                   who was a friend and in his
statements he says he was holding Philip’s hand trying to prevent him going forward when the
barrier broke. However, the Coroner called Ian Southgate, who was a fellow Boys’ Brigade
member who travelled to the ground with Philip but in his statement says he lost sight o f him
earlier. The reason for this, I think, is that in Ian’s statement he mentioned a surge, and the
Coroner dwelled on that when questioning him, leading the jury to believe that there was a
sudden surge o f people. Whereas, ini             statement he says that it was uncomfortable very
early on and they were all shouting for help and it gradually got worse.            evidence is
clearly at odds with the pathological evidence given at the Inquest that all victims would have
been unconscious within seconds, having felt no pain and then brain dead within minutes.

I would like to say that we, as parents, have the comfort o f knowing Philip was taken to
hospital and everything was done to help him. I feel so sorry for those who lost loved ones
and have to live with the fact that many o f them were pronounced dead initially by policemen
and then officially much later by a doctor. I am a nurse manager o f an intensive care unit. I
have indeed been in resuscitation situations where there have been many senior doctors, some
o f them not being able to detect a pulse, others who have, and resuscitation continues, many
times successfully.

Victims at Hillsborough were in shock, their peripheral circulation shut down to direct blood
to vital organs. It would have been extremely difficult for a lay person to detect a pulse. Yet
whilst there were trained, very experienced paramedics in ambulances lined up outside the
ground, policemen were put in the very difficult position o f deciding to discontinue
resuscitation, the victim left with a garment over their face. They may very well have had a
pulse. It is terrifying to contemplate.

I would also like to add my concerns about one of the Coroner’s investigating officers, G
           who amazingly was assisting this investigation whilst being investigated himself! I
find that very disturbing.

Finally, I would like to thank you for taking the time to read this letter and apologise for its
length but I am sure you will appreciate why it is so. If possible, my husband and I would like
to meet with you when you visit Liverpool, although we do understand that you will have
many pressures on your time.

Yours faithfully




Hilda M Hammond
