                    CONFIDENTIAL
.R.
                                            cc.   Miss Nicholson
                                                  Ms Rex
                                                  Mr Yates
                                                  Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Moriarty
                                                  Mr Turney
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  HMCIC
                                                  HMCIFS
                                                  Mr Mower
                                                  Mr Bolton
                                                  Mr Goddard
                                                  Mr Gilbert
                                                  Mr Mould
                                                  Mr— F Sm l'LTf/ F8
                                                  Mr Lidington


  Mr Turnev


                     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


       This note is to record matters arising in the Home
  Secretary's briefing meeting on 2 August on Lord Justice
  Taylor's interim report not dealt with in his subsequent
  meeting with Ministerial colleagues, recorded separately.
  Those present with the Home Secretary at his briefing meeting
  wer e:

       Lord Ferrers, Sir Clive Whitmore, Mr Chilcot
       Mr Turney, HMCIC, Mr Mower, Mr Bolton, Mr Mould
       Mr F Smith, Mr Gilbert, Mr Lidington, Mr Storr
       Miss Bannister.

  2. The meeting had before it      uou^    submission of
  2 August. The Home Secretary was broadly content with the
  drafts attached to the submission (the final version of the
  Home Secretary's minute to the Prime Minister has been
  circulated separately).  In addition to noting the points
  about the contents of the report made in
  submission the following points were made during the meeting.

  Recommendation 2(b) - 15% reduction in capacity of terraces

  3. It was noted that the recommendation was for the Green
  Guide formula to be respected (as it had not been at
  Hillsborough) but also for the figure >c>    be reduced by 15%


                                                  /to improve the
                   CO                    i   IAL
E.R.
                               2



   to improve the safety margin.  The 15% figure was arbitrary
   and officials thought that it undermined the Green Guide
   philosophy.  Lord Justice Taylor had not said that this was
   a temporary recommendation. While the Government should not
   criticise this recommendation, officials thought that
   ultimately the clubs would concentrate on putting into effect
   the Green Guide formula, rather than reducing the figure by
   15%.  In the Home Office evidence to the Inquiry for the final
   report, officials would press in the direction of enforcing
   properly a figure in the Green Guide.

   Recommendation 7 - emergency exists

   4. It was noted that some gates in radial fences might not
   necessarily be emergency exits. This depended on the
   geography of each ground and would be a matter for local
   determination.

   Recommendation 21 - CCTV

   5. It was noted that introducing CCTV would be time consuming
   and expensive, but this recommendation was not asterisked.
   Lord Justice Taylor thought that all cameras should be
   provided by the clubs and the Home Office supported this.

   Recommendations 31-34 - communications

   6. It was noted that the cost of providing cables would be
   for the clubs. It would not always be necessary for the
   cables to be under the ground.

   Recommendations 42 and 43 - health recommendations

   7. The Department of Health were content with the
   recommendation for an ambulance authority ambulance to be
   provided at all matches with an attendance of 5,000 or more.
   This might be seen as excessive compared with the provision
   for other public events with the same sort of attendance.
   Clubs had to pay for ambulances and smaller clubs at the
   margins of attendance of 5,000 might have difficulties in
   deciding whether to pay for an ambulance or not. However
   these were not sufficient reasons to criticise the
   recommendation.




                                                   /8
                            3.
                                                 <r £ \ - ' g

National Police Intelligence Unit

8. The Home Secretary said that he accepted Mr Mower's
advice that it was a mistake to mention the National Police
Intelligence Unit in the statement, though it could be
mentioned if relevant questions were asked. The Home
Secretary is content for the announcement to be made in
September, as originally proposed.

South Yorkshire Police Reaction

9. It was noted that Mr Chilcot would be seeing the Chief
Constable on Thursday 3 August.  If it was known after that
meeting what his reaction on the day of publication would be
the Home Secretary could make a decision before Friday on
whether he would be interviewed.  If not, a decision would
have to be made during Friday.




Private Office                         MISS C J BANNISTER
3 August 1989                          Private Secretary
