                             SUPERINTENDENT R.L. GREENWOOD


I am a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police presently the Sub-divisional

commander for Woodseats Sub Division (E2).


I presently have twenty five year's Service having joined the then West Riding

Constabulary in 1963.


My experience of policing football crowds dates back to 1975 when I was an Inspector

stationed at Rotherham.    Nfy experience of policing Hillsborough ranges from 1980/81

and 1983/86 in the rank of Inspector and Chief Inspector respectively.     I have also

policed the previous semi finals in the rank of Superintendent.


In connection with the FA Cup Semi Final to be held at Hillsborough on the 15th

April, I was allocated responsibility for the Football Stadiian.


Prior to the event I attended two planning meetings and a briefing for Inspectors

 and above which was held at Hillsborough on Friday 14th April 1989.    After this

 briefing I briefed Inspectors under my command, details of which are contained in

 the briefing notes which are attached.


 On Saturday 15th April 1989, I arrived at the ground at about 9.45 a.m. and was

 present at the main briefing which was held at approximately 10.00 a.m.    After this

 I went with Chief Inspector Beal, Inspectors Booth and Calvert and the Serials

 concerned with policing the Spion Kop to the Spion Kop, where with the Inspectors

 concerned I examined the area which had been taped off and set aside for Liverpool

 supporters.   At last year's Semi Final a few hundred Liverpool supporters had

  obtained tickets for the Spion Kop, which was allocated to Notts Forest supporters,

  by whatsoever means and had had to be segregated from the Nottingham supporters by a

  cordon of Police Officers.   There was friction between both sets of supporters

  particularly when Liverpool scored and Police Officers had cane under threat to

  their personal safety.    Officers had had to draw their truncheons to control the

  situation.   I anticipated that such a situation was likely to occur at the 1989
                                         -   2   -




Semi Final.   After discussion I then briefed the Serials as is reflected in nay

briefing notes.   I then went with Chief Inspector Beal, whilst the Serials were

being further briefed by their Inspectors, to the. rear of the Spion Kop as there was

a concern about loose stones being present.          There was evidence of sane stones on an

undeveloped area but this gave no major cause for concern.


I then made a tour of the ground particularly looking at the upper level of the North

stand as I was apprehensive about the location of a betting booth.          I spoke with sane

Officers from nay own Sub Division who pointed the betting booth out and arrangements

were agreed for its supervision.    I then went fran the North stand via Leppings Lane

past the Director's entrance and into the Sheffield Wednesday Control Roan, where I

liaised with Staff.   Present at that time was Superintendent Marsh who I took around

the ground.   I also liaised with Inspector Darling and Sergeant Chapman who were the

supervisory Officers responsible for the Constables who sit on the perimeter track.


I was present outside the players entrance to supervise and-monitor the arrival of

the Liverpool and Notts Forest team coaches, after that I again liaised with the

staff in the Sheffield Wednesday Control Roan.          I learned fran the Sheffield

Wednesday staff that Brian Clough, the Notts Forest manager, would be sitting

immediately behind the Notts Forest team bench as he was banned fran the touch line.

The seat was pointed out to me and I was told that so as to evade the press he would

cane out, not with the teams as is normal practice, but after the teams, the

officials and coaching staff.


I estimate that it would be about 2.35 p.m. when I went on a tour of the perimeter

track.   I walked from the central tunnel area passing the South stand to the West end

of the ground.    The perimeter track Constables were in position and I spoke to most

of them on passing.    When I reached the area behind the goal of the Leppings Lane .

terraces I remember talking to P.C. Helliwell and together we stood and faced the

 terracing and the West stand.   There was a carnival atmosphere in the central pens, a

 light weight beachball was being flipped about in the crowd.         I saw a young supporter
                                           -   3   -




in a green and beige striped rugby shirt being hoisted from the central pens by

supporters in the West stand up into the West stand.         Once in the West stand, I saw

him move first to the left and then to the right and I thought to myself, because I'd

seen this happen many times before at half-time, when was he going to go to the back

and disappear into the crowd but he didn't and I believe that he realised he had been

seen by us.    I had attempted to attract the attention of some Officers in the stand

to what was going on but suddenly the supporter came back to the front of the West

stand and without no more ado dropped back into the terracing.         After a few moments I

then walked along the perimeter track in front of the North stand to the front of the

Spion Kop.     I recall looking up to the area at the back which contained Liverpool

supporters.     I contemplated going into the Spion Kop to talk to the Officers that

were segregating approximately 800/1000 Liverpool supporters but I looked at my watch

and saw that it was about 2.50 p.m. and that as the teams would be coming out onto

the pitch before very long, it was time for me to take up a position in the central

tunnel.     I therefore made my way to that location.


I do recall a youth being arrested/ejected from the Spion Kop although I think that

it was during the earlier tour of the ground.          It was on that occasion that I

actually went into the Spion Kop because I thought that the arresting/ejecting

Officers had fallen as a result of the youth struggling.          I remember some minutes

after this I saw what I believe to be the same youth reappear on the Spion Kop.             I

believe he was spotted by Officers and was again removed.         A Police Officer, at sane

stage, told me that the youth admitted giving a turnstile operator £20.00 to get back

 into the ground.


On returning to the central tunnel I was confronted by a large number of press

 photographers awaiting the arrival of the teams.         After a short time the teams ran
                                                                                                *


 onto the pitch followed by the referee and 2 linesmen and trainers/coaches.         Mr

 Clough did not appear at this stage and the press photographers remained.         I recall

 asking one of them what they were waiting for and he said, "You know damn well -

 Clough".     I heard, with my back to the pitch at this time, the whistle go for the
                                           -   4   -




kick-off.    The press photographers remained and some of than were on the playing

area.   It was necessary they move and they were told to do so by the Police Officers

present.    Mr Clough came out and took up his seat but still sane of the press

photographers had remained to photograph him.           In front of the Notts Forest dug-out

was sane television camera equipment and the Notts Staff complained that it was

obstructing their view.    This was moved by T.V. personnel.         The natch having kicked

off and the press photographers gone from the front of the tunnel I then surveyed the

scene in the ground.     I looked to nay left and saw one or two spectators climbing over

the perimeter fence at the Leppings Lane end behind the goal.           Two or three Police

Officers were with than.     I immediately realised that there must be a crowd problem,

not fighting or a pitch invasion because that would not happen so early in a match,

and so I immediately went to the Leppings Lane terracing where I saw two or three

Police Officers by the track gate which I believe was open.           From ground level I

looked at the crowd in the pen (Pen 3) behind the goal and saw quite clearly that

supporters were being squashed against the fencing.           The area behind the gate was

heavily congested preventing persons from exiting.           I should mention that the

perimeter fence gate is not wide enough to allow a mass exit of persons being in the

order of a normal doors width.     The actual terracing is at a lower level than the

perimeter track and one has to mount one or more steps so as to exit from the

 terracing through the gate onto the pitch.        Police Officers were trying to get

supporters out.     I then mounted the advertising hoarding and from above fence level

 surveyed the whole of the crowd in the pen.           I could see that there were also people

 behind the front row who were squeezed and being pushed towards the fencing.             As one

 looked further back, the crowd probably more than two thirds were watching the match

 quite unaware of what was happening at the front.           One or two supporters were

 clambering along the top of the crowd and were trying to get out over the perimeter
                                                                                              •


 fencing.    There were a few supporters on the pitch at that stage.        My immediate

 assessment was that there was a chance the problem could be alleviated if the crowd

 at the middle and back of the terracing moved back so as to ease the pressure at the

 front.     There was room to do so and the central tunnel was clear.        I therefore
                                           -   5   -




gestured to the crowd in the middle and towards the back with both hands in a pushing

motion shouting at than to move back and also with both index fingers pointing down

to the front of the crowd so as to indicate to than there was a problem at the front.

I gained no reaction to this and more people started to climb towards the fencing.

It was apparent at that stage that the match could not continue.           I therefore

determined that the match should stop and after broadcasting by personal radio to the

effect that there were potential casualties and that the game be stopped, from the

top of the fencing waved both my arms towards the Control Box in a signalling motion

to the effect that the game must be stopped.           I then ran onto the pitch past the

Liverpool goalkeeper who I recall was still facing down the field of play, seemingly

unaware of what was going on around him.       It took me a little while to attract the

referee's attention by shouting but I recall play then came to a halt as he had

awarded a free kick.   I told him that we had a serious incident and that he must stop

the game and take the players off the pitch.           He agreed to do so without argument.


I then returned to the fencing and could see no improvement in the situation; more

supporters were clambering along the top of the crowd and attempting to get over the

fence where they were being helped over by Police Officers standing on the hoarding.

The crowd towards the back was still not responding by moving back.           I moved towards

the South pen nearer the Police Control Box to attract the attention of the staff so

as to apprise them of the extent of the problems.           I believe it was at this stage

that I saw Assistant Chief Constable Mr Jackson who cane to the pitch and told him

 that we had casualties.


 I then immediately returned to the fencing behind the goal.          I believe it was at this

 stage that an Officer told me of a fatality.          I recall looking at the people on the

 front row inmediately beind the fencing and as my eyes skirted to my right along the

 line I saw a female who in my view was clearly dead.          The colour had drained from her

 face and her pallor was grey.   I then broadcasted that there was a potential

 fatality.   By this time more supporters had come over the fence.         Officers were

 attempting to get into the crowd down the side fencing.
                                           -   6   -




I was concerned as to medical support 3 nd ambulances and I recall discussing with

some Officers the presence of an ambulance.            Ambulances had been requested and I

believe a further broadcast was made at that specific time; caimuni cat ions were

extremely difficult because of the noise.       However it was within my knowledge that

there was an ambulance located at the end of the tunnel in between the North stand

and the Spion Kop.    An Officer was dispatched to get that ambulance to the scene.            I

recall that the presence of press photographers was many and that they were hindering

the operation of getting people out of the pen.            I had to depute an   Officer to keep

than at bay.    I had previously deputed an Officer to bring St Johns Ambulance Staff

to the fence.


I believe it was at this time that I saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrive.


Because of the crush of people adjacent to the fencing it was impossible to get

people through the gate and I specifically recall a large well built man who was

trapped by other people on the steps inside the terracing.            Together with other

Officers I struggled to pull this man free.            Other persons including a young boy were

quickly pulled out.     Officers by this time had managed to go down the side railings

into the crowd.     I acquired a loudhailer.       I then broadcasted to the crowd to ease

off at the back to allow the casualties to be evacuated.            It was at one stage whilst

doing this that the advertising hoarding that I was standing on broke and I fell to

the ground.     By this time Officers were in the terracing and were attempting to take

casualties through the gate and there was clearly insufficient room for two Officers

with a casualty to get through the gate.        It was therefore arranged that a channel of

Officers comprising two lines be formed        outside the gates and that Officers would

pass casualties through the gates to the Officers on the outside where they could be

 further attended to.    I think it was at this stage that I heard a roar from

 supporters who were on the pitch and my immediate impression was that they were

 making their way towards the Notts Forest supporters in the Spion Kop, however I was

 not in a position to do anything about this.           It was sometime prior to this that I
                                           7




recall an ambulance, I believe St Johns, had arrived from the Spion Kop and it was

necessary to clear some of the advertising hoardings in order it could gain access.

In order that casualties be removed as soon as possible from the terracing I

instructed the Officers by loudhailer to bring the casualties to the gate, not to go

through it but to pass the casualty through the gate releasing it to Officers on the

outside; then instructing those Officers to go and get another casualty and then

instructed other Officers to come forward with a casualty and pass it through the

gates and so on.   I had also directed other Officers who had entered from the rear of

the terracing to evacuate casualties through the central tunnel at the rear.    By this

means the casualties were very quickly cleared from the area.    Once this was achieved

and the area cleared I saw a crowd barrier that was crumpled and twisted.     (I re­

visited the Stadium on Sunday 16th April and surveyed the terraced area of pen 3.       I

again saw the crumpled and twisted crowd barrier and noted      rust on a stanchion

which was still fixed in the ground and as I recall on one of the poles.     I don't

know whether this was surface rust or otherwise.    I also saw a deflated beachball in

the well of the terracing.)   I arranged that Officers remain to protect the scene.         I

then reflected as to the question of crowd safety of all those supporters in the

ground.   I had been conscious at one stage during the rescue operation of a broadcast

from the public tannoy system I believe requesting supporters not to push in the

central pen but it then struck me that panic or supporters leaving the ground may

result in further problems.    I think it was at this stage and round about 3.30 p.m.

 that I instructed P.C. Goodwill of 'FI' who was present in the area of the goal to

accompany me so as to ensure better ccranunication with other Senior Officers and

Police Ground Control and that he must never leave me unless it was on my direct

 instruction.   Firstly, I requested that he try and get those Officers back into

 Serials that were not engaged because throughout the rescue operation and

 particularly at this stage I and other Police Officers were subjected to vehement

 abuse in the strongest terms from the Liverpool supporters on the pitch who accused

 the Police as murderers who had killed Liverpool supporters.    I recall one supporter
                                          -   8   -




with a Merseyside accent saying to me, "You've fucking killed than", and another

saying, "The fucking police have murdered them".      Others were saying, "The fucking

police and Kelly have done this".    Having made their points they would not go away

and were obstructing me from continuing with my duties.     Many smelled of drink.     I

recall at one stage having to push two or three supporters aside so I could continue

supervising the rescue operation.    Similarly, I had to push press pilotographers away

who were taking photographs of people trapped against the fencing.     They were

obstructing the rescue operation.    The loudhailer at this point became faultyand P.C.

Goodwill obtained a replacement.


I had been requesting by personal radio that I meet with Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield as I wanted to discuss the situation as far as the rest of the crowd was

concerned.   I was told he was in the club's boardroom and so I set off to meet him

there.   I turned towards the central tunnel and saw that both managers, Dalglish and

Clough had walked onto the pitch and were making their way towards the goal.       I

immediately feared as to what would be the reaction of supporters towards Mr Clough

and that it tobelikely that Mr Dalglish be totally surrounded by Liverpool supporters.

Therefore I spoke to Messrs Dalglish and Clough and told than that it would be more

appropriate if they left the pitch and could assist by broadcasting over the tannoy

system and asking for calm.   The two managers agreed and I escorted than down the centr

tunnel on my way to the boardroom.     Messrs Clough and Dalglish were then escorted to

Police control by other Officers and I went into the boardroom ntfiere I was met by

several directors of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.      They asked me if there were

fatalities and I said potentially that may be so, and they said that if there were

fatalities the match should be abandoned with their full support but recognising

 that it would be a Police decision.    I then went to the Police Control Box and gave

an update of the situation.   After a short time I returned to the pitch at the West

end where I saw a Police Scenes of Crime photographer in civilian clothes being

 attacked by supporters.   I instructed that he be told to put his camera away.
On looking down the pitch I saw that there was sane disruption in the crowd in the

uncovered South stand seats at the Spion Kop end, either people were arguing or

fighting.    I was on ny way there when as I passed the central tunnel I heard abuse

being directed into the tunnel by supporters.    I saw Mr Kelly (FA Secretary) was in

the course of doing a television interview with Desmond Lynam.     It seamed likely that

he may come under physical attack from the supporters who were blaming him for what

had transpired.    I immediately shouted from the entrance to the tunnel that they must

stop the interview and get out of the way around the back.     I then went to the

uncovered seats where I directed that two or three Officers should go into the crowd

and sort the problem out; it was evident that there were some Liverpool supporters in

there amongst Notts Forest supporters.     To supplement this I broadcasted by loudhailer

to the crowd and asked for calm and their co-operation so that matters be resolved.

The broadcast had the immediate effect of quietening things down and so I determined

that I would broadcast to the Spion Kop and spectators in the rest of the ground

because I believe at this stage nothing had been said about the match being abandoned

and I had a fear of panic and potential problems resulting from people leaving the

ground.     I therefore broadcasted to spectators along the Spion Kop and North stand at

 roughly 15 yard intervals to the effect that there had clearly been casualties and

 that we were working under extremely difficult circumstances and requesting the co­

 operation of spectators to remain where they were.    I also advised that there would

 be spectators who would not be able to hear this message clearly because of the

 limitations of the loudhailer and requested that supporters # 1 0 had heard it relay

 the message to those behind who would not have heard it.    Every broadcast was

 followed by applause both from Notts Forest supporters in the Spion Kop and Liverpool

 supporters in the North stand.    I recall that in the course of passing this message a

 group of supporters on the Spion Kop were chanting and singing and the rest of the
                                                                                       •

 crowd turned on them and silenced them.     I believe that when I reached the West end

 of the North stand the formal announcement was made that the game had been abandoned.

  I believe that persons at that stage were advised to leave the ground slowly and not
                                         -   10   -




I then started to receive enquiries about the casualties from Liverpool supporters on

the pitch and they were directed to an area by the central tunnel wfriere I arranged

that Officers could attend to their needs.        It was at this stage that I obtained the

telephone number for the Casualty Enquiry Bureau and informed the Police Ground

Control.    After that I went to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where I saw

outside the River gate (Gate C) a number of bodies covered in green sheets and

liaised with Inspector Sykes.    I ascertained these bodies had been removed from the

terracing and taken by Officers to the rear of the West stand.


I then went to Police Ground Control where I liaised with Officers as to the updated

position.    Following this I went to the North stand where Officers had been gathered

for de-briefing instructions.


 I then went to the gymnasium which was being used as a temporary mortuary and after

 surveying the scene checked as to the condition of the Officers who were with bodies.

 Some were particularly distraught and I attempted to reassure them.       I then returned

 to the North stand where further liaison took place about de-briefing and then to

 Claywheels Lane to check on the welfare of Officers and to the Sports and Social Club

 at Niagara for the same purpose, where I remained in anticipation of de-briefing.

 Prior to visiting the gymnasium I had been informed that there was a Police Officer

 who had been working in the terracing area who could not be accounted for and I was

 told at the gymnasium that a Police Officer had been taken to hospital.
