                               OUNKmdWTM.
                                                               St e ~   je*es   d S      a #



                                                                        L Ufe.str f o. "
NOTE FDR TOE PTTHRT)
                                       CC     Mr Yates   oJUUo^fc ^             (SUifc




                                             Mr   Boys Smith
                                             Mr   Malone Lee
                                             Mr   N o rris                  ^   2-V </
                                             Mr   A ddison
                                             Mr   S oden^^
                                             Mr   W halley


HELISBQRODGH POLICE EMgHRlKS - COSTS ETC


Mr Geoffrey Dear raised with me this morning, in the margins of another
meeting, sane aspects of the enquiries being conducted by his force
into the events at Hillsborough..


2.   First, he said that some members of his Police Authority on the
extreme left were seeking to cause difficulty for Jri-m twswigft of the
abstraction from policing effort in the West Midlands and what was
being portrayed as a burden falling on West Midlands* ratepayers.
Mr Dear said that behind this lay sane criticism by those members that
he was too close to the Home Office, that he should not so readily have
accepted the commitment by West Midlands, and the risk that they would
seek to restrain or inhibit the work of the West Midlands force in
conducting the enquiry unless they were safcjs-Hpd on the financial
aspect.


3.   I showed Mr Dear the letter from the Clerk to the South Yorkshire
Police Authority to the Herne Secretary seeking central funding b^-qngp
of the expected costs of the enquiries; I said that in my view th-ia
contained implicit acceptance that South Yorkshire had same or «n of
the responsibility, at least initially. While I was not in a position
to give any undertakings to the West Midlands (who should be looking to
South Yorkshire in any event at the first instance), South Yorkshire
had now formally raised the matter with the Herne Secretary and it was
perfectly open to Mr Dear to tell his police authority that the matter

                              ocMFiirannAL                                       i
                              QUNKiiaMnra.
lay between South Yorkshire and the Home Office.     Mr Dear (and neither
of us had then seen the letter from the Clerk to his police authority
to the Home Secretary received by fax today (25 April) seeking
assurances that West Midlands would not have to meet any of the costs)
thought he could get through his next police authority meeting later
this week perfectly comfortably on ^sot footing that the issue would
need to be resolved fairly early.


4.   I then raised with Mr Dear the issue of the scale and duration of
the police enquiries.   Very large numbers of police officers had been
mentioned in press reports, and I said I should not be surprised if
Sir Peter Taylor (whom Mr Dear was to meet later in the day) would want
to form his own view about the necessary scope of enquiries.    Mr naa-r
said that he was very ready to take direction from lord Justice Taylor
on, for example, the range of people from whom statements needed to be
taken.   West Midlands have, in any case, initiated a preliminary
questionnaire procedure (which. I thought very sensible and said so) to
get a first idea of the quality of information available from all those
who might respond to the free-phone enquiry system.     Once they knew how
many respondents there were to the free-phone enquiries, and then
when initial questionnaires had been returned, it ought certainly to be
possible to categorise respondents and to limit further statement-
taking and interviewing to those who had something substantive to
contribute.   This would be for lord Justice Taylor in conjunction with
West Midlands police to decide at a later date.


5.   Finally, Mr Dear said that much of the effort would be done with
police officers working overtime and there was a natural limit to how
long this <S©uld go on; but on present form he thought that by mid or
late May the great bulk of the work of processing questionnaires and
taking statements ought to be couplets.   Thereafter it was not easy to
see how further police enquiries might develop, but I rather formed the
impression that these would be on a very much smaller pcale than the
current initial round.

                                             J A QTTtTOOT
                                             25 A p r il 1989

                              OCMFlUmHAL
PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 24 APRIL
1989

Mr David Alton (Liverpool, Mossley Hill): To ask the Secretary of
   State for the Home Department, at what level the publication
   of statements on 18th April by South Yorkshire Police
   concerning the conduct of Liverpool fans at the Hillsborough
   semi-cup final was authorised; if he will publish a copy of
   that statement and the name of the officer who made it; and if
   he will make a statement.




DRAFT REPLY


Official statements made by the South Yorkshire Police are the
responsibility of the Chief Constable.   It would not be         for
me to publish statements or counter-statements which have been
made about the circumstances leading to the tragedy, or to name
those who made them.   It is for the judicial inquiry to establish
the facts.
PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 24 APRIL
1989

Mr Harry Cohen (Leyton): To ask the Secretary of State for the
   Home Department, if he will seek a report from the Chief
   Constable of the West Midlands force on whether any
   representations from the public appertaining to police
   activity and strategy at the Hillsborough tragedy will be
   admissible to the police inquiry; and if he will make a
   statement.




DRAFT REPLY


I understand from the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police
that any member of the public who has information which he
believes will be of assistance to his enquiries should make this
available to him without delay.
BACKGROUND NOTE

The Question is imprecise.   The Chief Constable of the West
Midlands Police is leading the police investigation.     We
understand from Chief Superintendent Pemberton of the West
Midlands that the police inquiry team will wish to interview all
those whose evidence will be of help to Lord Justice Taylor's
inquiry; and the team will be open to receive such evidence from
any quarter.


2.   The Question refers to "representations" and the West
Midlands Police are concerned not to be inundated with
"representations" of a general nature from those whose
contribution will not be material to the inquiry.   Furthermore,
"representations" could well extend to "complaints" about police
conduct for which statutory provision exists under Part IX of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.   Such complaints will
involve the Police Complaints Authority and the relationship of
the Authority to the judicial inquiry is now being established.
Mr-                 /Hi/faDti/lb
PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 24 APRIL
1989

Mr David Alton (Liverpool, Mossley Hill): To ask the Secretary of
   State for the Home Department, if he will call for a report
   from the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire as to what
   arrangements are being made to return items belonging to
   deceased Hillsborough victims to their relatives.




DRAFT REPLY


I understand from the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police
that the items are being held temporarily for the purposes of
assisting the enquiries being carried out by officers of his
force.   They are giving priority to the early return of the
items.
BACKGROUND NOTE

We understand from Chief Superintendent Pemberton of the West
Midlands Police, who is a member of the police inquiry team,
that the personal items belonging to Hillsborough victims are
being held to try to identify where they were standing at the
time of the disaster.   Clothing etc is being photographed and
will help to build up a picture of the crowd and of individual
persons within it.


The West Midlands Police are fully aware that the delay in
returning items to relatives is an extremely sensitive matter.
They have set up a unit to discharge this work in order to ensure
that the items are returned as a matter of priority, particularly
as the funerals are now taking place.     They hope that most of the
items will be returned early next week.


Chief Superintendent Pemberton is content with the line of the
Reply.
PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 24 APRIL      9
1989


     Mr Harry Cohen (Leyton): To ask the Secretary of State for
     the Home Department what arrangements will be made for every
     person involved in or affected by the Hillsborough tragedy
     who wishes to complain about Police strategies, tactics,
     behaviour or practice at or appertaining to that event to be
     heard at Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry; if he will take
     steps to ensure that any such complainant will be able to
     make their complaint formally and officially; and if he will
     make a statement.




DRAFT REPLY



It is for the Inquiry to determine the arrangements for hearing

evidence which it considers will help establish the causes of the

tragedy.



Statutory provision exists under the Police and Criminal Evidence

Act 1984 for complaints by members of the public against the

police to be dealt with thoroughly.
BACKGROUND NOTE
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has asked the Chief
Constable of West Midlands force to carry out an investigation
into the actions of the South Yorkshire police their handling of
events at Hillsborough.

The details of the relationship between the Inquiry and the West
Midlands investigation have yet to be settled but it is
understood that Lord Justice Taylor is meeting with the Chief
Constable of West Midlands in Liverpool on 21 April.

Part II of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 contains
statutory provision for handling complaints by members of the
public about the conduct of police affairs. Complaints involving
death or serious injury must be referred by Chief Constables to
the Police Complaints Authority for supervision by them of the
police investigation. Precisely how this will work out is still
being settled between Lord Justice Taylor, the Chairman of the
PCA and the Chief Constables of South Yorkshire and West
Midlands.

It will be for the Inquiry to determine the arrangements for
hearing of evidence and from whom it will receive such evidence.
