iPifOQ
IpJSo?   THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




         Will) Cotnpltntente



16 LANCASTER GATE, LO ND ON ,W 2 3LW
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                     L IM IT E D
                                                     Founded 1863

                                     Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u    e e n
                                   President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f        K e n t
                                          Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p

    C hief Executive:                                                                     Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
                                                                                                 Telex: 261110
R. H. G . K e l l y f c i s                                                                 Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                              16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  O ur Ref:                                       Your Ref:
                 RHGK/RB/471                                                     23rd May 1989



 Councillor H. Chase                                                                               P cLv
 c/o Room 42, Municipal Buildings
 Dale Street
 Liverpool L69 2DH
                                                                                               Sol Vi     ZcWWt

                                                                                           tW'vj      GC^WW             J As\ {fi

 Dear Councillor Chase,



       Further to your recent letters, I would inform you
                                                                                                 i                                  'i
 that I am not willing to duplicate the work we are doing for /■                                                                    ^
 the official Inquiry.                                        u''

       I am sure Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry will provide
 the full picture the Liverpool City Council is seeking and
 certainly The Football Association will render every
 possible assistance to the Inquiry.


                                                                                                                   1C ,


                                         Yours sincerely,




                                          Chi'ef Executiv




                                  Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Cate. L ondon W 23L W
                                  Incorporated in L ondon Registration N um ber 77797
                     City of Liverpool

            From C ity Councillor   H. Chase


            Please reply to:
                               Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH
                                                     Date:   15th May, 1989



                                                                        5



Mr. G. Kelly,
Chief Executive,
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate,
L O N D O N        W2 3LW




Dear Mr. Kelly,

     Could you please furnish to me information on the
following points regarding television coverage of the
Hillsborough semi-final tie of 15th April, 1989:-

     1.   What organisations had the F.A. contractual
          agreements with for the live transmission of the
          game?

     2.   What provisions, if any, were made in the
          contract(s) for the possibility of a delayed
          kick-off?


                                         Yours sinr-prpiv




                                       (Councillor H. Chase)



                                                                        r
S01AAD
                                     City of Liverpool

                        From C ity Councillor . . . . H a r r ^ _ C h a s e .....................................

                                                     c/o Room 42, Municipal Buildings,
                        Please reply t o :           Dale.. S tr e et *...Liverpoo 1..L69 2DH.


                                                                                                         Date:      1 5 th May, 1989.


Mr. Kelly,
Chief Executive,
Football Association,                                                                           /
16 Lancaster Gate,
LONDON
W2 3LW.

Dear Mr. Kelly,

The recent decision by the Football Association to substantially increase
ticket allocations to both competing teams' supporters at this years
Football Association Challenge Cup Final is welcomed by this Hillsborough
Working Party.

This decision, set against a reduced Wembley capacity, does raise to the
number of important issues relevant to the F.A ticket allocation and
distibution policy for their Wembley final.

Firstly, were the events of 15th April, at Hillsborough, the sole influence
on your decision? If so, is the increased allocation to be viewed purely
on a gesture of goodwill to the people of Liverpool and the supporter's of
both Everton and Liverpool? If this is the case does it indicate that the
F.A will, for future finds, revert to the 'normal' policy for ticket
allocation to competing clubs and appropriate bodies.

Secondly, in light of the failure of segregation at last year's Liverpool
Wimbledon F.A Cup Final, and in view of the increasing call for ticket
allocations at all neutral venues to be based on competing clubs average
attendances, would the Football Association consider a wholesale review of
its ticket allocation policy in light of these and other catalogued
factors which are subject to subjudice at this time?

Thirdly, if the F.A are to revert to the pre-existing ticket allocation
policy would the reduced capacity, in future, lead to a commensurate
reduction in the tickets made available to competing team supporters?

Finally, arising from Liverpool City Council's own Trading Standards Dept,
Report into the 1988 F.A Cup Final, what action has the F.A taken against
those associate bodies and clubs identified as having been the original agents
for tickets which subsequently entered the black-market.

Your comments and views in the above would be most welcome.

Yours sincerejy


H. Chase,
Chair - Hillsborough Working Party.
      RHGK/PFS/SKC/1018                         15th May,   1989




Cllr. Harry Chase,
Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party,
c/o Room 42, Municipal Buildings,
Dale Street,
Liverpool.
L69 2DH.



Dear Mr.   Chase,

   I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 11th
May, in connection with the "Hillsborough Working Party .

   I will bring your letter to the attention of the appropriate
people within The Football Association and write to you further
soon as possible.

                             Yours sincerely,




                             Chief Executive



b. c. c. Mr.   R. Parker - We await your observations
                               City of Liverpool

                  From City Councillor . . . . ^ . ^ . ^ . . £ ^ . ^ 5 ......................................



                  Please reply to :                                                                                ’   D a le   S tr e e t>

                                          LIVERPOOL.                   L69 2DH.
                                                                                                     Date:      11th May, 1989




Dear Mr. Kelly,

In response to the tragic events at Hillsborough Liverpool City Council has
formed a 'Hillsborough Working Party' in an attempt to develop as full a
picture as is possible of the events leading up to and including the
circumstances surrounding the deaths of 95 Liverpool Supporters.

At this stage we are reviewing the preparations made in advance of April 15th
with special regard to the Football Association's responsibilities concerning
your planning and decision-making processes and procedures for semi-final
and Wembley final fixtures, including those arrangements within your domain
for Hillsborough.

Oviously I understand the Football Association's involvement with the Taylor
Inquiry. Notwithstanding this, and to facilitate as thorough a response as
is practicable under the circumstances, your assistance in relation to the
following points would be gratefully appreciated:-

(1)   A copy and/or information on the F.A.'s official guidelines and/or
      recommendations for:-
         (i)   Ground Safety;
        (ii)   Ground Management;
       (iii)   Provision/level of Medical Facilities;
        (iv)   Emergency Plans (e.g. Evacuation/Rescue);
         (v)   Choice of Venue;
        (vi)   Ticket Allocations/Distribution;
       (vii)   Liaisons/Links withAppropriate Police Forces;
      (viii)   Segregation and Security within Stadia;

(2)   A copy and/or information on the F.A. Report for the corresponding
      (Hillsborough) fixture in 1988 and any recommendations implemented for
      the April 1989 fixture.

(3)   A copy and/or information on E.U.F.A. ground safety procedures with
      special regard to fencing policy.
*




                                           -2-


    (4)   A copy and/or information on the Football Association's response to the
          Lord Chief Justice Popplewell's final report.

    Yours sincerely




    Cllr. Harry Chase,
    Chair,
    Hillsborough Working Party.
                   Ki :GK/ t i l l / « b 0                                       1 7 th Ha y   19b9


           i:ci jS ±. V*

C ity cr Liverpool
c / o K001.1 4 2 ,                                 ijU ii.u j.n 9 ;;
U cl 1 e   L/ C i. t! ti l_

L iverpoci                 Lb9 2Di:




bear       C o u n c .11. i o r     C ■: r.   ,


                                                     iiillsborougn


             Thank you for your letter of                                        May.

        I would like to be able to help you jay attending the
publ i c u6: t..xiicj o n ^ \j t n i.iuy ( 'o u t .£ cun cirircii.cl X 3.1.1 not.
prepared to duplicate the work already being undertaken by
The Football Association for t>ord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.

      I am sorry I am not in a position to attend. You may
be aware that I respcnaec fully to the public aebate in the
immediate aftermath of the disaster - but I will, of course,
be pleasea to receive any relevant information which the
"hillsoorough Working Party" wishes to pass on.




                                                  i'ours sincerely,




                                                  C h ie f   iix e c u c i v e
                                     City o f L iv e r p o o l

                        F ro m C ity C o u n c illo r   Harry.__Chase.........
                                                 c/o Room 42, Municipal Buildings,
                        Please r e p l y   to: ....Dale ...Street;,, ..Livernop.].,. L69 2DH.


                                                                               Date: 15th May, 1989.


Mr. Kelly,
Chief Executive,
Football Association,
16 Lancaster Gate,
LONDON
W2 3LW.


Dear Mr. Kelly,

Liverpool City Council's Hillsborough Working Party has organised a Public
Meeting on the Hillsborough tragedy for Thursday May 25th, commencing at
7.30 p.m at the city's St Georges Hall.

May I take this opportunity to formally invite you as a guest speaker to
a widely publicised meeting where representatives from the Football
Supporters Association and the City Council will be present.

Please contact me at the earliest opportunity to formalise arrangements.

Yours




Cllr. Harry Chase,
Chair- Hillsborough Working Party.
3
