                                                  DRAFT ( 3 )




                 STATEMENT BY HOME SECRETARY:
                        17 APRIL 1989



With permission, Mr Speaker, I       should like to make a
statement about the disaster at      the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club ground at Hillsborough on Saturday. Everyone
has been horrified by this incredible tragedy in which 94
lost their lives and 7 0 were injured.
                     11 ;


Shortly after the start of the match there was a surge of
spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace which crushed many at
the front against the                    * This accounted for
most of the deaths and injuries.


The match was due to start at 3 p.m. To help ensure orderly
access, the gates of the ground were opened at 12 noon.  At
2.30 p.m. most of the Nottingham fans were in the ground, but
many of the Liverpool supporters were still arriving. It was
clear to the police officers in charge that there was ample
capacity still to be filled in some parts of the enclosure
allocated to Liverpool.
                             2.




At about 2.45 p.m.   there was a large crowd     of   Liverpool
supporters at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane behind the West
Stand. There was difficulty in coping with the pressure on
the turnstiles and    the police used loudhailers to urge the
crowd to be patient.


At about 2.50 p.m. more Liverpool supporters arrived and the
numbers in front        of the turnstiles / increased. Some
supporters started to climb the walls and turnstiles and
those at the front of the crowd were under considerable
pressure from those behind.


The senior police officer present considered that there was a
possible danger to the lives of the spectators at the front
of the crowd. In order to relieve the pressure he arranged
for an exit gate near the turnstiles to be opened to let a
section of the crowd through.      The relationship of that
action to the disaster on the terrace shortly afterwards is
clearly a central question to be investigated.
                                             r




My Rt Hon friend the Prime Minister and I yesterday visited
the football ground and the two Sheffield hospitals which
received casualties.     I would like to pay tribute to all
those involved in the rescue operations at the ground,
including the many spectators who gave their help; and to
those others, including the hospital staffs and voluntary
agencies who have since been working, so hard treating the
injured and consoling the bereaved. We heard many accounts
of courage exerted on behalf of others.


I have asked for further factual reports from the police and
other services, the local authority and the Football
Association. Inquests will be held in due course.    But over
and above this, there is clearly need for a         full and
independent inquiry to identify the causes of the    disaster
and to examine what needs to be done to prevent       such an
accident happening again.    I have therefore asked Lord
Justice Taylor to carry out an inquiry, with the following
terms of reference:


      "To inquire into the events at Sheffield
      Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989
      and to recommend what further steps should
      be taken to improve crowd safety and ground
                                            r
      control at sports events, including any
      necessary  changes   in   the   relevant
                               '   '   ■   -   '   I       '       '     'W



./•     ••   .   '             ■                       ^       ■   " "

      Nr Geoffrey :% or# the .Chief Constable of . the .West .Midlands-
        ."qareed to a s s i s t . the inquiry as an .assessor! f and.
Vqr'rqnaeroents will be made as necessary for other aualiflef}
 .aisesiors to be appointed and for the inquiry to be provide^
  $ lt.tr technical advice and support,       I am asking -that" the
  Inquiry should proceed with all possible -speed. Lord Justfcr
/Taylor will visit Sheffield as soon as possible .this., wei^
' C-to:m orrow:] to begin his investigation. I am grateful to him
;.fgr agreeing to undertake this task.


  '-§§;/pjj§al.fund is. being sft .up by the.civic author!tier-af
   Liverpool and]Sheffield. The Government Hill be contributing
   P Q 0 # Q 0 0 immediately towards this fund.


      ;|||s p s a devastating tragedy. Our deep -sympathy '.goes' to:
      .the .families of those who died, to those recovering# and .to...
       $tiose: still fighting for life.and health. We owe a duty-'tq
      these passionate supporters of football'to examine urgently
      and thoroughly the cases and background, and to do all In our
      power .to prevent such a .thing happening again/
