                                                                                           ft

   A        A SSO C IA TIO N OF
  i j \     D ISTR IC T
i         A C O U N C IL S
9 BUCKINGHAM GATE LONDON SW1 E 6LE                                      Fax: 0 1 -8 2 8 6 9 48
Telephone: 0 1 -8 2 8 7931                                              B.T. GOLD LMX021

GORDON McCARTNEY, Secretary                                        ROGER CHATER, Deputy


                          Our Ref:               Please ask for:
                  SL/18/1/MB/KA                              Mr Bursnell
                                                               3 July 1989




             Dear Mr Whalley,
             HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
             Further to Lord Justice Taylor's invitation to submit
             evidence to the above Inquiry, please find enclosed six
             copies of the Association's submission. The Association
             would have no objection to any wider public
             dissemination of the comments expressed in the
             submission.
             If you require any additional information or would like
             to discuss any of the matters raised in greater detail,
             plese do not hesitate to contact me at any time.

             Yours sincerely,




             MARK BURSNELL
             R M Whalley Esq.
             Secretary to the Inquiry
             Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
             Home Office
             50 Queen Anne's Gate
             London
             SW1H 9AT
                      EVIDENCE SUBMITTED BY
              THE ASSOCIATION OF DISTRICT COUNCILS
          TO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
1.    Introduction

1.1   The   Association    represents    332    non-metropolitan
      authorities in England and Wales with a total population
      of   over   32   million   people.     Forty-fiv§,„ lAmhor
      authorities have league football stadia "within'^Refr
      areas for which they are the principal building control
      and planning authority, and an integral part of the
      licensing inspection system.     Over a number of years
      these authorities have cemented close formal and
      informal relationships with the local clubs across the
      whole range of football related activities.
1.2   There have been joint initiatives in a number of
      different    spheres:     combined    recreation    schemes
      involving the active participation of schools and youth
      clubs; securing greater spectator and community access
      to the facilities offered by the club; providing a
      consultative mechanism for resolving planning/parking
      disputes with local residents etc.         These have all
      burgeoned   over    the   last   decade    and   with   the
      deteriorating financial position many clubs, expecially
      in the lower divisions, have looked to the local
      authority   for    financial   assistance.     Some   local
      authorities have part ownership in their local club and
      many offer a range of benefits, annual grant or loan
      facility or preferential rent, to ensure the survival of
      their local league club.
1.3   These factors, together with the traditional affinity
      the majority of the community have with their local
      football club would suggest that football will continue
      to exercise a strong appeal for the public, and the
      survival of the local league club is therefore a
      legitimate concern for district councils.
1.4   The Association appreciates the difficulties involved in
      regulating the conduct of large gatherings of spectators
      and the attendant problem this presents in terms of
      co-ordination of agencies charged with ensuring the
      safety of the public at sports grounds.
1.5   The Association is aware that there are numerous factors
      involved in determining the potential danger to the
      public arising from a particular sporting event and that
      any one of them might precipitate an unanticipated
      occurence setting off a train of evfents culminating in a
      serious incident.

1.6   The following comments are made under the relevant
      headings, to contribute to finding ways to prevent a
      similar tragedy from re-occurring.
                                 -   2   -




2-    PUBLIC SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
2.1   The Association     feels  strongly that the present
      arrangement governing the inspection of sports grounds
      are     unsatisfactory.     At     present,    statutory
      responsibility for the issuing of general safety
      certificates rests with the county council who are
      required to liaise and consult with the district council
      as the Building Control Authority about the terms and
      conditions to be included in.ithe Certi«ic^t^^i.,--f.^v-.^:.».^-
                                                                     m-



2.2   The duality in responsibilities for public safety
      evident at present, with the County Council responsible
      for licensing and inspection and the district for
      Building Control    and planning,   is confusing    and
      impractical.
2.3   The Association believes that there is a strong case for
      vesting   responsibility   for   co-ordinating   matters
      pertaining to safety at sports grounds at the local
      district council level.
2.4   The Association would like to see safety at sports
      grounds treated as a local issue as it has a direct
      impact on local people both as supporters of the club
      and residents.   Greater emphasis should be placed on
      effective monitoring and involvement throughout the year
      - not merely at the licence application stage - to
      ensure the safety of spectators.    This should involve
      the creation of a District Council sponsored local
      liaison committeei involving relevant officers from the
      District Council, the County Council, other involved
      public bodies, representatives from the club and the
      community, giving local people an opportunity to express
      their views on matters that have a direct impact on
      their daily lives. To this end, regular inspections of
      stadiums should be carried out by the safety team,
      identified under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975!
      These inspections should take place before, during and
      after matches.

2.5   Most district councils already have experience of this
      type of responsibility, which they currently enjoy in
      relation to indoor sports centres and grandstands below
      a certain capacity.
2.6    The Association would like to see adopted a far more
      systematic approach to training club stewards, involving
      closer co-operation with the police and the local
      authority.   All stewards used by a club should be
      familiar with the contents of a written emergency plan -
      which all clubs should be obliged to draw up - and some
      provision made for regular testing in the effective use
      of the evacuation procedures. Also, more effort should
      be given to steward training in crowd control and
      consideration given to what extent and in what ways this
      role might complement that of the police.
                              -   3   -




2.7   The Association urges that careful consideration should
      be given to formulating nationally applicable standards
      for all sports stadiums covering such matters as fire
      precautions,   safety   barriers,  crowd   capabilities,
      perimeter fencing, medical facilities, access and egress
      to grounds etc.
2.8   The Association accepts that in some circumstances it is
      necessary to have a pitch perimeter fence to restrict
      supporters to the terracing, fcwt; it is essential to draw
      up contingencies for mass access to the playing area in
      the event of an emergency. In the light of experience,
      the recommendation for gates contained in paragraph 215
      of the Green guide seem insufficient for the purpose.
      It is recommended that all grounds be fitted with quick
      release perimeter    fencing to      facilitate a rapid
      evacuation of the adjacent terracing.
2.9   Although the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
      paragraph 44 - recommends that spectators should be
      admitted at a rate which is compatible with the
      dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground, it
      also calls for contingency plans to stop unduly large
      crowds gathering outside.     Where large crowds are
      expected, it is imperative that there is sufficient
      pre-planning to cover such aspects as crowd control,
      stewarding, issue of tickets etc.    To this end it is
      also essential that police officers who are responsible
      for crowd control outside the stadium are familiar with
      the layout and with the potential hazards within the
      stadium.
2.10 The Association has in the past supported and will
     continue to support the use of close circuit television
     both inside and outside the ground. This system should
     be linked to a public address system so that information
     can be relayed to crowds outside the ground.
2.11 The Association believes that more attention should be
     given to public safety arrangements in extraordinary
     conditions, which can present problems that may not be
     covered adequately by existing procedures.
2.12 The Association also believes that all entrances,
     carparks, pedestrian routes and other public facilities
     should be clearly signposted and visible from a
     distance.
3.    CAR AND COACH PARKING NEAR OR AT STADIA
3.1   Given the location of many stadia in high density
      residential areas with poor traffic flow and inadequate
      parking facilities, it is virtually inevitable that
      problems of congestion and nuisance will occur on match
      days, which can not only cause serious inconvenience to
      local residents but can jeopardise the effective
      operations of the emergency services in reacting quickly
      to a major incident.
                              -   4   -




3.2 The Association suggests that local authorities ought to
    be encouraged where      possible   to  make   available
    additional space for cars and coaches on adjoining land
    to the stadium on match days where suitable designated
    car parking space is not available near to the ground.
3.3   The local authority, in conjunction with the club and
      the   police,   should    explore the  possibility    of
      establishing other temporary.coach parks around thetow*^
      on match days where a capacity or near capacity crowd
      is   expected, with the police directing traffic and,
      where necessary, marshalling spectators between the
      points of disembarkation and the ground. It is also
      important for coaches carrying opposing supporters to be
      parked in separate coach parks.

3.4   The Association is aware of several member authorities
      with a league club in their town which have had a
      purpose-built   stadium  railway halt constructed     to
      facilitate the flow of visiting supporters travelling by
      'football specials' to and from the ground on matchdays.
3.5   The Association would support any such scheme that would
      minimise the problem of football supporters passing
      through residential areas or the town centre en route to
      the football ground, which often disrupts an otherwise
      peaceful Saturday afternoon and can be a serious source
      of friction between local people and the football club.
3.6   The Association agrees with the Green Guide - paragraph
      189 - on the need to secure adequate roads for emergency
      vehicles "to ensure that swift and direct access can be
      obtained to all buildings within the ground. Areas where
      parking is prohibited should be clearly marked by the
      police although parking bans in such areas should form
      part of an overall traffic management system.

4.    APPLICATION AND ENFORCEMENT         OF   BUILDING   CONTROL AND   ^
       PLANNING REGULATIONS.
4.1 The Association is concerned       about the scope and
     enforceability of the existing Building Regulations as
     they apply to building control at Sports Stadia. While
    Building Regulations clearly apply to new Stadia which
     are constructed to present regulatory standards and to
     alterations to existing structures - i.e. extension to
     stands and material alterations - and cover such matters
    as structural and fire safety, stairways, guards and
    access for disabled persons, the modernisation of
    boundary walls, fences, terracing and barriers etc.
    existing stadia are not covered by building regulations
    and might not be inspected until the renewal of the
    Safety Licence.
                              -   5   -




4.2   The   Association   suggests  that    compulsory   annual
      inspections are instituted for      all sports   grounds,
      jointly involving the police, the fire service, a
      structural Engineer, a representative of the club and
      the Principal Building Control Officer, to effect closer
      supervision and control over the building activities
      undertaken by the club.
4.3   The Association is aware that       in London and the
      Metropolitan areas the responsibility for enforcing
      duties under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, has
      since April 1986 been devolved upon the Metropolitan
      Boroughs, usually within the scope of the Building
      Control Authority
4.4   From the analysis of returns from our member authorities
      it is clear that in some areas Building Control
      undertakes   the   prime  role   in   co-ordinating   and
      consulting   the safety   team      and issuing    safety
      certificates. There are, in addition, a number of other
      enforcement duties, such as action under Sections 71 and
      77 of the Building Act 1984, which are directly related
      to safety at Sports Grounds and the responsibility of
      the District Council.
4.5   It is confusing to clubs to have the standards outlined
      in 4.4 above enforced by the district council and the
      county council responsible for the general licencing of
      sports grounds under the 1975 Safety at Sports Grounds
      Act. The existing controls should be rationalised and
      the responsibility for co-ordination and enforcement
      given to the Building Control Authority.

5.    LIAISON WITH THE POLICE AND THE LOCAL CLUB
5.1 The Association realises just how crucial good liaison
    between the police, the other emergency services, the
     local club and the Local Authority is.       Effective
    pre-planning and then joint co-ordination of effort is
    the key to ensuring the safety of the public in and
     around a stadium on matchdays.
5.2 From canvassingthe views of our members it appears that
     in most areas the      relevant agencies do have the
    opportunity to meet occasionally and to discuss and
     resolve any outstanding problems concerning public
     safety and related issues.
5.3   However many of these consultative channels tend to be
      informal, have vague terms of reference, and often
      exclude one or other of the main bodies involved.
The Association is aware       that, under the powers
contained in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and
amended by the Fire Safety and Places of Sport Act 1987,
permission is granted to establish Safety Panels as
properly constituted bodies, involving all the concerned
parties meeting on a regular basis. The Association
would like to see this model adopted nationally or at
least for firm guidelines to be established setting out
the remit and procedures for any proposed Joint Liaison
Committee.

OTHER ISSUES
The Association would in addition to the above points
like to bring the following matters to the attention of
the Inquiry.
Football Spectators Bill
(a)   Although the Association supports the general tenor
      of the Government's proposals contained in the
      Football Spectators Bill, a number of our member
      authorities have expressed some reservations about
      the safety and financial implications of a national
      membership scheme.

(b)   Of direct pertinence to the Inquiry is the
      perceived potential for a large build-up of
      spectators outside the ground if the flow of entry
      into the grounds through the turnstiles is affected
      by the requirements of the scheme or in the event
      of a technical breakdown.
(c)   The Association has learned that a number of
      authorities have serious doubts that the scheme
      will operate as envisaged.     Many clubs have no
      facilities to separate supporters whose cards might
      be defective or subject to scrutiny by the police.
      It is understood that the police will have no
      discretion to admit supporters arriving without a
      valid identity card.
(d)   Evidence from the recent Football    League report on
      the subject suggests that the       current computer
      technology is not capable of        coping with the
      simultaneous influx of football     supporters twice
      weekly at the ninety-two Football   League grounds.
(e)   The Association is also aware that the cost of
      installing the new turnstile technology will have
      to be borne by the club.    This, coupled with the
      possibility of reductions in attendances and
      consequent losses of revenue as a direct result of
      the requirements of the scheme, might have a
      detrimental effect on the future viability of the
      club.
Alcohol Bans on Match Days
(a)   The Association understands that in a number of
      areas the police, in conjunction with the local
      authority and the club, have requested local
      licensees to enforce alcohol bans in the general
      vicinity of the relevant ground on match days.
(b)   Although this measure might not be appropriate in
      all circumstances, the Association would welcome
      the extension of this practice.
Relocation and Redevelopment
The Association has already acknowledged the present
difficulties caused by the location of most existing
football stadia in long-established residential areas.
The problems of such grounds are well known.       Some
member authorities of the Association have accepted the
desirability of relocation of the club to out-lying
areas of the town, where the problems associated with
stadia can be reduced.
Many local authorities already own the freehold of the
land occupied by the local league club and would welcome
the opportunity to redevelop the existing site for much
needed housing,    retail   or open space provision.
Additionally, a number of local authorities have drawn
up projects to relocate the club within multipurpose
sports stadia providing excellent modern facilities and
encouraging greater family participation.
Of course such proposals would raise the vexed question
of financial resources, as the cost of achieving such
objectives is likely to be high and in the existing
financial climate neither the club or local authority
are likely to be able to find all the funds necessary.
The Association would like to explore the possibility
whether any Government funds could be made available
towards the cost of schemes for relocating football
stadia out of existing residential areas.

'FOOTBALL IN THE COMMUNITY'
The attention of the Inquiry should be drawn to those
organisations that have been established to promote
football as a family sport and to project a good image
for the game on the national stage. Football's Family
Forum is one such body, actively supported by the
Association, which aims to embrace a broad spectrum of
national organisations' representatives from league
clubs, local police forces and football supporters'
organisations tackling some of the problems afflicting
the m o d e m game and to combat the often negative image
of football portrayed by the media.
7.2   The Association would also briefly like to mention
      examples of schemes to promote community involvement
      that   have   been  undertaken   by   individual   local
      authorities in co-operation with local league clubs.
      The concept of "Football in the Community" schemes
      whereby local authorities can encourage young people to
      enjoy both recreational and competitive sport using the
      good offices of the local football team and its players
      - has been embraced by a large number of authorities and
      clubs.

7.3 Watford    Borough   Council   have   a   scheme  called
     "Sportsworld" offering courses on football coaching as
    well as other sports for different levels of competence
     and for different age groups involving an active input
     from Watford Town F.C. players and with the local
     authority providing a full time sports development
     officer to co-ordinate these schemes under the umbrella
     of "Sportsworld", giving extensive access to council
     owned pitches and sports and community centres.
7.4   The long term aim of "Sportsworld" is to provide a
      structured system whereby all levels of involvement are
      catered for. Primarily, the scheme aims to foster the
      notion that sport is good recreation and, for those
      youngsters with the motivation to improve their skills
      and participate in league competitions, cup competitions
      etc, by attracting them to clubs in this structured
      system, to improve good behaviour and raise general
      standards.

7.5 In the same vein, Derby City Council have combined with
    Derby County F.C. to promote "Friendship in Football
    Again." The intention that underlies this scheme is "to
    restore the good behaviour pattern in young people
    either playing or watching the game through active
    participation in the game by two sets of young
    supporters playing and watching football, proving that
    intense rivalry can be enjoyable and does not have to
    result in violence either on or off the field of play."
7.6   The project    involves two teams from a local community
      league or inner city league, one from Derby and the
      other from the town or city who are playing Derby
      County, who are invited to be guests of the Council on
      the day of       the match. it is    desirable that the
      participants are not all from one centre or one regular
      team but are young people drawn together for the day.
      In this way it is hoped that the experience will bring
      about a change of attitude amongst young impressionable
      people.   Inaddition, there are      a number of other
      similar schemes at Stoke-on-Trent, which takes much
      credti for pioneering the original "Matchmates" scheme
      upon which Derby's and other clubs' schemes are based,
      Norwich, Southampton etc which share the same objective!
MB/KA
23 June 1989
       A SSO C IA TIO N OF
  *->\ D I S T R I C T
 1 A C O U N C ILS
9 BUCKINGHAM GATE LONDON SW1E 6LE                                           Fax: 0 1 -8 2 8 6 9 4 8
Telephone: 0 1 -8 2 8 7931                                                  B.T. GOLD LMX021

GORDON McCARTNEY, Secretary                                            ROGER CHATER, Deputy


Your ref:                     Our Ref:               Please ask for:
                                  SL/18/1/PR/JR          Mr Reader
                                                         26 May 1989


            Dear Mr Whalley
            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
            Thank you for your letter dated 23 May concerning Lord
            Justice Taylor’s invitation to submit evidence to the above
            inquiry.
            I can confirm that the Association would wish to submit
            written evidence. Unfortunately, the Association will not be
            able to meet the timescale quoted. Perhaps we could discuss
            a mutually acceptable date.
            I look forward to hearing from you.
        ' Yours sincerely




        « PHILIP READER


            R M Whalley Esq
            Secretary to the Inquiry
            Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            London
            SW1H 9AT
'   f\   V.-'-V
