                                            jp^-                          (jS)

 NOTE OF DISCUSSIONS WITH PROFESSOR CANTER 21 NOVEMBER


 Present:     Lord Justice Taylor        Professor Canter
              Professor Maunder
              Mr Whalley



 1.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether, in Professor Canter's
 view, the extent of hooliganism had declined because of the use
 of CCTV and undercover operations.       Professor Canter said that he
 had never been convinced that the root of the hooliganism problem
 had been a small band of dedicated offenders:       he believed that
 hooliganism was largely expressed in rowdiness.       Arrests outside
 grounds were continuing.     It was inevitable that football matches
 would be rowdy and noisy, which had the effect of distilling out
 those who felt uncomfortable in such surroundings, so that a
 higher proportion of those remaining would be committed to an
 atmosphere of that kind.


 2.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether the Government's proposals.
 would dilute the extent of hooliganism.       Professor Canter did not
 believe that the Government's proposals went to the heart of the
 problem.     He believed that many genuine football supporters would
 be put off by the bureaucracy of obtaining a card, so that the
. residual population of supporters would be the football fanatics.
 In any case, Professor Canter did not believe that the timing was
 right:     football had always been associated with scenes of
 disorder, for example in the 1920's English clubs were banned
 from European competitions.        There had always been large scale
 incidents and crowd violence, but the difference now was that
 they were no longer considered acceptable.        This was partly
 because of press interest, partly because of labelling of
 misconduct, but more particularly because of a change in
 attitudes.     That had led to reduced numbers, increased
 segregation, increased animosity between rival fans, and a
 reinforcement of aggressive relationships.


 3.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether it was possible to put the
 process into reverse.     Professor Canter did not believe that the
 solution lay in the Government's hands, but rather with the clubs
and police.   There was a huge contrast between the approach at a
big stadium like Wembley and the attitudes shown by the Football
Association and the Football League.    The latter had completely
failed to manage the game in the interests of the spectators, and
concentrated almost entirely on activity on the field of play.
Nowadays, however, the leisure industry demanded increasingly
high standards of comfort and entertainment for spectators.      A
well run stadium such as Wembley, by contrast, took a strategic
view, looking for ways of improving and enhancing the appeal of
the entertainment to spectators.   Football clubs saw problems of
crowd control as the responsibility of the police not of
themselves as managers of the event.    Big clubs, for example
Chelsea, could become part of the local community, with wider use
being made of the facilities, and less emphasis being made of the
symbolic event of the Saturday football match.


4.   Professor Canter saw some merit in a radical option
concentrating on a few large scale facilities, but renewed his
emphasis on the need for such stadia to be properly managed,
involved with the community, and providing a high level of
facilities.   He did not believe that all-seating accommodation
would on its own make any difference.    Extreme groups likely to
cause havoc would do so whether in standing or seated
accommodation.   He would challenge those who saw all-seated
accommodation as a panacea for the ills of football.     It had to
be remembered, also, that in other sports rivalry between groups
and teams was widespread, but it was not expressed in violence in
the way it was in football.   This was partly because of press
attention on acts of violence at football matches.     The key issue
was that of acceptability of behaviour within society as a whole,
and the way in which the press sought to reflect that feeling.


5.   Some hooligan groups took advantage of the anonymity which
being in a crowd gave them.   The culture giving rise to crowd
behaviour was deeply rooted and would take time to reverse.      For
example, any bad language or bad behaviour at a baseball match in
the United States would look instantly out of place and hence
would not be imitated.   In a crowd, however, the individual could
recognise a great deal of power, and when a small group together
were all aware of their collective power, their individual
behaviour was likely to be subject to the pressures generated by
the larger group.


6.   Lord Justice Taylor suggested that an analysis of crowd
behaviour of this kind made it hard to draw the line on levels of
acceptability.   Professor Canter believed that clubs assessed
that only in terms of the basic limits of safety.    A properly run
commercial facility, by contrast, would go out to seek those
groups who might be hesitant, and would find out what it is that
was deterring them from attending.    Lord Justice Taylor
nevertheless drew attention to the point that the central
question would be the entertainment value of the match.
Professor Canter believed that the key factor was the extent to
which the stadium was "secularised", with the special event no
longer being the total focal point, other activities being
present, with wider audiences, a more diverse age range, women
attending and so on.   Furthermore, clubs could follow the example
of the promoters of pop concerts who would make clear that any
pop group leading to a disturbance would not be invited back.


7.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for Professor Canter's views on
the possibility of a criminal offence of going onto the pitch
without reasonable cause.     Professor Canter did not believe that
bad ’behaviour could be changed by physical means such as
perimeter fences.   If fences were to come down, clubs must be
committed to not tolerating unruly behaviour.     Part of the
difficulty was the unwillingness of the football authorities to
penalise those clubs who allowed their spectators to invade the
pitch.   This was due in part to the obsession with winning at all
costs.   On present trends he could foresee football disappearing
as a major spectator sport.     A membership scheme would accelerate
the process, because of the range of other attractions available
as entertainment to the general public.     This reinforced, in his
view, the case for building stadia designed for comfort as well
as safety:   he gave as an example calculation of crowd densities,
which were'based on the lowest which would cause bodily harm.


8.   On the question of crowd management, Professor Canter
believed that strategies had been shown to be inept in numerous
situations, including the Bradford and King's Cross fires.      This
he attributed to lack of management and training.     The emergency
services were entirely reliant upon ad hoc experience when it
came to giving information to large crowds.     No organised
training process was available giving them guiding principles,
and the police, in particular, were always geared to the small
scale response to a particular problem rather than a strategic
overview.     Those speaking over public address systems, for
example, should give clear and simple instructions using a simple
vocabulary.     A crowd was bound to be confused and anxious when
faced with a sudden and threatening problem, but it would not
necessarily panic in a wild or irrational way.     Further work was
however needed in this area, and a research base was needed to
give principles at the senior level on which strategies could be
based, and an organised set of guidelines on how to communicate
with a crowd devised.


9.    On the Football Spectators Act, Professor Canter believed
that any card to be a successful basis for the scheme must have
positive components.     The recent experience of London Underground
in installing ticket machines which were liable to be defective
showed lack of awareness of the potential for disruption which
individuals presented.     He believed that such systems should be
designed to cope with the most idiosyncratic or wayward of human
behaviour.    He did not believe it was necessary to penalise away
supporters in the way in which the Government scheme proposed:
the aggression of football spectators was ritualistic and only
burst out if it was mishandled, apart from in small groups.


10.   Professor Maunder asked whether the publicity now available
instantly in the case of an incident had been sufficiently taken
into account.     Professor Canter believed that, as recent media
coverage from eastern Europe had showed, the media effects of a
large crowd could be enormous.     Professor Maunder asked further
for Professor Canter's view on the suggestion that in the absence
of war soccer provided an outlet for male aggression.     Professor
Canter noted that many young people in their late teens faced
situations of conflict which could give rise to potentially
violet groupings, whose expression took the form of aggression,
radicalism, or intolerance of ambiguities.


11.   Professor Maunder referred to Professor Canter's point about
the lack of research, and wondered why the SSRC had not funded
more research.     Professor Canter did not believe that academics
or disciplines of significance had got to grips with the problems
of football hooliganism in the group.     Studies tended to be
individualistic or anthropological, straying off into politics
and economics.     Safety and the attitudes to safety were not seen
as a major issue.     There was also the practical difficulty of
achieving worthwhile results over a short timescale.


12.   Professor Maunder asked about the importance of community
involvement.     Professor Canter drew attention to the fanatical
devotion to particular clubs, and their resistance to
amalgamation.    The starting point was to convince the clubs of
the need to amalgamate.
