                                                                                                                       %
ACCESS COMMITTEE for ENGLAND
35 G reat Smith S treet                                                      Chairman Arthur Goldthorpe OBE
London SWIP 3BJ
Telephone 01-222 7980




              23rd June 1989



              The Secretary
              The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
              50 Queen Annes Gate
              London SW1H 9AT


              Dear Sir

              HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

              In response to your invitation to put forward recommendations
              about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports
              grounds, the following are submitted for your consideration.

              1    The principle must be stated that no-one should be
              debarred from attending any sports event because of his/her
              physical, sensory or intellectual handicap.

              2    Many indoor and outdoor sports grounds and stadia
              already provide suitable environments, backed by management
              arrangements, which enable disabled people attend events
              safely.   These should become universal.

              3   Any arrangements made should be equally applicable to
              both home and visiting supporters, and information on these
              readily available to both.

              4    Certain groups of disabled people require features to
              achieve easy access to seating or viewing positions, and safe
              egress in an emergency.

              5   Parking. A number of extra wide parking spaces should
              be provided for disabled persons vehicles near the most
              appropriate entrances, both for private cars and minibuses.
              Drop off points should be provided adjacent to the ground for
              larger vehicles to unload and reload their disabled
              passengers.

              6   Wheelchair users. The majority will be accompanied, but
              not necessarily all. Some may use three wheel electric
              scooters or four wheel electric chairs.  All wheelchairs and
              scooters require an alternative to the conventional turnstile
              entry point, plus a level or gently ramped uninterrupted
              route to the viewing position.  The seating area should be
              under cover with a seat for a companion alongside each
              wheelchair space, or at least close by.

                   Since these spectators will need to arrive early and
              leave late to avoid the main crowds, suitable Unisex sanitary
              facilities must be available nearby.  Evacuation routes
Centre on Environment for the Handicapped        Chairman John H Penton MBE BA AADipl RIBA RIAS ACIArb FCSD FRSA
Registered Charity 272034                                              Chief Executive Sarah Langton-Lockton BA Oxon

                                             1
should also be be short, level or gently ramped and well
signed.

7    People who walk with difficulty.  Parking, access
through the turnstiles and short easy routes to suitable
covered seats are essential. If steps have to be negotiated,
these must have handrails at both sides, or one centrally
placed, to facilitate access. Sanitary provision should be
available close to the seating.  Evacuation routes as above.

8    Visually Handicapped People. Bright contrasting colours
on handrails and stair nosings enhance the independence of
partially sighted people.  Clear signing and good quality
public address announcements are essential.

9    Aurally Handicapped People. Many people with impaired
hearing have difficulty separating relevant sounds from a
confusion of noise.  In an emergency, visual information
should be flashed on to electronic scoreboards wherever
possible to supplement loudspeaker announcements.  Clear
unambiguous signing essential.

10   Consideration could be given to a differential pricing
structure which would help disabled people on low incomes
to afford the safer seating areas, rather than stand in the
crowded terraces.

Yours faithfully




Arthur Goldthorpe OBE
Chairman Access Committee for England
ACCESS COMMITTEE for ENGLAND
35 G reat Smith S treet                                                     Chairman Arthur Goldthorpe OBE
London SWIP 3BJ
Telephone 01-222 7980




             30th May 1989



            The Secretary
            Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            London SW1H 9AT


            Dear Sir

            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

            Thank you for your letter of 23rd May 1989 with the .
            invitation to present a written submission to the above
            inquiry.

            I have arranged to circulate your letter for discussion at
            the next meeting of the Access Committee on June 16th.
            Unfortunately this is shortly after the date when you hoped
            submissions would reach you, but I will ensure that the
            response of the Access Committee is sent as soon as possible
            after their meeting.

            I apologise for any inconvenience this may cause.

            Yours sincerely




           Arthur Goldthorpe
           Chairman Access Committee for England




Centre on Environment for the Handicapped       Chairman John H Penton MBE BA AADipl RIBA RIAS ACIArb FCSD FRSA
Registered Charity 272034                                             Chief Executive Sarah Langton-Lockton BA Oxon
