43-12.JS



From:        J L Goddard                     cc Mr Cogbill C4
             F8 Division                        Mr Evans    C4
             Ext 3314                           MissWooldrige F2
                                                Ms Rex C1
             21 December 1990




Mr Clavton




BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES: TICKET TOUTING




Thank you for your minute of 13 December and for the first draft
instructions to Parliamentary Counsel.     I have a number of
comments.


2.      I am content with the reference in paragraph 2.3 to the
Football Spectators Act 1989 as Ministers have indicated that they
would wish to restrict this offence to Association Football.


3.      I see no difficulty over "organisers of the game" in
paragraph 2.7.     We have again checked with the football
authorities and their view is that this is the correct term.
Apparently,    for the vast majority of matches,   the organiser would
be the home club.     For important Cup matches at neutral grounds or
for international matches the Football League or the Football
Association would be the organisers.     If necessary, we might
perhaps include a definition somewhere, but there is no ambiguity
in the football world in using the words "the organisers of the
game".


4.      The penalty is a question on which I look for advice from C4.
They will doubtless take into account the need to make the penalty
appropriate to the profits.     Subject to their views, I should be
surprised if it was thought right to allow this offence to clutter
up the business of the Crown Court.


5.   Turning to the draft instructions,      I am not sure that your
paragraph 2.2 quite gives the intended flavour.      Whilst the
presence of touts themselves can cause obstruction, our purpose is
more to reduce the potential for disorder resulting from the
amassing of crowd in the expectation that tickets might be
available.   I suggest that the first sentence of paragraph 2.2 be
replaced by something on the lines of:-


     "One of the main purposes of the proposed offence is to
     reduce the potential for disorder resulting from the
     expectation that tickets will be available from touts outside
     football grounds.   This expectation attracts large groups of
     supporters without tickets to attend at the vicinity of the
     ground causing obstruction and, as ticket supply fails,
     frustration, which are conducive to disorder".


6.   I also wonder if the first line of the defence in paragraph
2.6 is necessary since the offence will only be committed if the
sale of the ticket is in a public place or a place to which the
public have access.


7.   We are, of course, ready to hold a meeting if that would be
helpful.




                             J. L. GODDARD


                            J L GODDARD
