                         THE JUDICIAL SCRUTINY INTO
                     THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




                   WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
                    HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP




        INTRODUCTION

1       The Hillsborough Family Support Group. These submissions are made on behalf of
        the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“the Group”), which consists of most of the

    §   families who lost relatives in the disaster.1 The Group was responsible for the
        submission of the new evidence to the Home Secretary in March 1997 which resulted
        in the establishment of this Judicial Scrutiny.

2       The aims of the Group. The Group contends that the fresh evidence discovered
        justifies criminal proceedings for perverting the course of justice at the inquests in
         1990-91. The culpability of particular individuals needs to be discovered by further
         investigation. While some believe that proceedings for manslaughter should have
        been brought, others argue that an acceptance by police officers of fault at the
        inquests would have assuaged grief and anger, and that the concealment of the truth
        and misrepresentation of events is more serious. All seek from this Scrutiny a further
        judicial inquiry into the disaster on the basis of evidence not made available to the
        inquiry of Lord Taylor in 1989, nor to the inquests in 1990-91. It is accepted, eight
        and a half years after the event, that it is impracticable, and may be undesirable, for
        fresh inquests to be convened. It is not argued that a judge should be appointed to
        re-examine all the issues considered by the Taylor Inquiry. It is submitted that the
        matter should be referred to the High Court for a determination whether the verdicts
        of “accidental death” should be set aside by reason of the fresh evidence. However,
        these submissions will demonstrate that there are issues of fact which can only be
        resolved by the presentation of oral evidence at such a proceeding. The most
        appropriate course would be

        (a)   an invitation by the scrutinising tribunal to the Attorney - General to issue his
              fiat for an application to the Divisional Court under section 13 of the Coroners
               Act 1988, with a view to having the inquest verdicts quashed, combined with;

        (b)   the grant of leave to move for Judicial Review of the inquest verdicts, or a
               recommendation that leave be granted.



       'The submissions have been prepared by Alun Jones QC and Julian Knowles of
Counsel, 3 Raymond Buildings, Gray’s Inn, London WC1R 5BH, instructed by Ann
Adlington, solicitor to the Group.
     3   Section 13 of the Coroners Act provides:

                 ( 1)   This section applies where, on an application by or under the authority
                        of the Attorney - General, the High Court is satisfied as respects a
                        coroner (“the coroner concerned”) either ...

                 (b)    where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether by reason of
                        fraud, rejection of evidence, irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency
                        of inquiry, the discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is
                        necessary or desirable in the interests of justice that another inquest
                        should be held.

                 (2)    The High Court may -

                 (a)    order ... another inquest to be held into the death ... or

••               (c)    ... where an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on that
                        inquest.

         In Re Rapier [1988] 1 Q.B. 26 the Court stated (at p28C) that it was desirable for
         applications under section 13 of the Act to be combined with an application for
         Judicial Review in order for the Court to have the broadest range of remedies at its
         disposal.

     4   The advantages of a Divisional Court hearing. Such a hearing would have a number
         of advantages over a “first instance” type of enquiry.

         (i)     the Divisional Court could inform itself of background and uncontroversial
                 evidence by affidavit evidence;

         (ii)    the Divisional Court could, at an inter partes hearing, decide how much
                 evidence need be called live to determine whether verdicts should be quashed.

         (iii)   the very flexible Judicial Review procedures available would obviate the need
                 for expensive and cumbersome re - litigation.

     5   The motives of the Group. Most, but not all, of the members of the Group are from
         Liverpool. Otherwise they have little in common beyond the fact that all of them lost
         cherished relatives. They come from a variety of backgrounds, circumstances and
         occupations. The Group is not political, and has no interest except in promoting the
         legitimate legal interests of its members in relation to the disaster. It is understood
         that a number of relatives have written to Lord Justice Stuart - Smith expressing their
         own reasons for wanting a fresh enquiry.

     6   Common to all the members of the group is a deep-seated conviction that the legal
         system failed them, at a vulnerable time in their lives, when they most needed its
         protections. Hostility is not directed towards the Taylor Inquiry. Many recognise
         that the disaster lead, through Lord Taylor’s recommendations, to great and lasting

                                                2
improvements in safety at football grounds. However, the Group’s attitudes to the
inquests are very different. Repeatedly, members have told their lawyers, and wish
to express to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, that they attended the inquests full of trust
in the police and coroner’s court, which subsequent events have proved to have been
misplaced. The feeling of betrayal is profound and has led to deep bitterness and, in
some, a sense of alienation from the courts and law enforcement authorities. Many
feel that they have failed their dead relatives by failing to assert themselves effectively
at the inquests.

The new evidence demonstrates that the inquest proceedings, culminating in verdicts
of accidental death, were deeply flawed. The inquest verdicts were procured by the
presentation of false and misleading evidence, and by the concealment and rejection
of material evidence. Responsibility for this lies with the South Yorkshire Police,
and with the West Midlands Police, who investigated the disaster.

The inquest verdicts were the culmination of the attempts of the South Yorkshire
Police to shift the blame for the disaster from themselves to others, in particular to
the supporters. This evasion of responsibility began as the disaster unfolded, when
the officer in charge lied to the Secretary of the FA about what was happening, and
continued through to the inquests, despite Lord Taylor’s condemnation (see Appendix
1, para. 285). The fact that the Taylor Inquiry is not criticised by most of the Group
enhances rather than diminishes the need for a further Inquiry. The Taylor Report
was directed to other issues than the inquests, and was, from the point of view of the
families of the deceased, impersonal and general. Each bereaved person looked to
the inquests to discover the individual circumstances of his or her relative’s death;
instead of this, it became apparent to them, eventually, that each inquest did not
direct itself to the questions of the facts of each individual’s death, but was another
general inquiry into the overall circumstances of the disaster, which succeeded in the
minds of certain sections of the public in undermining and even reversing the findings
of Lord Taylor. It is submitted that a useful starting point in understanding the
background is to contrast the Interim Report of Lord Taylor of August 1989 with the
summing-up of the Coroner to the jury.

In these Submissions the Group will:

(i)     Present and analyse the new evidence, none of which was considered by Lord
        Taylor or the inquests;

(ii)    Analyse the false evidence which was given;

(iii)   Demonstrate how the new evidence might have affected the course of the
        inquests.


             CHRONOLOGY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY


The most important dates are as follows:
April 15   2.52pm: Gate C opened

           3.06pm: Match stopped

           3.15pm: Mr Duckenfield tells the Secretary of the FA that
           Liverpool fans have burst in through the gates. Later, other
           officers tell the press that excessive drinking by Liverpool fans
           was the cause of the disaster.

           Two video tapes go missing from the locked and alarmed club
           control room room at Hillsborough.

April 17   Lord Taylor appointed

April 18   Inquests opened and adjourned

April 19   The Sun article "The Truth". False police allegations that
           drunken fans were to blame and that they had looted the bodies
           of the dead presented as established fact.

April 24   West Midlands Police begin their investigation

May 15     Taylor Inquiry begins (174 witnesses give evidence)

June 29    Taylor Inquiry finishes

August 4   Interim Taylor Report published

August 5   Chief Constable of South Yorkshire (Peter Wright) offers to
           resign in the light of the Taylor Report. He expresses surprise
           at the extent of his force’s failings.

im
February   Decision taken to hold ’mini - inquests’ dealing with the
           statutory questions of ’who, where and when’, but not with
           ’how’.

April 18   ’Mini - inquests’ resume. On average, 20 minutes spent on
           each case.


Autumn     The DPP announces his decision that no police officers will be
           prosecuted because of "insufficient evidence".
November 19   Main inquests begin in Sheffield.

mi
March 28      The jury return verdicts of accidental death by a majority of 9 -
              2.

July 11       Police Complaints Authority (PCA) direct that charges of
              neglect of duty be preferred against Mr Duckenfield and Mr
              Murray.

November 10   Mr Duckenfield announces his retirement on medical grounds.

1922

January 13    The PCA drop the charges against Mr Murray.

April         Memorial presented to the Attorney - General, for the purposes
              of section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, asking for new
              inquests in the case of six families on the basis of evidence
              which has come to light since the original inquests.

May           Application for leave to move for judicial review adjourned by
              May J pending the Attorney - General’s decision

August 20     Attorney - General says that there is insufficient basis for the
              exercise of his fiat

1992

April 6       Leave to move for judicial review granted (Macpherson of
              Cluny J)

November 5    Judicial review refused by the Divisional Court (McCowan LJ
              and Turner J) (Appendix 2).

im
December 5    Granada Television      broadcasts    drama    -   documentary
              ’Hillsborough’.

1997

March         Roger Houldsworth’s evidence, the footage from Camera 5
              before 15.02 pm, which the Coroner at the inquests stated had
              gone missing, and the evidence of Dr Edward Walker
              presented to the Home Secretary and the DPP.


                              5
June 30               Home Secretary announces a judicial scrutiny of the fresh
                      evidence.


EVIDENCE NOT PRESENTED TO THE INQUESTS OR TO LORD
TAYLOR’S INQUIRY: TWO GENERAL SUBJECTS

There were two serious areas of human failing at Hillsborough, applicable to all the
deaths:

       (i)    The failures of control in the police control box, highlighted in the
              Taylor Report, caused the crushing in the pens.

       (ii)   The slow and inadequate response to the developing disaster delayed
              the arrival of the emergency services, and prevented the injured from
              receiving medical attention. It is remarkable and shocking that only
              fourteen of the deceased were taken to hospital. The remainder were
              left for dead in the gymnasium at the football ground, or at various
              locations at the back of the Leppings Lane terraces.

Evidence relevant to both of these limbs of failure was withheld from the inquest
jury. To the first of these, the evidence of Roger Houldsworth is directly relevant.
To the second, the evidence of Dr Edward Walker and the ambulanceman Tony
Edwards is directly relevant. None of this evidence was made available to the
Coroner’s court nor to the Taylor Inquiry.

  The police control box: the importance of the video tape evidence.

The recently-discovered evidence of Roger Houldsworth is of central importance. In
order to understand its significance, it is necessary to consider the very different
evidence advanced between 1989 and 1991. Lord Taylor found that the primary
cause of the disaster was the failure of control which occurred in the police control
box at Hillsborough. He said that the decision to open gate C at 2.52pm should have
been accompanied by measures to divert the fans away from the tunnel into pens 3
and 4 which, he found, were overfull at 2.50pm (Para. 184). Although he accepted
the police evidence that they were unable to see the terraces because of a faulty
camera, he found that it was foreseeable that opening the gate would cause injuries
in the pens. He described the police’s failure to take these measures as "a blunder
of the first magnitude" (See paras. 229 -232). He singled out Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, the officer in charge, for particular criticism. "Mr Duckenfield’s
capacity to take decisions and give orders seemed to collapse ... He froze." (Paras.
282 - 284). Mr Duckenfield and his deputy, Superintendent Murray, were charged
with neglect of duty by the Police Complaints Authority, although the cases were
discontinued when Mr Duckenfield retired on medical grounds.

The false allocation of blame to Liverpool supporters. The police, aided by ’The Sun’
newspaper, had sought to blame the disaster on drunken Liverpool fans (see
Chronology, supra.). The Taylor Report repudiated this completely. Lord Taylor
both exonerated the fans and criticised the police, not just for their mistakes, but for
telling lies and refusing to face up to their responsibilities (para. 285). The Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, Peter Wright, offered to resign after publication of the
Report, expressing surprise at the extent to which his force had been criticised.

By the time the main inquests resumed in November 1990, therefore, it was clear that
the focus of the evidence should be upon the actions of the police rather than the
behaviour of the fans. It was apparent that a central question would be whether the
police’s ’blunder’ was of sufficient gravity so as to permit the jury to return verdicts
of unlawful killing. This made it extremely important that all the evidence relevant
to the issue of the police’s culpability was put before the inquest jury. The two police
forces would have been aware that the more the jury heard that it was obvious that
the pens were full when gate C was opened, the more likely it was that verdicts of
unlawful killing would be returned.

The basic legal issue at the inquests. At the inquests the Coroner left two verdicts
to the jury, namely accidental death and unlawful killing. (See Appendix 3,
Transcript, 25/3/91, p3 et seq.). In relation to unlawful killing, he directed the jury
in accordance with Watkins LJ’s formulation in R. v. West London Coroner ex parte
Gray [1988] Q.B. 467, namely:

               Was the failure to act for the benefit of the health and welfare of the
               deceased reckless ? An act of recklessness means that he did or failed
               to do something where there was an obvious and serious risk to the
               health and welfare of the deceased, to which that person whose
               conduct you are considering having regard to his duty was indifferent
               or that recognising the risk to be present he deliberately chose to run
               the risk by doing nothing about it.

Issues of Fact. There were two main general factual questions for the jury to consider
in connection with the verdict of unlawful killing:

(i)    Should the police be blamed for opening gate C, given the crush which had
       developed outside the turnstiles and, if so, to what extent ought they to be
       blamed?

(ii)   Should the police be blamed for failing to take measures to divert fans away
       from the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 when gate C was opened and, if so, to what
       extent ought they to be blamed ?

In his summary of the evidence, the Coroner first considered the events outside the
ground and the crush which developed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles prior to
2.52pm. (Appendix 3, 25/3/91, p7 et seq.). Having considered this evidence, the
Coroner told the jury (p25):

               All the evidence would seem - not all but virtually all the evidence
               would seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open the gate
               was reasonable in the circumstances.
       Therefore the Coroner effectively directed the jury that the answer to (i) was ’No’.2

18    The Coroner then went on to consider the events in the police control box. On no
       fewer than four occasions he directed the jury that the most crucial issue in the case
      was the knowledge and actions of the officers in the control box. In particular, he
      directed the jury to consider very carefully what the officers knew about the
      overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 before 3.00pm, and whether they were aware that the
      pens were already full when the orders were given to open gate C, which led to the
      influx of supporters and the fatal crushing on the terraces.

19    At pp54 - 55 the Coroner described the following question as one of the "root
      questions":

                      [A]t what point could - assuming somebody had looked at the terrace -
                       could anybody have realistically noted that there was serious
                      overcrowding with the terrace (sic) ...

20    Having directed the jury on Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C the Coroner
      said at ppl25 - 128:

                      Now, what about the assessment of the terraces, because this is may
                      be the single most important factor which you have to weigh.

                      The sum total of the evidence from the Control Room, from Mr
                      Duckenfield, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard, was that none
                      of them had noticed any problems with the pens until people came
                      over or the gates were opened. In other words, shall we say in round
                      terms, three o’clock.

                      This was partly because their attention was focussed on what was
                      happening outside Leppings Lane, though I think Mr Goddard certainly
                      said he did glance around and he had noticed nothing unusual ... [he]
                      also said that in fact the front of the pens is quite difficult to see
                      because of the angles ...

                      So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have noted
                      at the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens were
                      so full or so over full that diversion was something which had to be
                      taken; and secondly, of course, would the connection, would a
                      reasonably prudent, skilled police officer in the shoes, if you like, of


        2There are a number of members of the Group who believe that the decision to open
gate C was, by itself, an understandable reaction to what was happening outside the ground.
However a number of families believe that this decision cannot be looked at in isolation, and
that because the police were to blame for having allowed the crush at the turnstiles to have
built up, the decision to open the gate was of itself a culpable act for which they ought to be
held responsible; an alternative remedy was available, namely, to delay the kick-off.
              Mr Duckenfield or indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the
              opening of the gate, diversion of the tunnel, and conditions on the pen?

The following day the Coroner returned to this question.       He directed the jury
(26/3/91, p22):

              [I]n the final analysis you may feel the real apex of the problem is the
              issue of whether or not there was such a failure in not diverting the
              fans from the tunnel that you can classify that as creating an obvious
              and serious risk of injury.

At p24 he said:

              It all hinges, as I said to you yesterday, on whether or not; what the
              assessment, if any, of the pens were because if the pens were either
              not observed or were observed and not noted to be abnormal then that
              might help you in deciding whether or not there was an obvious and
              serious risk to the people involved.

              One of the big problems, of course, is that whenever you think about
              this, and when everybody thinks about it, one has to ask the question,
              "Obvious and serious to who ?". You have heard the officers say, "It
              wasn’t obvious to us" and if you believe them you might say that is the
              end of the matter ...

The evidence of the police about Camera 5. The officers blamed their failure to see
the overcrowding on the terraces on what they said was a defective camera, Camera
5, pointing at pens 3 and 4. The issue for the jury was whether the police had
ignored an obvious and serious risk when they opened gate C without taking measures
to stop fans from entering the tunnel to pens 3 and 4. Because of the evidence of the
officers (which was unchallenged) the jury must have based their consideration of this
question on a finding that the police, through no fault of their own, did not know
about the overcrowded condition of pens 3 and 4 until it was too late. It was
therefore almost inevitable that verdicts of accidental death would be returned

The appropriateness of the jury’s verdicts therefore depends upon the reliability of
their findings about what the police knew about the terraces. The Group submits that
the new evidence goes directly to the obviousness and seriousness of the risk that was
ignored by the police, and undermines the reliability of this finding, and thus also
undermines the jury’s verdicts. As the Coroner said, this question was the question
upon which the jury’s verdict hinged.

The evidence of the police officers is contained at Appendix 4. The following is a
summary of the most pertinent parts.


PC Trevor Bichard was in charge of the video cameras in the police control room.
These cameras had the ability to pan and tilt, and to zoom in and out. PC Bichard
was forthright in his evidence to the tribunals that the picture from Camera 5 had
been distorted, and that was the reason that the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 had not
been noticed by any of the officers in the control box.

The video tape of the pictures taken from camera 5 which was shown to the jury
began at 3.02pm, and was a time lapse video of poor quality. PC Bichard was asked
by the Coroner why the video began at 3.02pm, and whether there should have been
film of events prior to 3.02pm. PC Bichard’s response was inconclusive. He replied
that there should have been, but that (p80):

              I have no idea at all where it could have gone to. It was part of the
              tape and the tapes were all sealed up at the end of the day.

At p80 PC Bichard said:

              My recollections are that the particular camera had been faulty and in
              fact you saw some of the problems that occurred. You were getting
              what is called flare. It is reflection of light coloured objects and you
              lose the picture. The camera was not really being used as much as it
              would normally be because of the sub - standard picture. It was just
              left in position. That is why the picture never really moved at all
              because it was just left in position.

PC Bichard was then asked by the Coroner about when he had first noticed something
wrong on the terraces (p82):

              Q.       At what point, either visually or by monitor, anything that
                       warranted comment, if that is the right word ? - A. I saw some
                       people climbing over the fence and a situation similar to that,
                       people climbing to the stand, had occurred the year earlier ...

              Q.       That is the first time your attention was drawn to that part of
                       the ground in a significant sort of way ? - A. Yes

              Q.       Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a monitor
                       ? - A. It is very difficult to remember ... I am not sure.

At p92 he was asked:

              Q.       What do you say, officer, so far as the ability of a camera,
                       trained from the South Stand, to give you an idea in your terms
                       of overcrowding within that area ? - A. It would not give you
                       a view of overcrowding.

              Q.       Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment to
                       make any decision about overcrowding from the monitor that
                       you would have in front of you ? - A. I don’t think it would be
                       a sound judgment.
                     Q.     In fact, part of the problem is that the position and angle of the
                            camera in the South Stand, instead of ideally, if you like, being
                            on the centre of the pitch gives you a difficulty because of the
                            angle itself ? - A. That combined with the inadequacy of the
                            camera, yes.

30    At p96 he was cross - examined by Counsel for the families on his evidence that it
      was not possible to pick out facial features:

                     Q.     ... Do you maintain the view that the zoom facility is such that
                            it is not possible to zoom in so that one can clearly identify a
                            given individual if one wishes to do so ? - A. I am quite happy
                            with that comment, yes ... when there is a group, a large
                            crowd there, to pick out an individual would be difficult.

                     Q.     But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial features,

 §     At p97 he said:
                            can you not ? - A. I don’t think so, sir.3



                     If I had seen [overcrowding] I would have done something about it.

31    In his evidence to Lord Taylor on June 12 1989, PC Bichard said:

                     The camera was not up the mark ... we were getting pictures, that is
                     the best way of describing it.

32    Sergeant Goddard gave similar evidence. His evidence to Lord Taylor was as follows
       (June 11 1989, p87):

                     Q.     What did you see inside the ground that put you on notice that
                            something was wrong in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. People were
                            climbing over the fences.

                     Q.     When did you see that ? - A. About three o’clock time.



        3This evidence should be compared with the evidence given to Lord Taylor on 25
May 1989 at pp 1 2 8 - 9 where the camera systems at Hillsborough were described as ’the
finest in the country’. The following extract from an article in ’Police Review’ by Mr
Locke, the club’s head of security, was read to Lord Taylor:

       Today at Hillsborough ... a senior officer can follow crowd movement outside the
       stadium by using the closed - circuit cameras as his eyes. He is able to anticipate
       problems, see incidents as they build and employ necessary resources to abate them.
       Inside the ground he can watch crowd behaviour and identify offenders through the
       zoom facility.

                                            11
                         Q.     What did you do about it ? - A. My first thought was, "We
                                have got a pitch invasion" and it was a matter of deploying as
                                many men as possible down to the Leppings Lane end of the
                                perimeter track.

      33   At p94 he was cross - examined by Mr Hytner QC on behalf of the families:

                         Q-     ... Were you aware that there was a special problem on the
                                Leppings Lane terraces or not ? - A. No, sir, I was not.

                         Q.     ... Did you at any stage before you saw people climbing over
                                the pens notice any overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. No,
                                sir.

                         Q.     Apart from noticing there was crowd trouble in that people

• #   3                         were climbing over did you ever say to yourself pens 3 and 4
                                are beginning to look overcrowded. They have reached
                                capacity ? - A. No, sir. 3 and 4 were getting full, were full.
                                From my vantage point they were not overcrowded.

                         Q.     Did no Officer in the control box, anybody, comment at any
                                stage that pens 3 and 4 looked full ? - A. No, sir. They did
                                look full but not overfull.

      34   At p96 Sergeant Goddard was cross-examined by Mr Muller QC (for the South
           Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority). He said that there was a ’blind spot’
           at the front of the terraces, which meant that Camera 5 could not focus on what was
           happening on the bottom steps of pens 3 and 4. He said

                         You would not be able to pick out [fans] individually. You could see
                         figures.

      35   At the inquests his evidence was (14 March 1991, p92):

                         Q.     On this day ... at what point did you yourself first notice
                                anything unusual about the pens ? - A. The first point I
                                noticed, the unusual part, was when I saw people start climbing
                                over the fences onto the perimeter track and then I saw a gate
                                open ...

           Later he said (15 March 1991, p6):

                         Q.     Your evidence to the inquest is very simple; you never saw
                                anything unusual in that Leppings Lane terrace in the pens
                                there until you saw the people climbing over around three
                                o’clock ? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

      36   PC Ryan had worked in the control box at Hillsborough for five years. He gave

                                                12
evidence to Lord Taylor as follows (June 11 1989, p52):

               Q.     There was a problem with one of [the cameras] is that correct
                      ? - A. That is correct, yes. There was an apparent fault with
                      on the camera to the West Stand, West terraces ...

               Q.     Where is it mounted ? - A. I think that is the one that is
                      mounted on the electronic scoreboard.

               Q.     ... What was the problem with that camera as you can recall ?
                       - A. The picture was very distorted.

               Q.     (Lord Taylor) Very what ? - A. Distorted, sir.

               Q.     Was the fault mended ? - A. I contacted the engineer myself.

               Q.     That is Mr Houldsworth ? - A. Roger Houldsworth, yes. He
                      attended and came out and worked on that camera for some
                      time. Quite how long he was there I do not know. He was
                      certainly there working on it for some considerable time. The
                      picture was never satisfactory as far as I can recall that day
                      although that was not my specific duty to look at that.

               Q.     ... When you say the picture as far as you can see was not
                       satisfactory what was wrong with it ? - A. It was not as clear
                       as you would hope the picture to be.

               Q.     Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way
                      inoperative or less adequate than normal or ... - A. As far as
                      I can recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality of the
                      picture that was the problem.

PC Ryan did not give evidence at the inquests.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield began his evidence to Lord Taylor on 24th May
1989. He did not refer to any faults with the camera system. On 25th May 1989 at
p i29 he said that he did not use the zoom facility at all, but mainly looked out of the
window. On 26th May (pl5) he referred to the surveillance system as "an excellent
system".

Chief Inspector McRobbie gave evidence at the Taylor Inquiry; he was not called to
give evidence at the inquests. This is of great significance, because his evidence to
the Taylor Inquiry flatly contradicted that of his colleagues, especially PC Bichard.

Mr McRobbie gave evidence on 13th June 1989. At p20 he was asked, with reference
to the statement he made shortly after the disaster:

               Q.      At the bottom of p5 you refer to an incident which drew the
                      attention of the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) ... - A.
                      That is correct sir, yes.

               Q.     You say:

                             "Police Constable Bichard operated the camera and I
                             watched him to be able to zoom onto him (sic) which I
                             thought was a super facility for spotting trouble makers
                             in the crowd."

                      A. That is correct, sir.

               Q.    No difficulty with the picture at all ? - A. Well when you say
                     "no difficulty" it certainly brought this person closer to us than
                     I think it would have been possible for a Police Officer to
                     select the correct person that Control were identifying without
                     any problem.

              Q.      That is the whole purpose of it, isn’t it ? - A. I would think so
                      sir, yes.

At p22 he was cross - examined by Mr Glasgow QC (for Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club):

               Q.    Chief Inspector, the camera zoom which impressed you was
                     that which was showing the scene on the terraces, was it ? - A.
                     It was able to pick out someone directly under the control box,
                     yes, but I do not know where the camera is sited. I am sorry.

               Q.    You are quite sure that was the camera that was being used, the
                     one that shows the scene on the terraces ? - A. I cannot speak
                     about a camera. All I can say is on the monitor a person was
                     able to be enlarged.

              Q.     You might be able to help us if you can remember by chance
                     whether it was black and white or colour. - A. It was black
                     and white.

This exchange shows that it was Camera 5 to which Mr McRobbie was referring.
The other camera trained on Leppings Lane, situated in the centre of the South Stand,
was a colour camera.

At p26 he was again asked whether it was Camera 5 which had been zoomed in by
PC Bichard:

              A.     I would have thought so from the definition, but, as I say, I
                      would not ...
    7.,:...
                             Q.     (Lord Taylor) When you say "the definition” was it good
                                    definition ? - A. It was quite reasonable, sir, yes.

         43   Despite Mr McRobbie’s evidence, Lord Taylor accepted the police’s evidence that
              they did not notice anything amiss until fans began to climb out of the pens (para.
              78). Nonetheless, because of the layout of the ground, and the crushes which had
              developed at previous matches in 1981 and 1988, he said it was foreseeable that
              disaster would result from opening gate C if preventative measures were not taken.

         44   The evidence of Roger Houldsworth. Roger Houldsworth installed and repaired the
              CCTV (“Closed Circuit”) system operating at Hillsborough on the day of the disaster,
              and was present in the club’s video room during the disaster. Mr Houldsworth made
              a statement to lawyers for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on 16th May 1989, and
              expected to be called as a witness at the Inquiry and the inquests. However he gave
              evidence at neither tribunal (Appendix 5). Although Mr Houldsworth was well
^      'IP    known to the investigating officers, he was variously described on the Coroner’s
              witness list as a ’sound engineer’ and as ’ground sta ff. This statement was obtained
              by the Group from South Yorkshire Police, and so was known to the police.

              The first part of his May 1989 statement contains a detailed description of the two
              closed circuit television systems in operation, one for the club, the other for the
              police. The second part of Mr Houldsworth’s statement deals with the sinister
              disappearance of two video tapes from the club’s CCTV room on the night of the 15 -
              16 April. This statement did not deal expressly with the allegations later made by the
              police that video equipment was inadequate. There was no reason why it should have
              done so shortly after the event. Mr Houldsworth could not anticipate the police’s
              evidence.

         46   Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is contained in Appendix 5. It is believed that the
              significance of his evidence was not made known to the Coroner. Mr Houldsworth
              watched the disaster on the video monitors in the CCTV room, one of which showed
              what was being displayed on the police system. He was the only independent civilian
              witness who watched what was being shown on the monitors. His evidence shows
              the police evidence analysed above to be deliberately false and misleading. In
              particular, his evidence shows the following:

              (i)     That the video camera trained on pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane terraces
                      was functioning normally, having been repaired by him on the morning of the
                      disaster;

              (ii)    That the pictures from this camera were being received normally in the police
                      control box before 3.02pm (the time the video shown to the jury began) and
                      were being recorded continuously (rather than in time - lapse mode) on video;

              (iii)   That the camera was panning and zooming in on the terraces, and was
                      therefore being operated by an officer in the control box;

              (iv)    That at the time Mr Duckenfield gave the order to open Gate C, the screens

                                                   15
               would have been clearly showing that the terraces were full and that some
               people were obviously in distress, with many more clearly uncomfortable. It
               would therefore have been apparent to the officers in the control box that
               death and injury would result if more people were permitted to enter the pens;

       (v)     That the officers stationed in the box, in particular Mr Duckenfield, were
               therefore able to see the overcrowding develop in these pens prior to 2.52pm;

       (vi)    That those in overall control of the policing operation at Hillsborough would
               have been aware of the overcrowding on the terraces as it developed, and
               there was therefore an obvious and serious risk o f injury if gate C were
               opened and the fans riot prevented from entering the tunnels;

       (vii)   That on the night of the disaster, 2 tapes went missing from the locked and
               alarmed club control room

       (viii) That the evidence given by the relevant police officers, namely that they could
              not see the overcrowding on the terraces because the camera was defective,
              was knowingly false.

47     Mr Houldsworth was interviewed by Yorkshire Television for its ’First Tuesday’
       documentary on the disaster broadcast in February 1990. A transcript of this
       interview is contained within Appendix 5. A ’minder’ from the West Midlands police
       was present during this interview. This interview is significant because:

       (i)     It corroborates Mr Houldsworth’s more recent evidence that all the cameras
                were working properly (p2)4;

       (ii)    It shows that he was aware of the impending disaster because of what he could
                see through the screens in the club’s CCTV room, which was precisely the
                same was what the police were seeing on their monitors (pp8 - 9). The police
                would therefore have been aware of the situation. He saw the influx through
               gate C and went to check on the central pens because of what he could see on
                the police system;

       (iii)   This interview is significant because it shows the West Midlands police were
               anxious not to let Mr Houldsworth go ’on the record’ about anything not
               strictly within his May 1989 statement;

       (iv)    The fact that he was accorded a ’minder’ shows the importance West
               Midlands police attached to his evidence.




    4In the interview Mr Houldsworth refers to ’Camera 1’. In fact, this is Camera 5. This
camera was variously described during the Taylor Inquiry and the inquests e.g. as ’the
scoreboard camera’.
)
    48    Because of the disappearance of footage from Camera 5 tape and the poor quality of
          the footage from 15.02 (which was in time lapse mode), counsel for the families was
          prevented from cross - examining the police officers in the control box effectively.
          For example, in his cross - examination of PC Bichard, when PC Bichard had denied
          seeing any overcrowding (at p97) he said: "I cannot take that any further with you,
          officer." Had the tapes been available at the inquests, Mr King could have positively
          contradicted the evidence given by the officers. As it was, he was able only to
          suggest that the officers were mistaken in their protestations of ignorance.

    49    The jury therefore assessed the culpability of the police on the basis of evidence
          which was false and misleading. It is almost certain that they must have concluded
          that because the cameras were not working properly it would not have been obvious
          that the terraces were overcrowded, and that the police were therefore not to blame
          for not recognising the danger on the terraces when they opened gate C.

          Whv was an incomplete video shown to the iurv ? The tape played to the inquest
          jury was produced by Sergeant Killoch of the West Midlands Police as police exhibit
          TB15, on 15 March 1991 at the conclusion of Sergeant Goddard’s evidence
          (Appendix 4, 15* March 1991, p62). It became the Coroner’s exhibit C.539. On
           13* March 1991 the Coroner had acknowledged that this footage was of very poor
          quality. It showed only events after 3.02pm in others words, after gate C had been
          opened. The pictures were recorded in “time - lapse” mode, and the tape did not
           clearly show what was happening. The same incomplete tape appears to have been
           shown to Lord Taylor (see Transcript, 25* May 1989, pl29).

    51    Shortly after the disaster Yorkshire Television began work on a ’First Tuesday’
          documentary about the disaster. They were given a set of tapes which contained
          footage from the cameras in the police control room. Sections of these tapes were
          used in the programme. The tapes contained high quality footage of events before
          3.02pm. The tapes lay undiscovered in Yorkshire Television’s archives until they
          were found in a search requested by Trevor Hicks in February 1997. The statement
          of Trevor Hicks outlines the circumstances. (Appendix 6).

    52    The Group believes the suppression of this evidence to be sinister, and, primafacie,
          a perversion of the course of justice. It was potentially the most important evidence
          in the inquest. It should be noted that two tapes also went missing from the locked
          CCTV room shortly after the disaster. The Coroner failed to pursue the question of
          where the missing footage had gone, despite PC Bichard’s response "I have no idea
          at all where it could have gone to. It was part of the tape and the tapes were all
          sealed up at the end of the day." He ought to have summoned the West Midlands
          officers responsible for gathering this evidence to give an explanation for its
          disappearance. The West Midlands Police should now be asked to explain how this
          evidence came to be suppressed. This is an issue which can only be resolved by oral
          evidence.


           5The Crown Prosecution service have suggested by letter of 10th April 1997 that this
    was in fact Exhibit TB/2.

                                                17
)
    53   The iurv’s requests to see the video. The jury were fully aware of the significance
         of the video evidence. On 13th March 1991 the Coroner addressed the legal
         representatives (p53):

                        ... there is just one thing which the jury have mentioned to me. In
                        fact they have mentioned it twice, and that is what about the video
                        evidence of the terraces. I have had the videos looked at and there is
                        actually next to nothing on the videos because, of course, not
                        everything was recorded. That does not mean to say they weren’t
                        possibly scenes (sic), but there is, I understand, a little tiny bit which
                        is actually on the compilation which you have seen. There is another
                        little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes on for a few minutes.

                        What we have done is that we have clipped it, if that is the right word,
                        and we will show it to you, but it is of very poor quality and I do not
                        think it is going to help us very much. As far as I can tell there isn’t
                        much recorded. Does that help ?

    54   The jury were therefore led to believe that the tiny clip of film they were shown was
         all that existed by way of video evidence of the terraces recorded by Camera 5. The
         poor quality of this clip would undoubtedly have persuaded the jury that the missing
         footage of events before 15.02pm would have been equally poor and would not have
         assisted them significantly.

    55   The only acceptable explanation for the contradiction between what is shown on the
          tapes and what was said in evidence at the inquests is that the officers lied in their
          evidence. The officers in the control box were fully aware of the situation on the
          terraces and had been monitoring the fans in pens 3 and 4 during the build up to the
          kick - off. However they failed to consider the effect that the opening of gate C
          would have on the terraces. Thus it was that the ’blunder of the first magnitude’ was
          made. The officers’ explanation that the camera equipment was not working was an
          excuse invented ex post facto in an attempt to shift the blame elsewhere. It should
          be noted that the explanation given by the South Yorkshire police has changed since
          the disaster. At the time the officers said that Camera 5 was defective. After the
          television programme ’Hillsborough’ was shown last year, the police initially said,
          in January 1997, that they had found the missing tape, and that it supported their
         claim that the camera had been faulty and had been subject to interference from BBC
         outside broadcast equipment. After it was learned that the Group had received tapes
          from Yorkshire television, they changed their explanation and claimed that they had
          never claimed the camera was faulty, but that the fault lay with the monitor. This
         second explanation is also contained in a Press Release from South Yorkshire Police
          of 1“ April 1997

    56   Summary. The police evidence to the tribunals was intended to give the impression
          that they were not to blame for failing to see the overcrowding on the terraces before
          opening gate C because of faulty camera equipment. In fact, the video tapes show
          camera 5 was working properly prior to 3.02pm. Incomplete video evidence of very
          poor quality was shown to the jury; in particular, the pictures from Camera 5 prior

                                                18
to 3.02pm were never shown. This evidence was deliberately suppressed. The video
shows that Camera 5 was operating correctly. Roger Houldsworth’s evidence shows
that the overcrowding was clear and visible to those watching the screen. The jury
therefore considered the most important issue in the case on a false and misleading
evidential basis. The jury’s requests to see the videos underlines the importance it
attached to the officers’ assessment of the terraces.


The medical evidence at the inquests and the evidence of Dr Edward W alker


Lord Taylor found that there was delay and confusion in evacuating the casualties
from pens 3 and 4 and in responding to the magnitude of the disaster. The police
were obsessed by the idea that a pitch invasion was in progress, even though it was
clear to those in the television commentary box (who were further away) that the
problem was overcrowding and not hooliganism (Para. 250). In particular he made
the following findings:

(a)    No officer took effective charge of the evacuation of the injured from the pens
       (Para. 251);

(b)    Organised evacuation of the injured from the pitch did not begin until 3 .12pm
       (lbid.)\
(c)    There was delay in activating the Major Accident Plan (although he
       underestimated the extent of the delay - see below);

(d)    No request was made for cutting gear from the fire brigade until 3.13pm;

(e)    There was no co - ordination of rescue efforts, and no call for the assistance
       of doctors or nurses until 3.29pm;

(f)    There were cases where the earlier provision of medical treatment might have
       made a difference, in that more lives might have been saved (Paras. 251 and
       252).

In contrast, the medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that all the
deceased had died quick and painless deaths, that they were all dead by 3 .15pm, and
accordingly that Lord Taylor had been incorrect in deciding that the secondary
failures of the police had resulted in further loss of life. For this reason, the Coroner
ruled that no evidence after 3.15pm would be considered. The 3.15pm cut off was
predicated on a number of unrealistic assumptions about the time it took for the
deceased to be asphyxiated, such as that all the deceased were subjected to continuous
pressure so that they were unconscious within a short period and dead within minutes,
irrespective of their locations within pens 3 and 4 and irrespective of whether they
were crushed against barriers or against other supporters.

Evidence which has emerged since the inquests shows this conclusion and the
 )
             assumptions upon which it was based to be false. Some of this evidence was
             presented to the Divisional Court in 1993, and some has been uncovered in the period
             since 1993.

     60     Dr W alker’s evidence. The evidence of Dr Walker is contained at Appendix 7.6
            It consists of his contemporaneous account of his work on the day of the disaster, and
            a copy of a police statement dated 20th July 1989.

     61     Dr Walker, who was not at work, responded to televised pictures of the disaster and
            assisted a large number of patients at the Northern General Hospital. He was praised
            by the consultant in charge, Mr Wardrope, for his efforts, and received a letter
            indicating that it was likely that he would be required to give a statement to the
            investigating police force. In due course, Dr Walker gave a statement to the West
            Midlands police. Dr Walker was not called as a witness at the Inquiry or at the
            inquests, and was repeatedly referred to in evidence as an ’unidentified doctor’. The
            consultant in charge of the Accident and Emergency Department at the Northern
•#          General Hospital, Mr Wardrope, gave a detailed account of the thirteen deceased who
            were taken to that hospital, some of whom were treated by Dr Walker, however no
            mention was made of him (Appendix 17).

     62     Dr Walker’s evidence, in summary, is that when he arrived at the Northern General
            Hospital the staff were aware only of a ’disturbance’ at Hillsborough. He was told
            that there was a paediatric cardiac arrest on its way to the hospital, but no connection
            was made between this casualty and Hillsborough. There was no sign that the Major
            Accident Plan had been activated and no awareness that the hospital was shortly to
            receive a large number of critically ill patients. The first patient to arrive was.? Lee
                     and the second patient w jp Philip Hammondf Both boys were young
            teenagers. When they arrived at the hospital their hearts were not beating. Dr
            Walker and others worked on them and succeeded in restarting their heart and
            breathing. Lee Nicol survived until the following Monday. Philip Hammond
            survived for a time but later died, however. Dr Walker then treated a number of
            patients, some of whom died but some of whom survived.

     63     Dr Walker’s contemporaneous evidence is significant in that it clearly demonstrates
            that there were a number of patients who were extremely ill when they reached
            hospital who were successfully treated. It is also significant because it shows that the
            treatment of the injured was hampered by a shortage of drugs and equipment of the
            type necessary to treat cardiac arrests. Dr Walker lists eight deficiencies which
            hampered the treatment of patients at the height of the crisis.

     64     When the evidence given at the mini - inquest into the death of Philip Hammond
            (Appendix 7) is compared with Dr Walker’s evidence numerous deficiencies and
            inaccuracies can be discerned. The evidence at the mini - inquest would have left the
            jury with the totally false impression that Philip was dead before 3 .15pm. Dr Slater,
            the pathologist who carried out Philip’s post - mortem, testified that the policeman


          6It is understood that Dr Walker is also submitting material directly to the Scrutiny.

                                                   20
      who said that he felt Philip’s pulse probably felt his own pulse. He said that the only
      signs of treatment were ECG electrodes attached to his chest and that "essentially
      only lay people saw him." Dr Slater said that Philip was ’brain dead at Hillsborough’
      (Transcript of Philip Hammond mini - inquest, p5). The evidence of Dr Walker
      shows that this opinion was wholly wrong, and that Philip was alive far beyond
      3.15pm. Dr Walker’s evidence accordingly raises the possibility that Dr Slater’s
      other diagnoses were wrong and that patients were alive well beyond the times given
      at the mini - inquests and well beyond the 3 .15pm cut - off.

65    The significance of Dr Walker’s evidence and the Memorial to the Attorney -
      General in 1993 There is evidence that four of the deceased ,§|^ul Carlile, ; Ian
      (fjover, Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams7 were alive after 3.15pm. This evidence
      is contained in the Memorial presented to the Attorney - General in 1993. (Appendix
      20).

£6    Although the Attorney - General did not consider this evidence by itself to be
j     sufficient to justify him exercising his powers under section 13 of the Coroners Act
       1988, it is submitted that this evidence together with the evidence of Dr Walker
       constitutes incontrovertible evidence that some of the conclusions reached at the mini
       - inquests were erroneous, and that many of the deceased were alive after 3 .15pm and
       that an inquiry into the precise circumstances of their deaths was warranted, including
       an inquiry into the matters referred to above.

67    It is significant that the Divisional Court accepted the validity of some of this
       evidence, but declined to grant relief on the basis that the Coroner was not at fault
       (Appendix 2, Judgment, ppl8 - 29, p30, p34). It can therefore be inferred that the
       Court considered that this evidence warranted detailed consideration, but because of
       the nature of the court’s function on an application for judicial review, insufficient
       to warrant relief. The Court specifically said that at p30 that had the hearing been
       a reference pursuant to a reference by the Attorney General under section 13 the
       position might have been different. It is respectfully submitted that the functions of
       this Scrutiny are not so limited. The issue is whether this evidence might have
       altered the outcome of the proceedings if it had been heard by the jury at the inquests.
       For the reasons set out above it is submitted that it is more than likely that this
       evidence would have affected the outcome of the inquests.

68    It is plain from Dr Walker’s evidence that there was evidence available to the
       Coroner of a slow response by the police and the emergency services to the plight of
       the injured, evidence that some people might have been saved by a more timely
       response, and general evidence of a lack of equipment. These were all matters
       which, it is submitted, required investigation in order to determine properly "how"
       the deceased came by their death, and they make the Coroner’s decision not to go
       beyond 3.15pm unjustifiable.



       7Separate submissions have also been made in relation to Kevin Williams by his
mother.
Further evidence is now available which is critical of the slow response to the disaster
(Appendix 14). Dr Naderassen Curpen and Dr Andrew Byrne attended the match as
spectators and became involved in the treatment of the injured. Neither doctor was
aware initially that there was a major incident, and so there was a delay before either
of the doctors went onto the pitch. No tannoy announcement was made until 3.29pm.
Once they became aware of the disaster they both attempted to treat the injured,
although the lack of equipment made this difficult. Dr Bull, who certified the death
of a number of the deceased also criticised the lack of equipment. This supports the
evidence of Dr John Ashton and Dr Glyn Philips, whom the Coroner refused to call
as witnesses.

The justification for the 3.15pm cut - off point. Prior to the resumption of the
inquests in November 1990 the Coroner decided, in spite of objection, that he would
call no evidence on events after 3.15pm. His reason was that the medical evidence
which had been given by the pathologists at the mini - inquests, in particular Dr
Slater and Professor Usher, was to the effect that death from traumatic/crush asphyxia
occurred four to six minutes after the chest became fixed so as to prevent breathing,
and on the assumption that the deceased’s chests had become fixed at the latest by
3.06pm, the time the match was abandoned, it could be further assumed that all the
deceased were dead or dying by 3.15pm, and accordingly that nothing further could
be done for them. He also chose this time because it coincided (approximately) with
the arrival of the first ambulance (see Transcript, 19 October 1990, pp8, 14.).

The British Medical Journal Article and the evidence at the inquests The
Divisional Court observed in the six families Judicial Review in 1993 that the
Coroner imposed the 3.15 pm cut-off

       “Because he took the view that on the overwhelming pathological evidence
       available to him permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered
       by all the deceased” (Appendix 2, Judgment, page 6C).

In November 1991, a very different account appeared in the British Medical Journal,
written by, among others Dr Wardrope (Appendix 8). Many injured people taken to
hospital survived and recovered (see Table 3). They suffered from a variety of
injuries, serious and minor. Some unconscious victims were revived. The following
questions are inevitably posed by this evidence. How many other injured supporters
died of injuries, untended, at the football ground of injuries other than asphyxia, or
of asphyxia at the ground which could have been treated if they had been taken to
hospital ? (Only 14 of the 95 victims (as opposed to the injured) were taken to
hospital) Why was this evidence not made known to the inquests ?

Mr Wardrope’s criticisms contained in this article should be compared with his
evidence at the mini - inquests (Appendix 17, 18/4/90, pl9 et seq.). There, he made
no mention of any failings at the hospital, and in fact gave the opposite impression,
namely that the hospital and emergency services had responded as envisaged in the
Major Accident Plan (see e.g. p27 - 28).

The Divisional Court held that although there was evidence tending to show that some

                                      22
of the deceased were alive after 3 .15pm (see e.g. Judgment, p34), there was no basis
for interfering with the Coroner’s exercise of discretion in imposing this cut-off point.
It is submitted that the new evidence, now available, presents a completely different
account of events.

The Coroner’s ruling had a number of consequences:

(i)     The main consequence was to prevent any further inquiry into the individual
        circumstances of the 95 deaths. At the mini - inquests the Coroner had
        assured the families that the question of ’how’ would be dealt with later. The
        inquests therefore became simply a general inquiry into the circumstances of
        the disaster. A number of the deceased were not mentioned at all during the
        96 days of evidence, save when their names were read out during the initial
        roll - call and when the verdicts were announced. Accordingly, their families
        never discovered how they died. An example is the family oi|fPeter Tootle
        (see Memorial, Appendix 20). His parents travelled nearly every day of the
        inquests by car from Liverpool to Sheffield . His name was mentioned only
        in the list of victims and when the verdicts were announced.

(ii)    The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number of the deceased
        were alive for a considerable period after 3.15pm;

(iii)   The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number of fans who
        were left for dead at the ground in fact survived. Therefore, they never
        considered the possibility that a number of those who died might have been
        saved had they received prompt and efficient medical attention;

(iv)    They never heard evidence about the failure of the Northern General Hospital
        to activate its Major Accident Plan until well after the onset of the disaster,
        and the detrimental effect this had on patient care. Dr Wardrope’s article
        referred to the failure to activate the Major Accident Plan and stated (at
        pl381):

               Failure to implement the major incident alert earlier meant that only
               a few staff had to cope with a large clinical workload in addition to
               implementing the major incident plan.

In summary, the Coroner’s ruling prevented any inquiry into the secondary failures
of the police and the emergency services to provide prompt and efficient medical
attention to the injured.


New evidence underminine the Coroners’s 3.15pm ruling

The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for the 3.15 pm cut-off, and
shows that lives could have been saved. The evidence shows that:

(i)     Some of those who died were alive after 3 .15pm;

                                       23
        (ii)   At least one supporter who would otherwise have died was saved by proper
               medical treatment.

        Taken together, this evidence shows that events after 3.15pm, in particular the
        inadequate response to the disaster by the police and the emergency services were
        relevant to the question of ’how’ the deceased died and accordingly that in order to
        fulfil properly his statutory functions the Coroner ought to have permitted relevant
        evidence to be called on this issue. The evidence provides specific examples of Lord
        Taylor’s general conclusion that lives might have been saved by a more organised
        response (para. 251 and 252).

77     Ian McDermott came forward as a result of an appeal in the ’Liverpool Echo’. He
        has been interviewed by the Group’s solicitor, and a signed statement will be
        forwarded as soon as it is received. His evidence shows that he entered pen 3 after
        gate C was opened at 2.52pm. He was swept down to the front of the pen almost
        immediately and began to be crushed. He spent a number of minutes fighting to
        breathe, but became unconscious some time before 3.04pm.                He regained
'      consciousness on the terraces whilst being given mouth to mouth resuscitation. He
        had pains in his chest, and he was later diagnosed as having suffered a cardiac arrest
        He was eventually carried off the terraces through the wire sometime after 3.25pm8,
        and was taken to the gymnasium where he was fitted with a drip and received oxygen
        and was put into an ambulance. After a period in intensive care, he made a full
        recovery.

78     Ian McDermott’s evidence demonstrates how the rescue operation ought to have
        operated. He received prompt medical attention on the terraces, was put into the
        recovery position almost immediately9, received oxygen while at the ground and,
        most importantly, was taken to hospital in an ambulance10. From this evidence the
        following conclusions can be drawn:

        (i)    Mr McDermott was dead on the terraces, his heart having stopped beating
               before he was carried out through the wire. Instead of having a jacket placed
               over his face and being given up for dead, as happened to the majority of the
               deceased11, resuscitation attempts continued, at the insistence of his friend
               who had accompanied him.

        (ii)   Irreversible brain damage by 3 .15pm was not an inevitable consequence of the
               severe crushing.



    8It is known that no request for cutting gear was made until 3.13pm, and from video
evidence that the wire in pen 3 was not cut until 3.25pm.

     9In contrast to, for example, Ian Glover, who was left lying on his back.

     10As noted elsewhere, a privilege only accorded to fourteen of the 96 deceased.

     "For example Victoria Hicks: see para. I l l , below.
    ■)

               (iii)   The provision of prompt medical attention to him, including drips and oxygen,
                       made the difference between life and death in this case.

               (iv)    There is a likelihood that others could have been saved had they received the
                       same medical care Mr McDermott received, and that their failure to receive
                       this care required investigation at the inquests.

          79   ^Andrew Sefton When the treatment Ian McDermott received is contrasted with the
                treatment Andrew Sefton received, it becomes apparent how lives could have been
                saved. The jury were told that Andrew Sefton had been pulled from pen 3 by fans
                who assisted in trying to revive him, and that a police officer had also tried to revive
                him by performing cardiac massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation (Appendix 9).

          80   Evidence which has come to light since the inquests shows this evidence to be at best
               misleading, and demonstrates a number of disturbing features about how Andrew
               Sefton was treated in the aftermath of the disaster.
    #^   ')    (i)     There are conflicts between written statements of PC Kearney and PC Shipley,
                       the two officers involved with Andrew Sefton. (Appendix 9). In an undated
                        handwritten statement PC Shipley did not refer to assisting in the resuscitation
                       of any injured person. His role was limited to calming fans down and being
                       part of the cordon across the pitch at the half way line. In a second statement
                        dated 13 September 1989, PC Shipley refers to assisting with a number of
                        injured persons, however the only one he purports to positively identify is
                        Andrew Sefton. In late 1989 or early 1990, PC Shipley spoke to Andrew’s
                        parents (at their house), and he told them that in fact Andrew had been the
                        only person whom he had assisted. Accordingly, he has given three
                       conflicting accounts of his activities on that day. The Summary of Evidence
                       prepared by West Midlands police states that PC Shipley gave heart massage
                       while supporter attempted mouth to mouth resuscitation. There is however no
                       mention in any of PC Shipley’s accounts that he did cardiac massage. The
                       jury were therefore given a false picture about the attempts by police to
                       resuscitate Andrew. The full statements, only disclosed after the inquests,
                       show that no police officer tried to revive Andrew.



•
               (ii)    PC Kearney gives conflicting accounts of where he took custody of Andrew’s
                        body. In his initial statement dated 19 May 1989 he says that he took custody
                        of him outside the North Stand and took him to the gym. In a second
                        statement dated 4 July 1989 he says "I took over this body outside the gym
                       after about half a dozen fans had dumped him there".

               (iii)   He asserts in his statement of 19 May that he took custody of Andrew’s body
                       when it was brought into the gymnasium and remained with him until the
                       early hours of the 16 April when he was identified by his mother and taken
                       to the Medico - Legal Centre. He refers to an abrasion on the lower
                       abdominal region, and states that no other marks were found. This statement
                       contains a number of omissions, and conflicts with the known evidence about
                       Andrew’s injuries. There is no reference to Andrew being certified dead; it

                                                      25
       therefore appears that Andrew was assumed to be dead rather than known to
       be dead and no efforts made to attempt revival. Thirdly, there is no reference
       to PC Shipley in PC Kearney’s statement.

(iv)   The discrepancies in the officers statementsand the false presentation of the
        officers’ evidence gives cause for concern. On the evidence as itis now
       known, no attempts were made by trained personnel to revive Andrew Sefton
       at any stage before he was certified dead by Dr Bull at 3.50pm.

Stephen Williams This man also contacted the Group after an appeal in the
’Liverpool Echo.’ His evidence and that of Andrew Worseley (who now lives in
Sweden) has been given in an interview to a researcher for the Group (Appendix 10).

Mr Williams arrived in pen 3 at around 2.50pm, as the crush began to build up. He
became trapped against a barrier at around 3.04pm, when Peter Beardsley hit the
cross - bar. He was unable to move for 10 minutes, and tried unsuccessfully to get
help by biting the shoulder of someone in front of him. Eventually he lost
consciousness. It is clear from his description and his injuries that Mr Williams was
severely crushed. The extent of the crushing is confirmed by a report compiled by
Mr Wardrope, referred to in the report of Dr Clive Leveson, which shows that he
survived 30 minutes of intense crushing (Appendix 10). The crushing was so intense
that he suffered five fractured ribs. In contrast, only thirteen of the deceased suffered
rib fractures, and none sustained five fractures.

Mr Williams regained consciousness in the courtyard outside the West Stand. He
remembers that when he came to he was vomiting and convulsing. He was put into
an ambulance and taken to the Northern General Hospital.

He was extricated from the pile of bodies at the front of pen 3 by a supporter called
Andrew Worsely. He attended the match with his father, who was pushed over in
one of the surges. He found Mr Williams underneath his father. He was blue in the
face, and Mr Worsely thought that he was dead. He managed to drag him out into
the courtyard, where a policeman threw him onto the ground where a number of
bodies were already lying. It is apparent that the policeman incorrectly assumed him
to be dead. It was only when Mr Worsely saw a news programme subsequently that
he realised that Mr Williams had survived.

This case is significant for four reasons:

(i)    It demonstrates the arbitrariness of the 3 .15pm deadline. The evidence of the
       pathologists Professor Usher and Dr Slater at the beginning of the mini -
       inquests on 18 April 1990 (Appendix 17) was to the effect that the deceased
       would have been dead after six minutes of crushing. Mr Williams’ case
       demonstrates that supporters were able to survive for far longer, depending
       upon a number of factors, including their individual capabilities, whether the
       crushing was intermittent or continuous, and whether they were being crushed
       against a barrier or against other supporters. His case confirms the opinion
       of Dr James Bums, a Home Office pathologist, which was sent to the Coroner

                                       26
        during the inquests, which called into question the validity of the assumptions
        upon which the Coroner’s ruling had been based. Dr Burns confirmed his
        opinion in an interview with the producer of ’Hillsborough’ in March 1996
        (Appendix 11). It also supports the opinion of Dr Ian West contained in a
        report dated 20 August 1992 (Appendix 11).

(ii)    Mr Williams describes how he was having convulsions and was vomiting
        when he regained consciousness. This has a significance beyond his own
        case. At the mini -inquest into the death of Kevin Williams (no relation) on
        2 May 1990, Kevin Williams was described by PC Bruder as vomiting and
        having convulsions whilst he was lying on the pitch, at a time well after
        3.15pm. (Appendix 20, Memorial, p26 et seq.) This caused the Coroner to
        adjourn the mini - inquest so that further inquiries could be made as to
        whether Kevin Williams was still alive at this time. During the adjournment
        the West Midlands police went to considerable lengths to undermine this
        evidence. PC Bruder was re -interviewed by officers from the West Midlands
        police and was persuaded to qualify his earlier statement. He was also
        telephoned by Dr Slater, the pathologist, and was persuaded to change his
        evidence (see below). At the resumed mini - inquest PC Bruder altered his
        earlier evidence by saying that Kevin might only have been ’twitching’ rather
        than having convulsions, and he could no longer be certain whether Kevin had
        vomited as he lay on the pitch. The explanation given by the pathologists was
        that vomiting is just one facet of dying from asphyxia (see "Pathological
        aspects of the disaster" by Professor Alan Usher, p6, Appendix 11). At the
        mini - inquest Dr Slater said that "[Convulsions] only occur when the
        individual is totally unconscious" (p8). The evidence relating to Kevin
        Williams was presented to the Divisional Court in the 1993 Judicial Review,
        however the Court held that the Coroner had been entitled to come to the
        conclusion he did (Appendix 2, Judgment, p34). Stephen Williams’ case
        undermines the evidence given by the pathologists, and therefore undermines
        the conclusions of the Divisional Court.

(iii)   Evidence available, but not presented to, the mini - inquest into the death of
        Hjin Glover was to similar effect. This evidence only came to light shortly
        before the hearing in the Divisional Court in 1993. Therefore, although no
        doctors commented upon this evidence at the inquest, Lord Justice McCowan
        assumed that if they had been asked, they would have given a similar
        explanation, namely that vomiting is merely part of the death throes of a
        person dying of asphyxia (Appendix 2, Judgment, p33 - 35). In fact, as the
        evidence of Stephen Williams shows, those who had been badly crushed and
        survived also vomited and had convulsions.          This evidence therefore
        undermines the conclusion reached by the Divisional Court in the case of Ian
        Glover. It cannot be assumed merely from the fact that Ian Glover was
        vomiting that he was dying.

(iv)    It is an example of a police officer assuming that a supporter was dead when
        in fact he was alive and capable of being saved (see below).


                                      27
 1
       86   gGraham Roberts The evidence presented at the inquests in respect of Graham Roberts
             was to the effect that he was breathing when he was carried by PC Best to the
             perimeter driveway outside the Leppings Lane end, but that he died shortly
             afterwards, when he was taken to the gymnasium (Appendix 12).

       87    This evidence is contradicted by the evidence of another police officer, PC 861 Alan
             Wadsworth, whose statements were not included in the file of evidence sent to the
             Coroner. (Appendix 12). PC Wadsworth’s evidence is remarkable for a number of
             reasons. Firstly, in his undated handwritten statement he refers to a policewoman,
             PC 3162 Ruth Pears, giving cardiac massage "to one of the bodies which had been
             presumed to be dead." Clearly mistakes were being made as to whether or not people
             were dead. (This is developed further below). Secondly, PC Wadsworth describes
             giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to this man along with PC Pears for 10 minutes
             whilst an ambulance man and a doctor fitted a drip to his arm. After the drip had
             been fitted, this man was placed in an ambulance, at which time he still had a pulse.
             In two further statements dated 4 October 1989 and 9 October 1989 PC Wadsworth
•# f         identified this man as Graham Roberts.

       88    PC Wadsworth’s evidence therefore unequivocally shows that Graham Roberts was
             still alive after 3.15pm, in contrast to the evidence given to the jury. At the time of
             the inquests this conclusion would have been impossible in light of the ’six minute
             death’ theory. Cases such as Stephen Williams make this conclusion entirely
             possible.

       89    Circumstances of disclosure PC Wadsworth’s statements were disclosed by South
             Yorkshire police in August 1997 after a request was made by the Group’s solicitor
             for the statements made by an ambulanceman called Wadsworth, who was referred
             to in the statement of an ambulance woman called                   PC Wadsworth’s
             statements were sent instead. This conflict in evidence ought to have been fully
             investigated so that it could be ascertained how and where Graham Roberts died. The
             fact that it was not investigated, and was only sent to the family by accident, is a
             further example of the suppression of evidence which tended to conflict with the
             Coroner’s theory that all the deceased died quickly. His family were told by South
             Yorkshire police in 1992 that there was no further information concerning their son
             (Appendix 12).


     90     Supporters who were presumed to be dead but survived The fact that only
            fourteen of the deceased were taken to hospital remains one of the most disturbing
            aspects of the Hillsborough disaster. A number of the families are concerned that
            during the chaos on the pitch a number of their relatives were presumed to be dead
            and taken to the gymnasium mortuary when in reality they were still alive and capable
            of being saved had they received prompt and efficient medical treatment. Dr Byrne
            made reference to a specific case of this nature in his evidence to Lord Taylor.

            The evidence which has now come to light shows that there are reasonable grounds
            for these fears. The evidence of supporters who were left for dead outside the ground
            but survived reinforces the conclusion that a number of fans could have been saved

                                                  28
1
         if they had received hospital treatment instead of being left in the gymnasium.
         Because there were few marks of violence of the bodies of the dead and injured, it
         was difficult to discern those who were beyond help from those for whom survival
         was still possible. This raises the possibility that there were others who, while being
         more seriously injured so that they died, might have been saved if they had been
         treated. A full investigation of each death was therefore required at the inquests,
         rather than a generalised inquiry into the circumstances.

    92   Roger Ball The evidence of Roger Ball is contained at Appendix 13. He attended the
         match with his sixteen year old son^Kester, and two of his friends. The two friends
         managed to escape from pen 3 before the worst of the crushing began. M r Ball was
         crushed into unconsciousness in pen 3, while Kester died.

    93   Mr Ball passed out shortly after kick off, at around 3.04pm. He remembers Peter
         Beardsley nearly scoring a goal, but does not remember the match being abandoned.
         He regained consciousness outside the Leppings Lane stand some time thereafter. He
         had lost his watch in the crush, but he thought this was around 3.30pm - 3.45pm.
         He was found by a man who called             who was later identified as
                                                                       Whoever placed Mr Ball
         outside the stand (and this was not             thought  he was  dead, because he had
         been placed next to a man who was indeed dead. Although                thought Mr Ball
         was dead, because he was blue in the face, he tried to resuscitate him by slapping him
         around the face, and Mr Ball eventually revived. Mr Ball made a full recovery, and
         began to search for his son.

    94   Mr Ball gave evidence at the inquests (Appendix 13), however he was not asked any
         questions about how he came to be put with other dead bodies, nor about how he was
         revived.

    95   Edward Spearitt was in pen 4 with his son Adam, who died in intensive care. He
         was one of the fourteen deceased who were taken to hospital. Mr Spearitt arrived at
         hospital at around 5.00pm, unconscious and having fits and in a dangerous condition.
         He was taken to intensive care, where he eventually recovered consciousness and
         made a full recovery.

    96   There is no evidence as to what happened to Mr Spearitt between 3.06pm and
         5.00pm. There are medical records of his treatment at hospital but no indication of
         where he came from, or how he came to be taken to hospital. The evidence in this
         section shows there are a number of people who were assumed to be dead and were
         taken to one of the areas which were set aside for dead bodies. Because of what
         happened in other cases, it is reasonable to conclude that Mr Spearitt was also left for
         dead outside the Leppings Lane stand or in the gymnasium.

    97   Stephen Williams This case is analysed above. After he had been extricated from
         the pile of bodies by Andrew Worsely he was placed beside a pile of bodies by a
         police officer who assumed that he was dead.



                                               29
1
             Evidence of slow and inadequate response bv the police and the emergency
             services

    98      The evidence of Anthony Edwards. Anthony Edwards was an ambulance driver who
            attended Hillsborough at around 3.32pm. He made a statement in June 1989 but did
             not give evidence at either the inquiry or the inquests, because his evidence dealt with
            events after 3.15pm. His evidence consists of his statements of June 1989 and
             September 1997.12

    99      Mr Edwards arrived at the ground in his ambulance to find a cordon of police across
            the entrance to the pitch. Two ambulances were already parked outside the ground,
            and had not gone in. There was a discussion between the ambulance men and the
            police officers. They were told by the police that it was not possible for him to go
            on to the pitch because "they are still fighting in there." Eventually he and others
            were permitted to go onto the pitch. Mr Edwards saw a number of dead bodies being
            taken out and so it was obvious that the incident was a disaster and not crowd trouble.
            Eventually they were allowed onto the pitch, where they commenced attempting to
            resuscitate the injured.

    100     Mr Edwards’ evidence is significant because it shows that the police were not just
            slow in requesting the ambulance service to attend but that they positively interfered
            with the ambulances’ efforts to get on the pitch. For whatever reason, some of the
            police did not appreciate that there was a disaster in progress. Although Lord Taylor
            made some findings on these aspects of the disaster, they were not discussed at the
            inquests. This has left the families with the sense that the inquests were therefore
            deficient. Had the Coroner heard that the police had intentionally or negligently
            hampered rescue efforts then there is a possibility that he would have concluded that
            it required further investigation.

    101     Ambulanceman John Flack attended the scene and assisted in taking supporters to the
            Northern General Hospital. He made two statements (Appendix 15). These
            corroborate the evidence of Anthony Edwards that there was total confusion during
            the rescue operation, with all ambulances being sent at one point to a bus depot.

    102     Ambulanceman Peter Howes Peter Howes was an ambulanceman from the Derbyshire
            Ambulance Service who attended Hillsborough. He has given a witness statement to
            the Group describing his involvement in the disaster.13 His evidence, in summary,
            is that he was directed to a pile of bodies outside the wall of the ground, on the
            service road running beside the River Don on the south side of the stadium. This was
            not one of the official casualty clearing stations, and it is not clear why bodies were
            placed there. The bodies had been thrown in a heap, and a number had had clothes
            placed over their faces. Mr Howes has identified himself on a photograph tending
            to Carl Lewis, one of the deceased.


          ,2A signed copy of this statement will be forwarded as soon as it is received.

          l3A signed copy of the statement will be forwarded as soon as it is received.

                                                   30
1

          Evidence of improper behaviour bv officers from the West Midlands police:
          procedural irregularity at the inquests

    103   Evidence has come to light which tends to show that some witnesses were pressurised
          into changing their evidence (or prevented from adding to their evidence) by officers
          from the West Midlands police. In the main, this pressure was brought to bear in
          order to prevent evidence being put before the jury which tended to contradict the
          theory that all the deceased were dead by 3.15pm. This evidence demonstrates the
          biased and incomplete nature of the investigation, and the desire on the part of those
          investigating the disaster to keep to a minimum the scrutiny of South Yorkshire
          police’s reaction to the disaster.

    104   PC Bruder and WPC Martin The evidence of WPC Martin and PC Bruder
          concerning Kevin Williams is contained in the memorial to the Attorney - General
          (Appendix 20). It should be noted that the Divisional Court accepted that there were
          unresolved questions of fact in respect of the evidence of these officers, in particular
          whether WPC Martin had been pressurised into making her statement (Appendix 2,
          Judgment, p28G - 29A).

    105   The evidence of these officers was crucial to the question of whether Kevin Williams
          was alive after 3 .15pm. Their evidence showed that he was alive after this time, and
          that the Coroner’s decision was therefore wrong. It was important from the
          Coroner’s point of view that their evidence be undermined. On 3 May 1990, during
          an adjournment in Kevin Williams’ mini - inquest, PC Bruder was visited by an
          officer from the West Midlands police and was persuaded to make a statement
          contradicting his earlier statement. He also received a phone call from Dr Slater (see
          below). WPC Martin received a visit from a West Midlands officer in March 1990
          during which she was persuaded, under pressure, to alter her initial statement in
          which she had described Kevin Williams saying ’Mum’. After the inquests WPC
          Martin made a further statement in which she re - affirmed the truth of her first
          statement, and stated that she only signed her second statement because of the undue
          pressure which was put on her by PS Appleton of the West Midlands police.

    106   The Divisional Court appeared to indicate that it regarded the truth of what happened
          to WPC Martin as being important, although it did not need to decide where the truth
          lay for the purposes of the application for Judicial Review (Judgment, pp28 - 29).
          It is respectfully submitted that the functions of this Scrutiny are not so limited, and
          that because the bona fides of the West Midlands police is now in issue, these
          important questions should now be answered.

    107   Dr Slater was one of the pathologists on whose opinion the Coroner based his 3 .15pm
          decision. He testified at the mini - inquest into the death of Kevin Williams. During
          the adjournment of the mini - inquest he telephoned PC Bruder and discussed his
          evidence with him. In particular, he tried to persuade PC Bruder that he could not
          have seen vomit, and that it was probably phlegm or spittle. The substance of this
          telephone call was shown in a dramatised form in the programme ’Hillsborough’.

                                                31
108   Dr Slater does not deny that the phone call took place, nor does he deny that he
      discussed PC Bruder’s evidence with him. Indeed, he admitted as much during his
      evidence on 4th May 1990. Rather, he defends his actions on the basis that the call
      had been made with the full knowledge of the Coroner. Dr Slater has maintained a
      correspondence with Dr Edward Walker, who reviewed the programme for the British
      Medical Journal, in which he has continued to defend his actions. (Appendix 16).

109   There is no doubt that Dr Slater’s actions amounted to a serious procedural
      irregularity, whether or not he acted with the approval of the Coroner. He should
      not have discussed evidence with PC Bruder during the inquest. He should not have
      sought to persuade PC Bruder that he could not have seen what he said he had seen.
      It was for the witness to give his evidence, and for the Coroner and the interested
      parties (all of whom were represented) to conduct such cross - examination as was
      appropriate. His actions were improper, suspicious, and vitiated the legitimacy of
      Kevin Williams’ mini - inquest. The Group respectfully submits that this incident
      requires full investigation.

 10   Paul Taylor was a spectator in pen 3 who assisted in removing injured fans from the
      pen. His evidence is contained in Appendix 19.

111   His evidence, in summary, is that he was attempting to resuscitate a young man and
      a young girl, later identified as Victoria Hicks. A police officer came and felt the
      pulses of both bodies and told him to leave them as they were both dead. Paul
      Taylor therefore covered the young man’s face with an anorak and covered Victoria
      Hicks with her cardigan. In fact, as the evidence of Tony Edwards shows, Victoria
      was subsequently found by her father and was taken in Tony Edwards’ ambulance to
      the Northern General Hospital. She was still alive, and a concerted effort was made
      to revive her after she reached hospital. On her death certificate, her place of death
      was recorded as being the Northern General Hospital.

112   Mr Taylor did not include details of this in his statement, because he was not aware
      at the time of the girl’s identity. After speaking with Mr and Mrs Hicks he contacted
      West Midlands police and was visited at his home in Liverpool by DC McCombie,
      the officer assigned to the Hicks’ case. When Mr Taylor explained what it was he
      wanted to add to his statement, DC McCombie threatened him that he would be
      committing peijury if he made an additional statement, for which he could be
      imprisoned, if he did not know the officer’s name and number. Mr Taylor therefore
      did not make an additional statement. When he gave evidence at the inquests he did
      not make reference to the incident involving Victoria Hicks.

113   This was clearly an improper threat. Mr Taylor merely wished to add details to his
      statement the importance of which he now appreciated. His evidence shows that there
      was a rush to declare people dead who were not dead, and who might have been
      saved if they had reached hospital more quickly.

114   Match tickets and gate C A consistent pattern of evidence has emerged showing that
      West Midlands officers went to great lengths to produce evidence to show that as
      many fans as possible went through gate C rather than through the turnstiles, so that

                                            32
      attention was focused on the behaviour of the fans rather than on the behaviour of the
      police.

115   The evidence presented at the inquests placed Paul Carlile outside the ground at
       14.54, after gate C was opened. The photograph produced was taken by a police
      photographer.

116   This evidence was incorrect. His mother Sandra Stringer has positively identified
      Paul on a photograph inside the ground at 2.47pm, i.e. before gate C was opened.
      Paul had a ticket stub, which was returned to his mother Sandra Stringer, which
      shows that he went through a turnstile.

117   The night before Paul Carlile’s mini - inquest began Mrs Stringer was visited by
      officers from the West Midlands police who demanded that she hand over his ticket
      stub. She refused, however the officers were extremely insistent, at one point saying
      that they would not leave until she handed over the ticket. She eventually handed it
      over on condition that she be given a receipt. One of the police officers advised Mrs p
      Stringer "Whatever you do, don’t let them say Paul went through gate C". In the [ '
      event the West Midlands police summary officer told the mini - inquest that a full
      match ticket was found in Paul’s personal effects (Transcript, 3 May 1990, p6).

118   Mary Corrigan, the mother of Keith Macgrath, received a similar visit from officers
      from the West Midlands police demanding that they hand over ticket stubs. Theresa
      Glover was given back a full ticket, although it was well documented that her son had
      gone through a turnstile with his brother Joe, who survived.

119   This evidence shows that West Midlands police officers were anxious to show as
      many fans as possible entering through gate C rather than the turnstiles. This was
      to fit in with the police’s attempt to blame the disaster on fans who arrived late and
      ’stormed’ through gate C.

                            The importance of full disclosure

120   The work of those representing the Group is hampered by the fact that disclosure of
      documents is a laboured and painfully slow process. It is submitted that it is unjust
      and unsatisfactory that the papers, formerly in the possession of the West Midlands
      Police, are now controlled by the South Yorkshire Police. Statements of police
      officers have been disclosed recently providing names of officers who were apparently
      concerned with individual cases, but whose existence has never before been made
      known to the families. Documents are now being disclosed, causing a wholly
      different picture to emerge from that provided to the families and the Coroner’s court
      in 1990-91. Further submissions will be made on these documents as and when they
      are received.

121   It is submitted that the facts of the Hillsborough inquests need to be examined in full.
       The office of the Scrutinising Judge is requested to take possession of all the material
       in the case and to ensure that it is made available to all parties. Statements of
       witnesses were not disclosed to the bereaved families at the time of the inquests, and

                                             33
1
              disclosure has been refused since.


                                      The Purpose of an Inquest


        122   In R. v. H.M. Coroner for North Humberside & Scunthorpe ex parte Jamieson
              [1995] 1 Q.B. 1 Sir Thomas Bingham MR considered the nature and purpose of an
              inquest in the context of the death of a prisoner in custody. He said:

                             An inquest is a fact finding inquiry conducted by a coroner, with or
                             without a jury, to establish reliable answers to four important but
                             limited factual questions ... It is the duty of the coroner as the public
                             official responsible for the conduct of inquests, whether he is sitting
                             with a jury or without, to ensure that the relevant facts are fully, fairly
                             and fearlessly investigated. He is bound to recognise the acute public
    ^                        concern rightly aroused where deaths occur in custody. He must
                             ensure that the relevant facts are exposed to public scrutiny,
                             particularly if there is evidence of foul play, abuse or inhumanity. He
                             fails in his duty if his investigation is superficial, slipshod or
                             perfunctory. (Emphasis added)


              In R. v. South London Coroner ex parte Thompson 126 S.J. 125 Lord Lane CJ said

                             The function of an inquest is to seek out and record as many of the
                             facts concerning the death as the public interest requires.

        123   The Group acknowledges the difficulties inherent in holding inquests into the deaths
              of 95 people in a single disaster. Nonetheless, the circumstances in which the inquests
              were held, in Sheffield, before a Sheffield Coroner, and the way it was handled give
              rise by themselves to feelings of profound unease. A reading of the transcripts of the
              evidence, particularly relatives of victims, repays study. The disproportionate time
              given to questions as to whether drink had been consumed was absurd and offensive.
              Meaningless detail was adduced about the circumstances in which supporters travelled
              to and arrived at the ground. Condescension was shown to relatives in questioning.
              Relatives were never given copies of their own witness statements, but shown them
              perfunctorily outside court before they were called in. In contrast, all police officers
              visibly had copies which they studied, and retained, outside court. The legal
              representation was wholly disproportionate. One junior barrister sought to represent
              over 40 families, while every South Yorkshire institution with an interest to protect
              was represented.

        124   These features of the inquests intensify the belief of the Group that justice was
              perverted and the truth hidden in order to protect the South Yorkshire authorities and
              services. Further information will be provided as soon as it is available.



                                                     34
         CONCLUSION

125     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has posed certain questions to the Group by letter. It is
        hoped that these representations have answered them. It is submitted that the fresh
        evidence of Houldsworth, Walker and Edwards (and in relation to individual cases,
        others) would have affected the terms in which Lord Taylor wrote his report and
        expressed his criticisms. The new evidence of Houldsworth would have made
        verdicts of unlawful killing much more likely because the question of what was
        visible was, as the Coroner repeatedly suggested, at the heart of the issue (see
        paragraphs 16 to 22, above) . It is known that the evidence was not submitted to the
        jury, and it appears that its significance could not have been explained to the
        Coroner. The evidence of Walker, Edwards, and the account given in the British
        Journal of Medicine by Wardrope should and would have lead to a different type of
        inquest in which manslaughter on the additional basis of criminal neglect of injured
        people would have been open to the jury in individual cases as the evidence of events
        after 3.15 pm demanded.

26       It is now apparent that the inquests were an incomplete and inadequate inquiry into
         the deaths of those who died at Hillsborough. In respect of some of the deceased,
         questions remain about even the most basic facts, such as where and when they
         died.14

127     The Group’s task of gathering the primary evidence from South Yorkshire police is
        not yet complete, but from the evidence gathered already and here presented it is
        inevitable that further deficiencies and contradictions will come to light which will
        further highlight the inadequacy of the Coroner’s inquiry. The Group submits that
        this evidence justifies the quashing of the inquest verdicts. Only a hearing before the
        Divisional Court will enable its effect on the outcome of the inquests to be properly
        assessed, however the Group submits that had the evidence herein been presented at
        the inquests there is a real possibility that the outcome would have been different,
        both in terms of the verdicts, and in terms of the grief and bitterness which the
        families feel as a result of the Coroner’s flawed inquiry.



        25th September 1997




      14For example Graham Roberts, supra.
