From: Peter Edmundson                           cc     Mr Michael
      Operational Policing Policy Unit                 Mr O’Brien
      Room 527                                         Mr Howarth
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                Lord Williams
      0171 273 2621                                    Mr Omand
                                                       Ms Weldon
       1 May 1998                                      Mr Middleton
                                                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                       Mr Granatt
                                                       Mr Pugh
                                                       Mr Evans ABCU
                                                       Mr Clifford ABCU
                                                       Ms Clifford CD
                                                       Ms Browne PPTU
                                                       Ms Scott Parly S
                                                       Mr Warner
                                                       Mr Owen
Home Secreta




HILLSBOROUGH: ADJOURNMENT DEBATE ON FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998

I attach an opening speech for you, and a closing speech for Mr Howarth for
next week’s adjournment debate on Hillsborough, together with background
material.

2.      The draft speeches hold the line that you accept the conclusions of
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Report, while seeking to strike a sympathetic and
understanding tone. Your opening speech also refers to the changes to be
made to disciplinary arrangements and the role of coroners in major disaster
inquiries. Given your discussions with the Hillsborough families and
Merseyside MPs in recent months you and Mr Howarth may wish to add a
more personal touch to the speeches.

3.     There is nothing new of substance to say in the speeches and we are
not aware of any additional “new evidence” which might be raised during the
debate. Rather, it may be difficult to prevent the debate covering old ground
including that covered by the original Taylor Inquiry, in addition to the main
purpose of the debate - discussion and detailed comments on Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s Report. The sort of issues which might be raised are:

       whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is a Mason

       details of what has and has not been placed in the library of the
       House following your announcement in February



F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
         why the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire received an advanced
         copy of the scrutiny Report

         particular inaccuracies on points of detail in the Report.

   4.      On Masonic involvement. I understand that you (Home Secretary)
   have had private communications with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about
   whether he is a mason following queries raised by the families and others.
rt We are unaware of the outcome of those communications, but the line we
   propose you take is that the question of Masonic involvement is a distraction
   as Lord Justice Stuart-Smith Report’s sets out clearly for all to see all the
   evidence he has considered, his conclusions, and the reasons for those
   conclusions. On placing in the library of the House the evidence considered
   by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, we will provide a schedule of what has been
   placed in the library of the House (almost everything), what will not be placed
   in the library of the House because the authors of the relevant documents
   have not given their approval, and those documents where we do not yet
   know whether the authors will give their approval. As far as the advanced
   copy of the scrutiny Report for the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire is
   concerned, you agreed that he should have it as he was the disciplinary
   authority referred to in the terms of reference. On points of detail and alleged
   inaccuracies in the report it is perhaps inevitable that there will be some. It
   would be very surprising, however, if there were any which would call into
   question the main findings of the report.

  5.     You could cover these issues in your opening speech thus pre-empting
  what the Merseyside MPs might say. However, as the debate is the occasion
  for the Merseyside MP to respond in detail to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
  Report and the Government’s decisions on it, you may prefer not to steal their
  thunder leaving Mr Howarth the opportunity to respond in his closing speech.

  6.     CD will put forward separate advice on handling.




                                            PETER EDMUNDSON




  F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
    HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT DEBATE: FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998
             HOME SECRETARY’S OPENING SPEECH


On 18 February I made a statement to the House on the outcome of Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster and I published his
report.


I explained that, after careful consideration, the Director of Public
Prosecutions, the Attorney General and myself had accepted the conclusions
reached by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that;


          there was no basis for a further public inquiry into the disaster; or


          for a renewed application to quash the verdict of accidental death
          reached at the inquests; or


          grounds for the Director of Public Prosecutions or police disciplinary
          authorities to reconsider decisions taken previously.


The families were understandably disappointed and frustrated at my
announcement. I indicated to the House at the time that I understood the
feeling that there should be an opportunity to debate the issues raised more
fully, once hon. Members had been able to study Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report in detail. I have always been sympathetic to the requests of Merseyside
MPs and others that there should be a debate and I am pleased that time has
now been found. I am grateful to my right hon. Friend the President of the
Council for arranging this.


We all remain united in sympathy for the relatives of those who died at
Hillsborough. I made it known that I am prepared to meet the families’ to
discuss their concerns about the outcome of the scrutiny. Hon. Members will
be aware that I met the families, both immediately before my statement to the



F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
Hi
Sm X-
House - to inform them of my decision - and at a subsequent meeting in
Southport on 7 March when we discussed many of the issues. I have been in
touch with the Family Support Group about arranging a further meeting in
Liverpool to discuss these issues at greater length. My hon. Friend, [the
Member for Knowsley North and Sefton East] has also been pleased to
discuss various issues on a number of occasions with people in Liverpool and
with many hon. Members present here today.




The Scrutiny


It was the families' belief that a number of issues remained unresolved about
the Hillsborough disaster which was central to my decision to establish an
independent scrutiny. When I took office, I was determined to ensure that any
new evidence should be considered to decide whether it was of significance
to our understanding of the disaster.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal was
eminently qualified to conduct an independent thorough scrutiny of the
evidence. The terms of reference I gave him were very wide and enabled him
to establish conclusively whether any material evidence had been overlooked
and to recommend appropriate action, i At mp remind th^ Ho1        ofcfos terms
of reference v^bic|i were:


 “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989; which was not available:


(a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


(b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the
purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or




F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
(c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c)
to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.”


Let me say at the outset that I stand by my earlier statement to the House on
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's findings. Whatever people think of its conclusions,
there can be no question that this was a very thorough exercise. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s report sets out very clearly all the matters he considered, his
conclusions and the reasons for his conclusions. There may be those who are
tempted now to call the scrutiny just a 'whitewash'. This was not a
'whitewash'. As those who have read the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report
will know, he considered in detail the submissions made to him by those
representing the families, other individuals and official bodies. He considered
allegations about missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged
interference with witnesses and witness statements, and concerns about the
use of the 3.15pm cut-off point at the Inquest. He also reviewed the relevant
evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and inquests. I hope the House will
agree that he conducted this work with the utmost integrity and made a
detailed and reasoned report of his conclusions.


It is inevitable that, over time, following a disaster such as that at Hillsborough
which shocked the nation so much, various matters will come to light which
were not available when the original inquiry took place. It is perhaps also
inevitable that various theories about what happened on the day will be
further fuelled by such discoveries. I believe that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report answers the principal concerns raised by the families. For example, he



F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
makes clear that the missing video tapes would add nothing material to our
understanding of what went wrong. He points out that blame attaches to the
police because they could see with their own eyes what was happening in the
pens and should have realised that serious overcrowding was occurring.


The tests for any new evidence are whether it is “material” and whether it is of
such significance to justify further action. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s main
conclusion, which I accepted, is that the evidence which was submitted to the
scrutiny does not add anything significant to the evidence available to and
considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests. It is worth reminding
ourselves briefly of those proceedings.




The Taylor Inquiry


Lord Taylor was appointed two days after the Hillsborough disaster to conduct
a public inquiry into its causes and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.


Lord Taylor's inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings
during May and June 1989 and considered many other statements and over
70 hours of video evidence. In his interim report published in August 1989,
Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number of causes. He did not
attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he
concluded that "The main cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control".




The Inquests


Inquests were held by the Coroner for South Yorkshire to determine the
statutory questions as to who each of the deceased was, and when and how



F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
he or she died. In March 1991, after hearing the evidence of around 200
witnesses, the inquest jury returned verdicts of accidental death in respect of
all the victims.




The Criminal and disciplinary investigation


There was also an investigation, conducted by West Midlands Police and
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there
were any grounds for criminal or disciplinary proceedings.


The Director of Public Prosecutions considered the West Midlands report and
took advice from Queen’s Counsel. The DPP’s decision was that no-one
should face prosecution as a result of the events that day. The Police
Complaints Authority, though, decided that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges of neglect of
duty. In November 1990, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired from the
force on the grounds of ill health before disciplinary proceedings could be
completed. Under police regulations, a discipline hearing cannot proceed
when a police officer retires. The Police Complaints Authority subsequently       ,
decided to withdraw the charge against Superintendent Murray becaus^H?
would have been unfair to pursue what in effect was a joint charge, in the
absence of the more senior o ffic e r.^ will turn in a moment to the changes to
the police disciplinary system-which we will be making).




Lord Justice Stuart -Smith's conclusions


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he accepts the conclusion
reached by Lord Taylor's inquiry that the main cause of the disaster was the
failure of police control. He himself condemned what he described as Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that fans had opened Gate C



F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined allegations of missing or suppressed
video evidence of the disaster. He concluded that there was no new video
evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor inquiry and the other
authorities investigating the disaster.


The use of the 3.15pm cut-off time has long been a matter of controversy to
the families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no grounds to conclude that the
conduct of the inquests was flawed. He says that the cut-off point did not limit
the inquiry undertaken by the inquest and it was not suggested by the coroner
that all those who died did so before 3.15pm. The inquest jury heard evidence
about those who died after arrival at hospital and of those who were treated
and recovered. It was only in relation to how and by what means the
deceased came to their deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Evidence
that some people died after 3.15 would not, therefore, effect the outcome of
The Inquest


In his report, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals with allegations about
statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers which were subsequently
amended on the advice of solicitors to the force before being submitted to the
Taylor Inquiry. He reports that the amendments in almost all cases were
confined to comment or opinion. In a very few cases, which he refers to in his
report, what was excluded was either factual or comment in which factual
matters were implicit. He says that ‘it would have been preferable' for those
matters not to have been excluded but he is satisfied that Lord Taylor's
inquiry was not in any way inhibited or impeded by what happened.


The original police statements, together with the amended versions submitted
to the Taylor inquiry, have been placed in the Library of the House. I am also
placing in the Library other evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
which is not already in the public domain, save where there may be overriding
reasons for doing otherwise. Copies of the police statements have also been



F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
sent to the Hillsborough families Support Group as requested by my hon.
friend, the Member for Liverpool Walton.




New Police Discipline procedures


As I said in my statement to the House on 18 February, I fully understand the
public disquiet that those who have been criticised by the inquiries into this
disaster have not been prosecuted or disciplined in respect of their actions. It
is not possible, however, to turn the clock back and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
is satisfied that there is no new evidence which he considered which should
be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints
Authority. I firmly believe, though, that there is a compelling case in the light
of Hillsborough and other cases for reform of the police disciplinary system.


In January the Home Affairs Committee published its report into police
disciplinary and complaints procedures. The report recommended changes in
a number of key areas and I announced to the House in March that I was
taking steps to implement most of its recommendations.


I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be
changed from the criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible
for officers to face both criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I
have also accepted the HAC's recommendation that we should implement a
system of 'fast track’ dismissal for use in the most serious cases.


In the light of the Hillsborough disaster, I have been particularly concerned to
address the serious defect in the present practice which allows a police officer
to retire on medical grounds before disciplinary hearings can be completed.
This was quite rightly an issue of the greatest frustration to the families of the
Hillsborough victims.




F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
The procedures will be strengthened so that where accused officers claim
they are unable, through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters
can be decided in their absence, with appropriate safeguards. I am also
concerned that the existing regulations should be rigorously applied so that
any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be completed before any
application for early retirement can be considered.


These, and other changes, will come into force in April 1999.




Inquests procedures


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report also underlined the need to make
improvements to the inquest system. In the case of Hillsborough, it was
clearly unsatisfactory that the families suffered additional distress as a result
of the inquest proceedings and the jury's verdicts of accidental death when
the causes of the disaster had already been established by the Taylor inquiry
and the DPP had announced that there would be not be any prosecutions.


I have made clear that the inquest system, in its present form, is unsuitable
for dealing with disasters such as Hillsborough. The Home Office Working
Group on Disasters and Inquests, which reported in March 1997,
recommended that the role of the inquest should be limited where a public
inquiry has already been held.


A comprehensive public inquiry which also addressed the questions before an
inquest would relieve the coroner of the need to resume the formal inquest.
The changes recommended by the Home Office Working Party point the right
way forward and the Government will look for a suitable legislative opportunity
to amend the Coroner's Act 1988.




F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
Conclusion


Madam Speaker, ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the disaster at
Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. The lives of many others were and continue to
be profoundly affected by the events that day. One cannot begin to
understand the anguish felt by the families who lost their loved ones in such
tragic circumstances, but we have shared their determination to establish, to
the fullest extent possible, how and why their relatives died. The causes of
the disaster were clearly identified by Lord Taylor in his 1989 report. It was
right to consider whether there was any subsequent information which cast
doubt on earlier decisions and I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has, after rigorous examination, reached the correct conclusions.


I have taken a very close personal interest in this case from the start. I
believe I was right to establish the scrutiny. My only regret is that the families
have not, for their own reasons which I well understand, felt able to accept its
conclusions. I do hope, however, that, in time, they may be able to view the
report in a more positive light.




F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT DEBATE : FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998
                       MR HOWARTH’S CLOSING SPEECH




Madam Speaker, I am grateful for the opportunity to close what has been a significant
and useful debate on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster.
The families and friends of the ninety-six Liverpool fans who died at Hillsborough
have suffered immeasurably. We have heard hon. Members from Merseyside and
elsewhere speak, with a feeling that I know is shared across the country, of the need to
ensure that nothing has been left undone in the investigation o f this tragedy and the
quest for the truth.


I, along with other hon. Members from Merseyside, have closely followed the
families’ campaign for justice since the day of the disaster. In office, my Rt. hon.
friend, the Home Secretary and I were determined to do all that we could to establish
whether new evidence was available that would cast new light on the events at
Hillsborough.


The Home Secretary gave Lord Justice Stuart-Smith wide terms of reference to carry
out his scrutiny and to recommend any action which the public interest required. He
has considered in great detail all the evidence put before him. That included all the
relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and inquests. He has looked
equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, by individuals and official
bodies, including those representing the families of those who died and others who
have acted in support of them.


He has produced a thorough and detailed report which not only deals with each of the
submissions made to him but, crucially, confirms the conclusion reached by the
earlier Taylor inquiry that the main cause of the disaster was the loss of control by the
police.
Ck
Police discipline


One of the issues which has caused the greatest frustration to the families is that
nobody has been held to account for what happened at Hillsborough. As Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report:


“I understand the dismay that they [the families] have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing their job


The Police Complaints Authority directed that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the
senior police officer in charge, should be charged with a disciplinary offence of
neglect of duty but he retired on ill-health grounds before proceedings could be
completed. As the rules currently stand, disciplinary charges cannot be pursued
against a retired police officer.


The Home Secretary has made it clear that the introduction of new police discipline
procedures is a priority, but new rules cannot be applied retrospectively. The
Government has accepted the recommendations on police discipline of the recent
Home Affairs Committee report. The procedures will be strengthened so that in future
where accused officers claim they are unable, through ill health, to appear at
disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in their absence, with appropriate
safeguards. The Home Secretary has also made it clear that the existing regulations
should be rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be
completed before any application for early retirement can be considered.


The inquests


The other principal issue of concern has been the conduct of the Coroner’s inquest and
the verdict of accidental death reached by the inquest jury. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
dealt with these issues in great detail in his report but he found no grounds for
recommending an application to the High Court to hold a fresh inquest or to quash the
original verdict.


He concluded that it would be impractical and undesirable, given the length of time
which has passed, to hold fresh inquests. This is a view which counsel for the families
recognised in his submission to the scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also said that
the effect of quashing the verdict without substituting any other verdict would be the
same as if the jury had returned an open verdict, and that would only be appropriate
where there was insufficient evidence to record any other possible outcome. In
practice, there were only two possible verdicts, unlawful killing or accidental death.


The main lesson here is that the inquest procedure is not a satisfactory procedure for
dealing with cases arising from major disasters where there has already been a
thorough public inquiry. The Home Office Working Party on disasters and inquests
recommended in its report, published in March 1997, that the law should be changed
so that an inquest is only resumed after a public inquiry where the coroner decides
there is some exceptional reason for doing so. The Home Secretary has made it clear
that new procedures will be introduced so that, in any future case, the relatives of the
deceased will be spared the additional distress and anguish o f these proceedings.


Conclusion


With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that, over time, new information may
come to light which has not been aired publicly before. This does not necessarily
mean that the outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different. What
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider was not just whether the information was
new, but whether it was of such significance as to justify a new inquiry.


Taking these matters into consideration, the overall conclusion that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith reached was that the evidence that was submitted to him did not add
anything significant to the evidence available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or the other
investigations into the disaster.
Let me remind hon. Members that the Taylor inquiry correctly identified the causes of
the disaster and made wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and safety
at sports events. Those have had a profound and positive effect on both crowd safety
at football grounds and on the policing of football matches.


The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the main share of responsibility for
the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday football club and the local authority were also
criticised by Lord Taylor and they have accepted responsibility by contributing sums
of money to the compensation settlements.


I fully understand that those who still live with the pain of losing their loved ones at
Hillsborough will feel let down by the outcome of this scrutiny. As my Rt. hon.
Friend, the Home Secretary explained in his statement to the House on 18 February
[in reply to a Question from the Rt. hon. Gentleman, the member for North West
Cambridge], while we do not believe there is a case for re-opening a further full
public inquiry, the coroner’s inquest, or disciplinary matters against the police, the
feelings of the families will live with them forever, and in that sense we accept that
whatever the conclusions of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report and our decisions on it,
the matter is not closed. But I do sincerely hope that they will accept that we have
done all that we undertook to do when we came into office. I very much regret that
they have been unable to accept the outcome of the scrutiny.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - mini-inquests to identify each of the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174
witnesses at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently
passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - M arch 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating
to the incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

I I July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the
absence of the more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s
proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard
promised to consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.



c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
Chronola^
