                                            KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                       SOLICITORS
                                            Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

A . H .G R E G O R Y
C. J . PRYCE
                         N. T . HAWSON
                         G .C O N N E L L
                                                                                      OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
P. A . SEALEY            A. J . COOM BE
K, L. W E B S T E R
M. A . P U T T
                         C. M. M. A YR E                                                        ST. JAMES’ ROW,

Consultant-.
                                                                                                            SHEFFIELD,
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                       S1 1XA.
     R M Whalley Esq                                                                  TELEPHONE 0742-722061
     Secretary to the Inquiry into
     Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                                    MDX NO. 10537

     50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                             FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
     LONDON    SW1H 9AT                                                               FAX NO. 0742 - 750243


     5th July 1989

       _ a hg / ml
OUR R EF:                                                                            W H EN YOU TE L E P H O N E OR CALL P LEA SE A S K FOR:


                                                                                      Mr Gregory



    Dear Sir

    Hillsborough Inquiry

    We enclose ten copies of the Submission on behalf of Sheffield City Council.



    Yours faithfully


    KEESfe^WSON




                       THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
            ^   4


      A ?
      ° $
 4? y l*
r\r   X
              FINAL SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



What happened?



Why?



What went wrong?



+
          The viewpoint   of the City as certificating authority provides a

special perspective on these questions.      At best the factual investigation

appropriate to this Inquiry allows only a broad brush technique in the

assessment and interpretation of the facts.      So far as the City is

concerned the factual investigation involved produces a special difficulty

in that whilst the City, through the officers in the relevant departments,

has knowledge of matters concerning the certificating function since 1st
                                                \
April 1986 the City has only imperfect knowledge of the relevant matters

prior thereto.    No complaint is made on that account, but the cautionary

note has to be that there are areas of potential knowledge and information

which, as far as the City knows, have not been explored.      The purpose of

making this point is not to suggest that any conclusion’
                                                       .which this Inquiry

may Gone to is inevitably jeopardised by any lack of total information.

Sensible conclusions can be reached on the information available.        The

point that is made, though, is that the City at this stage prefers to deal

with the .'questions posed above in a broad manner.

       . The questions can be answered with what, it is hoped, is not

deceptive simplicity in the proposition that the essential problem here was

one where too many people were in a confined area so that there was

crushing of sane of them who did not escape in time to avoid death or

injury.    It is possible to add refinement to that proposition and to

                                         2
 produce an increasingly complex version of it by overlays of detail.      The

 City, though, proposes to make final submissions here by reference to the

 essential problem as so described.    In essence the City seeks to deal with

 the question whether any conduct on the part of the certificating authority

 helped to create that problem.   The formulation of the problem as set out

 above gives rise to a series of issues:



 (i)     Too many people

         Did the certificating authority contribute to any risk that there

might be too many people on the terrace?       This involves a consideration of

the certificating authority's conduct in respect of, inter alia,

 (a)     crowd management outside and at theturnstiles;

 (b)     limiting numbers of spectators within the grounds;

 (c)     crcwd management within the ground.



(ii)     Confined area

         Did the certificating authority, by permitting the development of

the pens, create sane dangerous area?                  5



(iii) Crushing

         Did the certificating authority create sane unnecessary risk of

crushing or take insufficient steps to guard against crushing?



(iv)     Inability to escape or avoid injury

         Did the certificating authority create or fail sufficiently to
          , «*


minimise a risk that spectators might be unable, in the event of local

overcrowding or crushing occurring, to escape the injurious effects of it.

         There is a considerable measure of overlap between the issues which

arise.   That overlap reflects the reality that on the facts this tragedy

was the product of a combination of various circumstances.

                                      3
#

              The essential submission on behalf of the City in respect of the

      conduct of the certificating authority is that this tragedy was not caused

     by any wrongful act or emission on the part of the certificating authority.

     It is conceded that there were shortcomings in the execution of the

     administrative system but it is, nevertheless, contended that the system as

     practised was sufficient to achieve reasonable safety.



    ^ p E L .iIMINARY MATTERS

              It is necessary to consider as a preliminary matter the scope and

     nature of the statutory function and duty of the certificating authority.

     The City is the local authority presently charged with the duty of

     enforcing the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as

     amended and is of course the successor in title to the County, which was

     the local authority that granted the general safety certificate for

     Hillsborough Stadium.      The questions "what happened?   Why?   What went

     wrong?" so far as the certificating authority is ^concerned need to be

     considered in the context of,the relevant legislation - the 1975 Act and

     Regulations made under it.     The investigation involves the consideration of

     whether or not any act or emission on the part of the certificating

     authority, either in granting the certificate in the terms in which it was

    made or in enforcing the provisions of the Act or relevant Regulations, was

     a cause (and, if appropriate, a culpable cause) of this disaster.      A

    material question for the later part of this Inquiry is of course whether

    or not the machinery of the certificate or of enforcement of the
               •#

     legislation (in particular by inspection) could be used so as to prevent or

    help/to prevent any further such incident.      There is, though, an obvious

    danger that the considerable wisdem which has been amassed by virtue of the

    painstaking nature of this Inquiry may cause views to be formed of past

    conduct which are the product of hindsight.      Whilst clearly, or at least

    hopefully, all parties have already leamt frcm these disastrous events,

                                             4
#


    and whilst the City can identify acts or emissions which will not be

    repeated, it is still a proper conclusion that at the relevant time when

    sane action was taken the decision was reasonable and proper having regard

    to what was then known.

             There are certain features of the relevant legislation that need to

    be taken into account as relevant and important background circumstances so

    that the role of the certificating authority may be put into context,

    namely:-

             "Qualified person"

             Before granting a general safety certificate to an applicant the

    certifying authority's first duty arising under Section 3(1) of the 1975

    Act is to determine whether the applicant is a person likely to be in a

    position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions of a

    certificate, i.e. a "qualified person".     Clearly the certificating

    authority must have in mind the terms and conditions referred to when

    considering the question of whether the applicant is likely to be in a
                                                     \
    position to prevent contravention. When answering that question the

    certificating authority would have to reply on reasonable grounds and they

    would include, for example, in appropriate circumstances whether the

    applicant has the personnel and means as well as the ability to organise

    sane efficient system in order to prevent contravention.! In concluding

    that' 'the Clubs was such a qualified person the County did not abrogate its

    statutory function and duty and, of course, did not create an insurer.       It

    would be impracticable for any applicant to guarantee that contravention

    would not;occur.

            . However, the conclusion in favour of an applicant that he is a
        /
    qualified person helps to establish a perspective of the certificating

    authority's duty in the following way.     In issuing a certificate to the

    Club, and in enforcing the Act subsequently, the certificating authority

    are to be taken as having concluded that the Club was and remained likely

                                           5
#



    to prevent contravention of the terms seen in the certificate.        The

    certificate is tailor-made to suit authority's requirements for that

    ground.     The Club was reasonably regarded as likely to be in a position to

    prevent contravention of its terms.     In deciding in favour of the Club that

    it was likely to be in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and

    conditions such a vote of confidence in the Club is a factor of sane

    significance.     Condescending to particulars, by way of example, the City

    ^pers to Paragraph 3 of Schedule 2:         "the number of spectators admitted to

    the Stadium and to the several areas of spectator accommodation within the

    Stadium shall not exceed the figures specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3".

    Thus the certificating authority regarded the Club as likely to be in a

    position to prevent more than 7,200 spectators being admitted to the West

    Terrace.     If the Club (or any interested party) had felt at any stage that

    the Club could not prevent contravention of the term the Club (or any

    interested party) had a statutory right of appeal in respect thereof.

                                                           \
    (ii)      The Police and Fire Service
                                                               <

              Under Section 3(3) of the Act the certificating authority has to

    consult other bodies about the terms and conditions to be included in the

    certificate.     The Police and the Fire Service were in fact consulted by the

    County.     The significance of this is that these were authorities with

    obvious expertise and knowledge of matters relevant to their respective

    disciplines.     The Police would knew about crowd control and matters of

    public order.     The Fire Service would make a material contribution about

    fire hazards and emergency evacuation procedures and so on.       Both

    organisations are entitled to enter -the sports ground and make inspections

    of the ground.

              Consulting such organisations is clearly sensible since the

    certificating authority is unlikely to have as much knowledge and expertise

    as the Police and Fire Service in relation to those matters mentioned

                                            6
#

    above.     The fact that the relevant terms and conditions have been subject

    matter of consultation and have been expressly or tacitly approved by the

    Police and Fire Service again does not involve any abrogation of the local

    authority's duty.     It is thought again a potent factor in leading to the

    conclusion that these terms and conditions were reasonably regarded by the

    County as sufficient to secure reasonable safety at this sports ground.

              Similarly, the regular involvement of the Police and the Fire

    Service in the Officer Working Parties/Advisory Group and the annual

    ^pppections and the consultation of appropriate officers on relevant

    matters is an important factor in deciding whether the certificating

    authority acted reasonably in the way in which it sought to enforce the

    provisions of the Act.

              In this context is is to be noted that both the Police and the Fire

    Service are each of thou "an interested party" to whan is granted by

    Section 5(3) of the 1975 Act the right of appeal to the Court against the

    inclusion of anything in or the anission of anything fran a Safety

    Certificate or the refusal of the local authority\to amend or replace a

    Safety Certificate.     The fact that no appeal was ever made, or indeed ever

    threatened, is sane indication that these authorities did not find fault

    with the terms of the Safety Certificate and that in turn would support the

    certificating authority in concluding reasonably that the Safety

    Certificate was and remained sufficient and appropriate to secure

    reasonably safety.



     (iii)    The encouragement towards a flexible approach
                *
               .A
              Certificating authorities are given the following advice:

         /'   "Procedure regarding applications for general Safety Certificates

              ... in framing such conditions local authorities will no doubt wish

              to keep in mind the principles or guidelines set out in the Guide to

              Safety Sports Grounds.   In this connection local authorities are

                                            7
#

          reminded that, as was pointed out in Paragraph 6 of the Annexed Heme

          Office Circular No. 150/1975, this non-statutory document is not a

          set of requirements to be rigidly applied regardless of individual

          circumstances.   The maximum flexibility should be maintained to take

          account of the different circumstances at individual grounds

          deriving from differences in such matters as age, size and mode of

          construction.    In this regard, it should also be noted that the Act

          provides that the terms and conditions should be such as "necessary

          or expedient to secure reasonable safety" and it would be

          unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute

          safety of everyone attending the sports stadium."



          The words quoted cane fran Hone Office Circular No. 130/76 (page 6

    of Core). Their relevance, even today, is preserved by virtue of their

    repetition in Annex C to Hone Office Circular No. 7/1986 (Core at 307).

          This pmphasis on "maximum flexibility" and the undesirability to

    slavish application of the Green Guide is important because it clearly has

    influenced a number of persons who had dealings with this football ground,

    for example Doctor Eastwood and Mr. Lock.

           There are of course further references to flexibility.   On the 26th

    August 1976 the Fire Department of the Hone Office issued advice on

    amendments to the Green Guide and (page 14 of Core):
        :
        >
        ,\v
            "It is again emphasised that the reccmmendations made in the Guide

           to safety at sports grounds are essentially guidelines and should be

           applied to existing football grounds with the necessary degree of

           flexibility to take account of the particular circumstances at

           individual grounds.    The aim of securing a reasonable degree of

           safety should be kept uppermost in mind; it would be unreasonable,

           even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety of everyone

           attending a ground".

                                           8
#
            Such advice echoes of course what is found in the Green Guide

    itself:-

            (a)    In the 1976 Edition at Paragraph 1.4.:

                    "Deviations frcm individual guidelines are possible without

                   necessarily detracting frcm the overall safety of the

                   ground.   A flexible approach should be maintained to take

                   account of the particular circumstances at individual

                   grounds".

            (b)    1986 Edition Paragraph 6:

                    "Deviations frcm individual guidelines are possible without

                   necessarily detracting frcm the overall safety of the

                   ground.   The variety of type, function and layout of sports

                   grounds means that a flexible approach should be maintained

                   to take account of the particular circumstances at

                    individual grounds",

                   and Paragraph 8:

                   "It should be borne in mind that when using the Guide to
                                                     \
                   assess whether existing circumstances provide adequately for

                   the safety of spectators the criterion to be aimed for is

                   that of a reasonable degree of safety. 'It would be

                   unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the
                                                             t
                   absolute safety of everyone attending a ground"

                    and again Paragraph 11:

                    "The principles referred to in Paragraphs 4-10 above should

                   be kept in mind by both ground management and, where

                    applicable, by the local authority when applying the Guide

                    to an individual ground.   The Guide is an aid to, not a
        /                      ’
       /
                    substitute for, professional judgment and cannon sense".

            This emphasis on flexibility is still part of current orthodoxy as

    can be seen by reference to Mr. Bownes1 experience when he attended a

                                           9
 Seminar in October 1987 (Transcript 29: 129G and following) and was told by

 the Heme Office speakers (as evidenced inter alia by his note) that "the

whole concept of the legislation was related to "reasonable safety" bearing

 in mind that existing grounds could not realistically be re-built to modem

 standards; it is necessary to work with the existing structures and obtain

 the best result possible".   In the literature made available at that

 seminar is the following description of the Green Guide:

 "It must be emphasised that the document is a voluntary code which although

^^tended to demonstrate standards of safety to be achieved is expected to

 be applied reasonably and with a degree of flexibility"

        There is a problem in according the Green Guide this kind of status.

 What is "flexibility" to one mind may be slapdash permissiveness to

 another.   Clearly emphasis on flexibility was and is well-intentioned but

 the effect is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where

 non-canpliance can be justified as falling within the scope of seme

 flexible discretion allowed to the relevant authority.     There is no

 suggestion that at any stage the certificating authority has sought to

 excuse itself frcm taking action by seme contrived reference to the

 flexibility allowed under the Green Guide.   For the future perhaps the

 Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that the approach of the Green

 Guide should move away frcm that of "flexibility" to, for example, an

 approach of the following kind:-
     ;
     ';W
         That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the Club

 itself, should always seek to establish whether there is sate reasonable

 cause why a relevant guideline is not conplied with, and that in the
         .«•
 absence’of sane such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the

 guideline should be achieved or insisted upon.   That, of course, was not

 the orthodox approach when this disaster occurred.

        The suggestion of flexibility is, after all, a curious approach to

 take with regard to the Green Guide whose very purpose is to provide

                                       10
•
    measures for improving spectator safety. Admittedly the Green Guide does

    not have the force of statutory regulations but whilst the references to

    flexibility do not go so far as to emasculate the Green Guide they

    certainly reduce the impact that the Guide makes.

           As a final reference to this aspect of flexibility it is noted that

    the County's Officer Working Party considered the point.     On the 30th March

    1979 (Core at page 65) the County's Officer Working Party was told that the

    County Council had contacted the Hems Office but little information

^plitional to that contained in the various circulars was obtained.

    Basically the Herne Office had said that any new work or reconstruction had

    to be a standard not lower than set out in the Green Guide but "the maximum

    flexibility had to be maintained in the case of existing structures and

    differences in such matters as age, size and mode of construction had to be

    taken into account". The advice was in accordance with what has always

    been the approach taken but such an approach, whilst being far frcm a

    recipe for disaster, is likely to achieve less by way of reasonable safety

    than is possible                                     c

    (iv)   The practical implementation of the statutory function and duty

           What a certificating authority in practice is able to achieve in

    carrying out its certificating function and enforcement of the statutory

    provisions must necessarily be influenced by the nature and quality of any

    advice available to the authority and, indeed, the time and money available
        •% *
    for action.

           As to the former it is inevitable that the certificating authority

    will rely on advice frcm various quarters as there are unlikely to be
               ■»
    in-house -experts who can advise the certificating authority on all relevant

    matters.     It is quite clear that the County relied on experts frcm the

    beginning.      Although the Fire Service was "in-house" the Police and the

    Building Authority were not.


                                             11
        It is equally clear that the City relies on the experts who advise

and such was a repeated thane of Mr. Bownes' evidence.      For example, with

regard to the removal of Barrier 144 in August 1986 Mr. Bownes said

(Transcript 29: 61F) that he was relying there on the experts who were

present.      Again in connection with inspections Mr. Bownes said (Transcript

29: 7OH and 71A.) that as far as he was concerned he was not an expert but

he relied on the advice of experts who frequently gave advice on the

various matters relating to safety.

^       Mr. Bownes' lack of expert knowledge on matters of safety is not, of

course, in any sense a disqualifying factor.      What qualified him to act as

co-ordinator of the experts available to him is his expertise in

administering a wide variety of licensing systems.

        The Act contemplates consultation with Police, Fire Service and

Building Authority. The Statutory Guidance, in accordance with which the

certificating authority has to act when carrying out its inspection,

contemplates the involvement of persons qualified for the purpose of

carrying out an inspection.     The reliance by the ;City on experts is,

therefore, the product of the legislation.

        On behalf of the City a general point is made here that there is no

reason to suppose other than that the persons available to give advice were

at all material times reasonably competent.      The abiding impression created

by the documentary evidence is that the certificating authority's work was

carried out conscientiously and, it is submitted, with reasonable care.

Specific examples of the conscientious approach can be given and in

particular reference may be made to the way in which the City made

endeavours to keep the Club abreast of safety requirements:

    /   (i)       In May 1985 (post Bradford) the County sent a press release

                  to the Club (documents attached to Statement of Mr. Bcwnes

                  at page 135-6).   This was followed up on 9th August 1985

                   (ibid - page 137 and Core at page 274) by specific advice as
               to evacuation procedures, stewarding, first aid and other

               matters

       (ii)    On the 15th October 1987 the City drew attention to the

               revised Green Guide and certain aspects of management

               responsibility (Core at page 421).

       As to the question of time and money available for action by the

certificating authority, there have to be limits and this is recognised,

for example, by the Heme Office in for example, Circular No. 72/987 (Core

   page 423) where it is suggested that the statutory inspections should

not result in significant resource implications but that in general

inspections are not expected to take more than about 2 man days per ground.

This point is made in the context of emphasising that the scope of

inspections together with associated report work are not intended to be as

detailed or extensive as that often required of the holder of the

Certificate.   (Even allowing for such limits the City always paid due

regard to the achievement of reasonable safety and accorded safety at

Hillsborough a high priority.)   In fact it is knewn frcm Mr. Bownes'

evidence (Transcript 29: 70D) that an inspection topk a day tut since it

involved several experts clearly far more than 2 man days were taken up on

this matter.

       The availability of time is relevant of course to the suggestion of

delay d^i producing a replacement Safety Certificate and the City's answer

is given in detail at a later stage of these Submissions.   The point can be

made though at this stage that it is hardly appropriate to expect a

certificating authority to take on additional staff to deal with its
        .«•
statutory function and duty when the Hone Office view is that there should

not ,be significant resource implication.

      Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees in

respect of dealing with applications for the issue or amendment of a

certificate (by virtue of the Safety at Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) no
express provision was made in respect of fees for the on-going work of

enforcing the provisions of the Act and dealing with the inspections that

have to be carried out at least once a year.    This Inquiry m y wish to

consider whether express provision should be made to allcw a certificating

authority to make sane reasonable charge.

        Mr. Bownes was asked to consider a suggestion that on taking over as

certificating authority the City ought to have had a meeting of everybody

involved, including the Club and its engineer, in order to say in effect

ppook, we have taken this over.   We are responsible for the certificate.

Tell us if the situation at the monent is satisfactory.   Have there been

any changes or anything to be done?"    (Transcript 29:124G). However, in

considering how far the City needed to go consideration has to be given to

the following matters:

(i)     The substitution of Mr. Bownes for Mr. Vaughan of the County was

        effectively the only irrmediate change that came about in the

        certificating function.   It was not a case of the City taking over

        sane function which had not previously been administered (when a

        fresh start fran zero base would have been appropriate).   It was not

        unreasonable for the City to proceed on the assumption that the

        existing system was one which had been operated in a reasonable

       manner.

(ii)   ^The letters sent out by Mr. Bownes to Dr. Eastwood of 23rd October

        1986 (Core at 373A and B as copied to the Club), to the Chief Fire

        Officer on the 3rd November 1986 (Core at 373C) to the Chief

        Constable on the 13th November 1986 (Core 373D), and to the Building
         ■t
       -Surveyor of the City on 3rd March 1987 (Core 380A) and finally to

   y    the Club (Core at 383) certainly gave other parties the opportunity

        to indicate their views about what was to be done and of course, in

        the case of the Police, produce the encouraging reply that the

        ground met Police requirements under the 1975 Act (Core at 373E).
       The approach taken by Mr. Bownes in this context is, it is

submitted, an appropriate and reasonable one.     There was no point in him

muscling in as the new certificating authority and making change for

change's sake.   His approach was more gradual.   He proceeded upon the

assumption that all parties were reasonably content with the system that he

was taking over (T29:52E) and he sensible supposed that the ground was

reasonably safe (T29:63D) and was not given cause to believe otherwise



          ISSUES ARISING

First issue : Too Many People

(i)    Outside the turnstiles

       The fact that too many people were in Pens 3 and 4 was to a material

extent a consequence of there having been a very large crowd especially at

a late stage prior to kick-off outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

Paragraph 44 of the Green Guide indicates that turnstiles should be of such

numbers as to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are

kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster rate than the arrangements

for distributing spectators within the ground permit-      This ground had a

total of 93 turnstiles.    A capacity crowd could arithmetically be admitted

in a little over 45 minutes.

       Leppings Lane end terraces and the West Stand were capable of being

served by a total of 23 turnstiles which at an ingress rate of 750 per hour
     w
would require a little over 50 minutes to bring about full capacity.

       The kind of event which involves a capacity crowd e.g. semi-final is

one where most members of the public would have an expectation of scrtie
          ♦
        . **

delay in’"gaining admission and where most people would make scrtie effort,

even/if
    /
        not told do so,* to arrive well before kick-off.     Frcm the

certificating authority's point of view it is not unreasonable to have

concluded that the number of turnstiles was such as to provide a reasonable

rate of admission. It is not the sort of matter that would spring to the

                                       15
mind of the administrator.   Any such consideration would need to be

initiated by for example the Police or even the Club.   No doubt was ever

expressed to the certificating authority that the turnstiles were

inadequate or that there were any crowd problems outside the turnstiles.

       If there had been a problem brought to the attention of the

certificating authority then sane reaction might have been expected, either

by way of suggesting an alteration to the layout or by way of asking what

contingency plans Club management had made to deal with such a situation.

^^Less the certificating authority was made aware of such a problem it is

not reasonable to expect any action to be canmenced independently. This is

not a case where to the certificating authority's knowledge the available

entrances at the ground had "proved insufficient to stop unduly large

crowds fron gathering outside" which is the kind of circumstance envisaged

in Paragraph 46 of the Green Guide as necessitating the provision of a

contingency plan.

       The Certificate impinges upon this topic to sane modest extent.
                                                 \
Under condition 6(1) the holder has to agree with the Chief Constable the

methods of admission to be employed;   under Condition 9 there have to be

stewards provided for the control and direction of spectators entering the

stadium;   under Condition 11(4) all means of ingress have to be maintained

free fran obstruction;    under Condition 29 that the stadium shall be

maintained with the entrances and means of access to the entrances in the

number, size and position existing at the date of the Certificate and

indicated on the plans.

       It;would be wrong to ascribe the presence of any large or excessive

crowd outside the turnstiles to any wrongful act or atiission on the part of
    /
the 'City.




                                       16
#
     (ii)   Safety Certificate provision in respect of Crowd Capacity

            The Safety Certificate provides under Condition 2 of Schedule 2 that

    "the number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the several areas

    of spectator accanmcdation within the stadium shall not exceed the figures

    specified in part 1 of Schedule 3".    Part 1 of Schedule 3, headed "Crowd

    Capacity", indicates that the number of spectators admitted to the stadium

    and to the various areas of spectator accommodation within the stadium

    s|rall not exceed in the case of the West Stand 4,465, the West Terrace

    ^ ^ 0 0 and the North-West Terrace 2,900.

            These provisions have to be considered in the light of Section 2(2)

    of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in its then unamended form and

    which provided that:-

            "(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1) above, a Safety

            Certificate -

            (a)    shall specify the maximum number of spectators to be

                    admitted to the stadium;
                                                      V
            (b)    may specify the maximum number to be admitted to different

                   parts of it ...;"

            It is clear that it was not obligatory to specify the maximum number

    to be admitted to different parts of the stadium.

            Although Section 2(2) has been repealed the Hone Office advice is

    nevertheless that such terms should still be included in a Certificate.

            The capacities specified in the Safety Certificate are plainly

    derived frcm Dr. Eastwood's report, which was accepted by the County's

    officer working party (page 60 of Core). Dr. Eastwood discounted the total

    area on the West Terrace by 10% to allcw for the absence of gangways.     He
        /
    then applied the rate of 54 persons per 10 square metres as suggested in

    Paragraph 15.4 of the 1976 Green Guide.     That 10% discount was presumably

    in accordance with the suggestion that an appropriate reduction should be

    made in the area available for standing when the positioning and width of

                                           17
gangways did not meet the reccranendations at Paragraph 7.5.1 (every

spectator to be within 12 metres of a gangway or an exit). It was based

upon professional judgment.

       The approach taken by Dr. Eastwood found favour with the officers of

the officer working party.       It came frcm a man who was highly experienced

in sports ground safety and for whcm the question of safety was paramount

(transcript 26:79F), who did not feel that he was acting solely for the

ClTih and was conscious of the public interest (transcript 26:79B) and who

^ l l d have felt it his duty to report had he any reservations with regard

to matters of safety (Transcript 26:86E).

       The approach has been challenged on the basis that Dr. Eastwood

ought to have applied the more restrictive provisions of Paragraph 15.4.3

of the 1976 Green Guide which applies "when the spacing of crush barriers

does not conform to the guidelines..           However, the reference to spacing

is that set out in Paragraph 12, which deals with the maximum horizontal

distance between barriers.      Dr. Nicholson's report at 2.5 indicates that in

Pen 3 only one spacing does not conform and in Pen 4 only 2 spacings do not

conform.       On the other hand it may be said that the spacings are much

closer than they need to be which adds to the safety.        It is felt,

therefore, that Dr. Eastwood was in no way unreasonably in adopting the

method he did or in putting forward the figure which he did of 7,200.


     ■">
 (iii) The Green Guide and Capacity

        It would be wrong to suppose that the Green Guide provides any hard

and fast rule for dealing with the assessment of safe ground capacity.       At
           t
Paragraph 15.1 of the 1976 Green Guide what is described as "a method of

calculating the number of people that can be safely accommodated" is set

out.   The 1986 Green Guide at Paragraph 217 adds that the paragraphs which

formulate the suggested method of assessment "contain as of necessity


                                          18
 generalised guidelines in view of the wide variety of types, sizes,

 configurations of sports grounds, their use and general condition".

        Moreover, with regard to the packing density rates it is to be noted

 that these are put forward as being in the nature of "allowances" for the

purposes of the calculation and whilst achievement of those allowances in

practice ought to produce safety it does not follow that non-ccmpliance

produces danger.   In localised areas, where fans may well prefer to gather,

 higher rates of density cure often achieved but without danger.

^^rthermore, reference may be made here to the Fire Service photographs and

 the experiments carried out.

        It is to be noted, moreover, that in putting forward "a method" of

 calculating safe ground capacity Paragraph 220 (formerly (25.3) of the 1976

 Green Guide) deals with the number of people that can be safely

 accommodated "on a terrace".   There is no unequivocal suggestion in the

 Green Guide that a capacity needs to be estimated for an area such as a

pen.    If reference is made to Paragraph 101 of the 1986 Green Guide it is

 seen that a recommendation is made that a ground should be divided into

 "sections" to prevent potentially hazardous migrations by spectators and

 "each section of the ground has its own limit of safety capacity".    There

 is at least a hint that Paragraph 101 contemplates a larger unit than a pen

 in its term "section" because it does provide "each section of the ground
                                                         t

 for example each end or side should be self-contained..."

        Moreover, Paragraph 102 describes how each of the "major sections"

 should be sub-divided by gangways and crush barriers.   Again in Paragraph

 103 railings, fences etc. "dividing sections of the ground" should be of
          ■*
 the strength of crush barriers.   One might be forgiven for thinking then

 that'the Green Guide is not contemplating a pen when proposing that each
    f
 section of the ground should have its own limit of safety capacity.

 Alternatively there is either a lacuna or an ambiguity here.



                                       19
 (iv)    Revision of Capacity

         There is no evidence to shew that theCounty, through its Officer

 Working Party, ever considered the question of holding capacity in 1981

 when the radial fences were installed or 1985 when the layout of radial

 fences was modified.   On the other hand it is not surprising that this is

 so since no provision either in the Act or in the Green Guide or elsewhere

 (for example in any safety regulations which might have been issued)

 expressly dealt with the need to calculate capacity for an area such as a



         There is, though, a further and practical reason why such a capacity

 was unlikely ever to have been calculated asa holding capacity and that is

 that the areas created in 1981 and 1985 were     not self-contained       areas with

 the means of monitoring numbers at the point of entry.    The assessment of a

 holding capacity would sensibly be understood to require assessment of the

 number of spectators who would be held i.e. remain in an area during the

 football game.   Since the spectators were free to move about frcm one pen

 to another, and since no pen had the mechanical means for checking the

 numbers entering it, provision of a holding capacity was quite meaningless.

         It might be said that a revised holding capacity should have been

 raimiatpd if only to reflect the access channel created between the two

 runs of radial fences between pens 4 and 5 or, later, to reflect the

 removal of barrier 144.   It is unlikely though that specific capacities for

 pens 3 and 4 would have been produced for the very reason that any such

 capacity, even if it could have been monitored, could not have been

-enforced as long as -spectators -were -free-to move -between-the pens ---- — .
                                                                              —



 (v) /   Not a cause of what went wrong

        Even if Doctor, Eastwood's original .calculation was higher than it
V.-,-          ;■                              •->
 should have been or even if the certified capacity for the West Terrace

 should have been reduced or sub-divided into the component areas it is

                                       20
#
    submitted that the evidence does not establish that any revision of the

    certificate to reflect these matters as for example by providing that the

    maximum number to be admitted to pen 3 should not exceed say 800 was a

    cause of what went wrong.       A sensible interpretation of these events is

    that death and injury resulted frcm the sudden influx of large numbers of

    spectators once the gates were opened, and which were numbers so great that

    overcrowding and crushing was ever likely to occur.




                Realistically the tragedy occurred because of localised areas of

    overcrowding giving rise to intolerable crushing pressures. The

    certificating authority's position here is that crowd management within the

    ground is essentially a management responsibility, and this is envisaged in

    the Green Guide.       That is not to say that the certificate does not touch

    upon this aspect at all.      The emphasis at the mcment though is on the

    managerial responsibility which is envisaged for example in Chapter 13 of

    the Green Guide:       "Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in

    sections of the ground, reduce the likelihood and incidence of disorder,

    help disperse spectators in such a way as to reduce crowd pressure ...".

    Again at paragraph 195a a "basic" duty which a steward is called upon to

    carry out includes that the duty 'to help achieve an even flow of people to

    the viewing areas and safe dispersal of spectators on the Terraces or
        '■V i
    viewing slopes1. By paragraph 197 stewards have to be fully capable of

    carrying out the duties allocated to them.      Again at paragraph 204 the

    Green Guide specifies "As in other areas of safety, management is
                  *


    responsible for the crcwd control arrangements...".

        /'      This responsibility is developed in chapters 5 (Ingress) and 8

    (Terraces and Viewing Slopes). In particular chapter 8 describes hew

    "arrangements should be made to encourage the even distribution of the

    crowd on the terraces to provide ease of access and egress; to control and

                                             21
#
    facilitate movement, particularly if a local emergency should arise during

    the event;    and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous

    proportions



    (vii)   Provision in the Safety Certificate relating to crowd management

            The safety certificate provides quite apart fron the limit of

    spectator capacity on the West Terrace seme further specific terms that

    impinge upon this issue.    Under Condition 6(ii) the holder has to refuse

    admission to or evacuate spectators fron any part of the stadium before or

    during a specified activity upon receiving instructions so to do fron the

    Chief Constable (as defined). Under Condition 7 the holder has to arrange

    for the attendance of Police Officers "to secure the orderly and lawful

    behaviour of the spectators". Overcrowding in a particular area may well

    cause disorderly behaviour.    The Club and the Police would therefore have

    an interest in ensuring that there was no local overcrowding and that might

    if necessary be achieved by refusing admission to spectators to parts of

    the stadium.                                       \
            Again Ccndition 9 provides for the holder to arrange for the

    attendance of safety stewards who are to carry out amongst other duties

    that of control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the

    stadium.     It is true that the certificate provides expressly for the

    minimum number of safety stewards required and this minimum number does not

    include stewards specifically assigned to that duty on the West Terrace.

    On the other hand the safety certificate makes no provision for such

    stewards to be on the Spion Kcp but the Club do provide stewards there.       It

    would be wrong to interpret the safety certificate as meaning that the

    minimum number of stewards was the- correct number for each and every

     occasion.    The minimum number has to be provided for every specified

     activity and that presumably includes religious conventions, reserve

     matches and so on.    In practice sane football matches would plainly require

                                            22
more than the minimum number and this was recognised by the Club who

provided more than the minimum number on the occasion of this semi-final.

It is to be remembered that this is a general safety certificate and not a

special one for each game.     It makes general provision.

          The submission made on behalf of the City is that the general safety

certificate provided a sufficient framework within its conditions that

would have enabled the Club to fulfil its' responsibility of securing safe

crowd. management.



(viii) Practical avoidance of overcrowding and crushing

          In practice in the past this was achieved by visual monitoring.    The

description of the methods used varies in the Police evidence but the

ccrrimon feature is that of reacting to any detection that the density of the

crcwd unless further restricted would beccme excessive.      This has been

described variously as packing or filling the terraces.      It appears to be a

traditional method.  It was one used by Mr. Evans (transcript 26), now F.A.
                                                  \
Official but who previously as a Police officer used to walk the terraces

observing and detecting and restricting further entry to any area if he

felt that the level of ccmfort was at risk.     It would be wrong to

categorise this method as that of reacting only to disccmfort or danger. An

informed and competent observer alive to the risks of overcrowding and

crushing ought to be able to detect that the density is within tolerable

limits.

          All the more so should that be possible where the area under

scrutiny is relatively small as was the case with pens 3 and 4 which

measured in round terms 13m x 14m and where there were advantageous viewing

positions for the person carrying out the monitoring task (either frcm the

West Stand or frcm the perimeter track or at the rear of the terrace).

          Such visual monitoring would be a necessary part of any system

because even with numbers in a particular area less than any recommended
capacity there still is the risk of local overcrowding and crushing.     It

would be folly for anyone to assume that a totaliser was a sufficient

precaution and of course reliance on it might be dangerously misleading.

Spectators go to popular areas and may prefer to be a close-knit group.

The vital requirement is to know what conditions are like on the terraces

and there cannot be any substitution for careful visual monitoring.     That

is not an inefficient system if carried out by persons aware of the

^^ential risks.



(ix)      lack of Knowledge by the City

          The City was never told that there was any risk of local

overcrowding or crushing.     Had there been any such risk that was known of

then it is likely that a member of the Advisory Group would have been aware

of it and that its existence would have been made known to the City.     Had

the City beccine aware of any such problem then on Mr. Bowne's evidence the

means was available for achieving safety and this, could have included, if

necessary, a prohibition notice.

          It is therefore submitted that the City believed reasonably that the

Club with the assistance of the Police would be able to achieve the safe

dispersal of spectators on the terraces in a manner that would avoid local
                                                           ♦

overcrowding and crushing.     The City can reasonably be forgiven for not
          a



having included any more specific provision as to the manner in which

terraces should be filled or as to the need to look out for and guard

against local overcrowding.     These are matters which are of a basic nature,

which do.not need spelling out and which could safely be left to those

involved in the match-day operations to achieve.
      /
(x)       Ingress

          Two aspects relating to ingress to the ground need to be considered:

Directional Signs and the Tunnel.
(a)    Directional signs

       There is no provision in the Certificate with regard to signs.      The

1976 Green Guide made sane provision under Paragraph 6.6 in recommending a

ccrnprehensive system of signposting being such as would clearly indicate

routes to various parts of the ground.       Unfortunately this is in a part of

the Guide dealing with egress and it does not obviously relate to

directional signs for the purposes of ingress.

        The same point can be made with regard to the 1986 Green Guide which

      deals with signposting under Paragraph 57 but is again in the chapter

headed "Egress".    Management have to provide directional flow signs under

Paragraph 29(xv).

       The absence of any detailed recommendation in respect of signposting

for the purposes of ingress in the Green Guide is unfortunate. It is

thought, though, that the matter of signposting is better left to

management to deal with.    The information to be put upon a sign would

probably depend upon the operational requirements affecting a particular
                                                       \
match and for example if a small group of spectators attended there would

be no point in putting up signs which if relied upon might allow than use

of the full width and length of the terraces.

        The Police in those circumstances would wish to contain the fans

within a particular area and the signs ought to reflect that.

       >.it is in any event submitted that any suggestion that spectators

were likely to create danger for themselves through being confused by the

lack of appropriate signs would have been treated as a remote possibility

prior to this tragedy.     The likely response of the Club and the Police to

such a suggestion would have been that if spectators found through lack of

signs that they had in fact gone into an area which was already crowded

then for reasons of their cwn comfort they would have left that area and/or

looked out for somewhere else to go to.


                                        25
         Fran the City's point of view it is another of those matters where

they would have expected to be told if there was a problem (transcript:

29:90A) and in the absence of specific comment arising fron probably the

Police or possibly the Club it is unlikely that this was an issue which

would ever have seen the light of day at any advisory group meeting.

(b)     Tunnel

         So far as the tunnel is concerned it is with respect submitted that

whilst its gradient does not accord with the Green Guide recommendation it

      not unreasonable for the Certificate to be provided in spite of that.

It would probably have been unreasonable to require extensive work to be

done (see Dr. Eastwood's evidence).

         It is unlikely that the tunnel had any effect on the events of this

day and there is a wealth of evidence to show that spectators proceeded

through the tunnel without mishap.    Mr.           (transcript 1:63) described

a solid mass in the tunnel walking steadily;       he was not buffeted and was

not even aware it was a slope (1:80).       Mr. Hennessey had no apparent

problem in the tunnel (transcript 2:48) and suffered no pushing.      Mr.

Cruice had no problem in the tunnel (transcript 2:94).      Mr. Cunningham

described the catapulting effect at the end of the tunnel as a result of a

surge in it (transcript 2:104) but that was the result of the numbers

involved rather than the gradient.

        m   any event the "landing" effect of the level area at the bottom of

the tunnel needs to be stressed since this would have had a compensatory

effect after the gradient.

        Generally it is submitted that the tunnel had no effect at all on

the events of the day and whilst it may be Dr. Eastwood's view that the

tunnerl would need to be looked at again that is a view dependent very much

upon hindsight.

        Dr. Eastwood evidently had what appeared to him to be good reasons

for leaving the tunnel as it was.     It is suggested that the City could not

                                        26
 reasonably have required extensive works on the tunnel since there was no

 evidence of any history of canplaint or accident affecting the tunnel

 although its presence was well known and it was presumably used regularly

 and probably by the majority of spectators attending those Terraces.



 SECOND ISSUE:   CONFINED AREA, (the pens)

 (i)    History and Purpose

        The history of the pens is fairly straightforward.   The perimeter

4^nce was there before Certificate and was there as a security fence to

 keep spectators off the pitch.

        The radial fences were provided in 1981 and 1985, as appears fran

 the documentation. The purpose of having radial fences appears to have

 altered.   Initially they were provided as a means of controlling lateral

 movement of spectators. In 1985 the scheme approved was for the purpose of

 effecting segregation of hone supporters from away supporters on the

 terraces and to that end a sterile area between pens 4 and 5 was created by

 the addition of a radial fence there with the added option of creating a

 larger sterile area if necessary by shutting off pen 4.

        The purpose of the radial fences changed again after the 1986 season

 when it ceased to be the practice to have any mixture of supporters at that

 end of the ground.   The radial fences then became available as a means of

 containing gmallpr groups of away supporters in specific areas. On the

 occasion of any big match where the whole of the Terraces might be needed

 the policy hprame one of letting the fans find their own level subject to

 visual monitoring.   Thus latterly in the case of sell out matches the

 radial fences have been restored to the purpose of controlling lateral
                                  ✓


movement.

 (ii)   The Reasonableness of the Certificating Authority's Approval

        It is quite clear that the certificating authority approved the

 introduction of the radial fences in 1981 and the creation of the pens in

                                        27
 INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




FINAL SUBMISSIONS SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF

         SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
1985.   It does not seem that after 1985 the certificating authority ever

had its attention drawn specifically to the abandonment of the policy of

segregating rival supporters at that end of the ground.       It is submitted

that the certificating authority at all material times acted reasonably in

approving the installation and continued presence of the radial for the

following reasons

(a)     The 1976 Green Guide provides at paragraph 18.1:

        "Crowd movement on terraces should be severely limited in order to

        give the Police the fullest opportunity for crowd control.      Less

        problems occur where the terraces are divided as far as possible

        into sections by the use of railings or barriers, both radial and

        lateral...".

The radial fences were introduced in 1981 largely as a result of Police

recommendations and in the absence of any contrary view.       Again in 1985 the

Police favoured the introduction of the central radial fence between pens 3

and 4 and the provision of the sterile channel for their access purposes
                                                 \
between pens 4 and 5. The certificating authority would have needed

weighty reasons to challenge the Police view but it is in any event

submitted that the Police purpose was a sensible and proper one.

        (b)               The proposals both in 1981 and 1985 were supported by Dr.

Eastwood.     He had seine vacillation (transcript 27: 23 A) '.but never felt in

the event that there was any problem in controlling spectators (transcript

27:75A). He appreciated the manner in which in 1985 the pens were to be

filled by for example losing the gates leading into the central pens so that

once either pen 3 or 4 was full it could be closed off and people

channelled into the remaining pen of the two central pens.       It is important

to remember, frcm the certificating authority's point of view, that Dr.

Eastwood felt himself able in the exercise of his professional judgment to

issue annual certificates of safety as for example that dated 2nd August

1988 (Core at page 475).     Dr. Eastwood intended such a certificate to
»

     relate to those structures with which he as engineer was concerned and this

     included the radial fences, gates, perimeter fence, crush barriers and so

     on.    He meant the certificate to be read as meaning that as far as those

     structures which were within his remit were concerned the ground was safe

     to use.     Such a certificate carries therefore great weight, caning as it

    does fran an apparently reputable source such as Dr. Eastwood who would not

    put his professional reputation in jeopardy.      It is to be noted that Dr.

    Eastwood was certifying that the various structures in the ground were in a

    ^ftisfactory condition and appropriate for the stadium to be used to the

    full capacity as laid dcwn in the Certificate of Ground Safety.

               (c)    It was reasonable for the certificating authority to suppose

    that the Club with the assistance of the Police had the ability to control

    spectators entering and using the pens.      Properly organised the pens were

    capable of being used safely.     There is no evidence that the certificating

    authority was ever made aware of any disquiet on the part of anybody about

    any risk attaching to the pens.     The certificating authority was never put

    on enquiry, and that probably reflects the belief of the Club and the

    Police that the pens could be used safely.

             (d)      It was not necessary to enshrine any particular method of

    filling the pens in the terms of the General Safety Certificate.     The

    method was best left as an operational decision to be made by the Club with

    the assistance of the Police.     The methods described in evidence vary fran

    the certificating authority's point of view it was reasonable to suppose

    that those responsible for fixing a method would be able to do so without

    difficulty.



    (iii)    Effect on Capacity

            At least to the extent that the sterile channel took away a part of

    the area available for standing the provisions of the pens in their final

    form could have had an effect on the holding capacity of what is left. It

                                            29
#

    is to be noted though that the central pens created were relatively small.

    Originally 10% of the area of the terrace had been discounted to allow for

    the absence of gangways.   That discount might well be regarded as generous

    and perhaps even unnecessary in the case of the central pens where the

    majority of spectators would be within 12 metres of the tunnel exit.

           The fact is that it does not seem that the certificating authority

    ever reconsidered capacity for the pens but the reason for that is probably

    that it was meaningless to do so in terms of any holding capacity for any

    ^Pea which was not self-contained and in respect of which a number of

    spectators could fluctuate.   The Fire Brigade were evidently satisfied

    about the pen capacity in terms of evacuation times.



    (iv)   Administrative Shortcomings

           The presence of the radial fences should have been noted up on the

    plans and that would have involved an amendment of the certificate of which

    the plans are part.  The same may be said of the additional perimeter fence
                                                     \
    gate provided in 1985. However, though the paperwork was not dealt with as

    well as it should have been it is submitted that this did not contribute in

    any respect to the tragedy.

           If it were said that appropriate advertising with regard to

    necessary amendments might have allowed sane interested party to query what

    was being proposed or done the answer must surely be that any such argument

    is scmewhat remote and unlikely but in any event if any interested party as

    defined under Section 5(5) of the Act wished to challenge the introduction

    of the radial fences then since the radial fences were obvious to see on

    the terraces an appeal could have been brought to Court under Section 5(3)

    if necessary.

           The perimeter gates which are part of the structure canprising the

    pens are dealt with under the 4th Issue below.



                                         30
THIRD ISSUE: CRUSHING

         It is proposed to consider here the matter of the crush barriers

and, specifically, the removal of crush barrier 144.         The City's position

is that even allowing for differences between the crush barriers as they

were in pens 3 and 4 on the day of this tragedy compared with

recommendations in the Green Guide, nevertheless as far as the crush

barriers were concerned they were reasonably safe and sufficiently strong

      the kind of situation which could reasonably be envisaged.      Barrier

      failed because of gross overloading arising in exceptional

circumstances.      The following points are made:

(i)     The adequacy of the crush barriers at the time of issue of

        certificate.

        Deficiencies in the barriers as they were before the issue of

        certificate were noted by Dr. Eastwood and the Officer Working

        Party.   A Schedule of Required Improvements was drawn up.         Barriers

        were tested and where necessary replaced.    Additional barriers were
                                                     \
        provided.    The County took into account the professional judgment of

        Dr. Eastwood.    In the event what was provided was, it is submitted,

        a reasonable system of crush barriers.       Although there were

        deviations from the Green Guide this was an area where it was

        appropriate to apply maximum flexibility since the Isystem was so

       ^greatly influenced by the presence of barriers which had been there

       for upwards of nearly half a century.

       Moreover, it is to be noted that the terrace in front of the West

       Stand is quite a narrow one from front to back.       Effectively there

       are only 3 rows of barriers and the situation is quite different

       fran, for example, that which obtains at the Kop end where there is

       a much larger area of terracing on a much more significant incline.

       There seems little doubt that the barriers were strong enough to

       meet the recanmendations in the Green Guide.       The heights of the

                                       31
#

           barriers are sanewhat variable but it is submitted that the heights

           involved are not dangerous.
           so far as the layout is concerned Dr. Eastwood advised the Officer

           Working Party that the gaps should be larger than recamended in the

           Green Guide (transcript 28:16A)    and   he took account of the fact that

           the barriers were materially closer together rcw to rcw than

           required in the Green Guide.
           It was very much a situation where approval of the system was

    ^      influenced by professional judgment and carman sense.



    (ii)   Sufficiency of the Terms of the Certificate.
           The certificate makes specific provision in respect of the barriers

           by way of:
            (a)       Condition 15(i)   The holder shall at all times maintain all

                      structural parts of the stadium in sound order and to the

                      appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide and in all

                      nggps to the satisfaction of the Council.

            (b)       Condition 25 in relation to the systematic testing of
                      barriers by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer.

            (c)       Condition 29 in respect of the maintenance of the crush

                      barriers as indicated on the plan.

            Clearly   the   certificate has not kept up-to-date with the changes in

            the Green Guide in that testing under condition 25 was contemplated

            as involving a cycle of not less than 4.1/2 years and to be by way

            of a representative sample of not less than 20% of      the   total number

            of barriers.      Properly the certificate ought to reflect the fact

            that now testing should take place every 4 years (Green Guide 1986

            paragraph 38).      This made no difference on the day because the

            relevant barriers had been tested in July 1988.



                                              32
#
    (iii)   Maintenance of a reasonable system of crush barriers after issue of

            certificate.

            It is submitted that the system of crush barriers present on 15th

            April 1989 was reasonably regarded by the City as a safe and proper

            system.    There have been sane alterations over the years since the

            certificate was issued both when radial fences were put in and,

            particularly, in July 1986 when barrier 144 was partly removed.         The

            significance of barrier 144 is dealt with further below.    At this

            stage though the City advance the submission that they reasonably

            concluded that the barriers were sufficient and proper having regard

            in particular to the following matters:-

            (a)       The barriers were subjected to regular and appropriate

                      testing in respect of their strength and where necessary

                      remedial or repair work was carried out.

            (b)       Dr. Eastwood provided his annual Certificates of Safety

                      Testing and anybody reading such a certificate would

                      properly conclude that his profess ional view was that the

                      crush barriers were in good order, and sufficient strength

                      and made the terrace fit and safe for use.

            (c)       There were regular inspections by the Officer working Party

                      or members of the Advisory Group which included inspection

                      of the crush barriers.

            (d)       There were no carplaints of any danger arising from the

                      presence of crush barriers (except in relation
                                                            re.      to 144 - see

                      below). There were no accidents arising from the presence

                      of crush barriers .

            (e)       The crush barriers appear to have done their job effectively

                      in that they had been in regular use and on occasions

                      subjected to capacity crowds as for example in 1988.     It


                                               33
               would not be surprising if the certificating authority

                regarded the crush barriers as a tried and tested system.

       (f)     The City on taking over the certificating function in

                respect of the ground would reasonably have concluded that

                the crush barriers as provided had been approved and that

               they could only be changed if there was reasonable cause to

               do so.   Given that the system had indeed been approved and

                subjected to regular testing and inspection the City would

               have found it difficult to assert any reasonable cause for

                changing what was there and any attempt to change would have

               been contrary to the recommendation in favour of maximum

                flexibility in the application of the Green Guide.



(iv)   Barrier 144

       This was removed after the inspection of August 1986.   It is

relevant because of the thesis advanced that the absence of barrier 144 was

causative on the day in allowing a channel through which crowd pressure

flawed with the result that barrier 124A was broken dcwn.

       The circumstances under which barrier 144 came to be removed are

unfortunate.   No prior notice was given of the proposal to remove 144 and

the matter seems to have been dealt with on an ad hoc basis on site.    Some

i-imp was taken up in probing whether Mr. Bownes was acting ultra vires but

he refuted any such suggestion (transcript 29:77E).

       What can be said is that even if barrier 144 had been dealt with in

a procedurally impeccable manner the sane result was going to occur namely

that barrier 144 would be removed.   The reason for removal was that

advanced by the Police (see Calvert and 318A of Core).

       There plainly were safety considerations in mind (see especially

318A of Core) when the Police advocated the removal of 144.    Those safety

considerations were assessed by Dr. Eastwood and Mr. Strange and in
particular were assessed against the carpeting considerations including the

possibility of providing a replacement barrier.    The considered and

balanced view taken was that removal was in the circumstances a reasonable

course to take.    That was a matter of judgment based on reasonable grounds

and probably would have been the decision no matter in what circumstances

the discussion took place.
       Whether or not removal of barrier 144 was in the event causally

^pevant is a natter of speculation because:-

(i)    even if present barrier 144 only partially intruded into the gap

       between the central radial fence and barrier 149.     If crcwd pressure

       flowed through that channel then the presence of 144 would have had

       little if any effect in reducing such crowd pressure.

(ii)   it is by no means certain that crcwd pressure did flow through the

       channel so as to have any effect upon barrier 124A.     The evidence as

       to the circumstances in which 124A came to be damaged is in sane

       conflict.    Gary Gains (transcript 2:150) described barrier 124A

       breaking down after a steady build up of pressure and he put that

       very clearly as occurring before kick-off.     Statements were received

       fran other witnesses for example                 who put the collapse

       of barrier 124A at the time when a surge coincided with Mr.

       Beardsley's shot hitting the crossbar.     As a matter of speculation

       it is possible to envisage how a large group came through gate C,

       down the tunnel and then through the channel so as to cause

       increased pressure on barrier 124A but. it is equally possible that

       the pressure which affected barrier 124A was generated on the pitch

       side of where barrier 144 would have been.

       It is unfortunate that the video recordings do not resolve the

       doubt.     There is a suspicious movement to be seen on tape at about

       2.47 but no certain evidence as to what was happening within Pen 3

       at that time.

                                        35
(iii)   Moreover the continued presence of barrier 144 might well itself

        have been highly dangerous in the circumstances of the 15th April

        1989 since it could well have lead to a different accident where

        excessive pressure was thrown onto barrier 144 itself or obstruction

        occurred with great risk of injury to persons in, say, the tunnel.

(iv)    The channel as envisaged is probably illusory.      In fact the removal

        of 144 opens up an area where any crowd pressure is likely to be

^       dissipated and certainly it involves opening up another channel down

        the length of the radial fence.      Whilst that might not be desirable

        in itself it would have had the effect of reducing any pressure

        caused by people flowing in fran the tunnel.

        At all events after barrier 144 was removed its absence did not lead

to accident or injury at any match before the 15th April 1989 in spite of

the attendance of capacity crowds.     No report or canplaint was made about

its absence.   It was never suggested to the City that action needed to be

taken with regard to the absence of barrier 144.       Dr. Eastwood provided his

ground safety Certificate for 1988.     It is respectfully submitted that the

City would reasonably have concluded that the removal of barrier 144 had

achieved the desired objective put forward by Mr. Calvert and that its

absence .had not given rise to any other risk.



(v)     The Strength of Barrier 124A

        This barrier failed.   It did so because it was grossly overloaded.

Dr. Eastwood's evidence about this as set out at the end of his statement

has not been challenged.   It is therefore submitted that barrier 124A was

sufficiently strong and probably complied with the requirements of the

Green ftn-idp as much in April 1989 as it had done in July 1988 when last

tested.    No one could reasonably have foreseen that such excessive

overloading would be applied to barrier 124A.



                                        36
FOURTH ISSUE - Unable to escape or avoid injury or death

(i)    Perimeter Fence Gates

       As a matter of history the majority of these gates were present

before certification although 2 gates were added later namely gate 4 in

1985 and gate 7 in 1987.    Because of the ample width of the exit points at

the Leppings Lane end of the Terrace the perimeter fence gates were never

regarded as part of the primary exit system but were simply a secondary

^^fility available.

       The gates are in round figures about 30 ans., or say one foot,

narrower than the recarmended width for such gates according to Paragraph

209 of the 1986 Green Guide.   There was of course no recommendation of a

specific width in the 1976 Green Guide.

       The width of the gate was evidently a matter of deliberate choice

when consideration was given to the point in 1985.   The carpeting interests

were on the one hand those associated with matters of security and public

order when for example the Police might need access within the Pen and

preferred a narrower gate as against those associated with emergencies and

evacuations when for example the Fire Service would prefer a wider gate.

       It is submitted that the certificating authority acted reasonably in

concluding that the gates as provided were of a width which satisfied the

relevant interests.

       One instinctive reaction in the face of this awful tragedy may be

that the gates were so narrow as to hamper rescue and evacuation attempts.

It is submitted that such a conclusion is a tenuous one.   The evidence

suggests that spectators were crushed together inside the Pens but that
                                 *
when they reached the gate they passed through without being further

obstructed at that point.   Certainly if a comparison is made against gates

of the width recarmended in Paragraph 209 of the Green Guide it is

suggested that an extra foot or so would have made little if any difference

to the ability to escape or effect any rescue.

                                      37
       The attitude of the certificating authority was ever likely to be

affected by the way in which the Green Guide is couched.     Paragraph 209 of

the Green Guide (which is in similar terms to Paragraph 18.3 of the 1976

Green Guide) advises that "access to the pitch must be made as difficult as

possible in normal circumstances while at the same time ensuring that the

Police have effective access to the Terraces for the purposes of crcwd

control and enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the event

   serious emergency..     The priority consideration in the case of these

gates was ever likely to be Police access as the determining factor since

the gates were only intended as a secondary means of exit.     Conditions were

different at the Kop end (see Core page 82) where gates of the minimum

width were necessary.

       It is therefore submitted that the certificating authority acted

sensibly and properly in allowing these gates to be present, that there was

no sufficient reason to require alteration prior to the 15th April 1989 but

that in any event the particular reduction in width in the order of a foot

compared with the reccrrraended width in Paragraph 215 of the 1986 Green

Guide made little if any difference.



(ii)   Evacuation and Emergency Procedures

       It is submitted that these are not matters that can be dealt with by

way of specific detail in the Certificate which ought to provide generally.

The relevant Certificate does make provision as follows:-

(a)    By Condition 6(2) the Club have to evacuate spectators frcm the

       stadium or any part thereof upon receiving Instructions so to do

       frcm the Police.

(b)    By Condition 9 the Club have to arrange for stewards to man the

       exits, to patrol the stadium and deal with any emergency and have to

       arrange for training exercises relating to the action to be taken by

       such stewards in the event of an emergency.

                                       38
 (c)   By Condition 10 the Club have to ensure that egress routes are as so

       secured as to open immediately and easily fran the inside and to be

       manned at all times.

 (d)   By Condition 11 the Club have to sign, illuminate and maintain exit

       routes.

 (e)   By Condition 14(3) a public address system audible in all parts of

       the stadium and available for priority use by the Police has to be

       provided.

(f)    By Condition 17 emergency procedure notices have to be posted as

       required by the Chief Fire Officer.

       There are of course other and specific provisions relating to

emergencies involving fire.

       It is the City's case that the provision made within the Certificate

is sufficient to ensure that appropriate means for dealing with an

emergency were available and that it would not be reasonable to require the

certificating authority to have done more. The specific training of those

who might have to be engaged in dealing with an emergency and bringing

about an evacuation is not a matter that would need to be dealt with by the

certificating authority and ought to be left to those services with the

expertise and where appropriate authority to deal with the relevant events.

Moreover, since the kind of emergency likely to arise is one which would

probably require a Police presence it would have to be a Police decision as

to hew many Officers to have available and what kind of expertise might be

required.   This is not a matter that can be. dealt with in the Certificate

and of course under Section 2(2)A of the Act the provision of Police

services is reserved for the determination of the Chief Police Officer.



(iii) First Aid

       The Certificate makes provision under Condition 8 in requiring the

Club to provide and maintain a suitably equipped First Aid rocm (adequately
signed and lit), a physician to be available at the First Aid roan if

required and the provision of First Aid assistance.

       Mr. Bownes told the Inquiry that there was no nationally available

index of appropriate equipment for these purposes.    He had made specific

enquiry of the G.L.C., a body which had experience of major pop concerts,

but was unable to discover any specific detail.

       Originally the County's Officer Working Party had made enquiry of

          ~ Canmunity Physician, and he had provided a list of equipment

which the Officer Working Party had in turn put to the Club.

       However, that list had it is submitted ceased to be relevant by

April 1989.    After the City became involved their Health and Consumer

Services Department had been introduced as a member of the Advisory Group

and had made specific enquiry of the Club with regard to First Aid

facilities (see the evidence of Mr. Graham Mackrell) and the position which

resulted was that the Club undertook to find out fran St. John's Ambulance

Brigade what equipment they recommended and to comply with their

suggestions.    The evidence of Mr. Wells of the St. John's Ambulance

suggests that this arrangement was put into effect. Certainly the Club

relied upon St. John's Ambulance to provide First Aid assistance and to

suggest what equipment was needed.

       Having regard to the obvious expertise of the St. John's Ambulance

Brigade it is submitted that it was entirely proper and reasonable to rely

on them as the source of advice. It is though further submitted that the

Certificate by Condition 8 makes sufficient and appropriate provision in

respect of the subject when by virtue of the 1986 Green Guide Paragraph 29

the provision of First Aid facilities and First Aid staff is stipulated to

be a management responsibility. It would be unfair to require the

certificating authority to do more than was in fact done here.

       One consequence of relying on St. John's Ambulance Brigade was that

in so far as they relied on their own equipment that equipment was not
  likely to be available at the Club on the occasion of any annual

  inspection.    However, it was reasonable to believe that St. John's

 Ambulance Brigade would attend any specified activity with appropriate

  equipment because they invariably do attend and provide First Aid at the

  events of mass entertainment.

         Two specific points call for further comment.      Firstly Dr.

  list djd provide for a Minute-man Resuscitator and it seems that such an

       of equipment was not provided by the Club or St. John's Ambulance

 Brigade.      It is thought that the absence of such an item of equipment was

 not culpable because had such an item been required then St. John's

 Ambulance would have advised accordingly.       Its absence, moreover, was not

  causative.    In the event various resuscitators were made available by the

 Fire Service and Ambulance Service. It is unlikely that any resuscitator

  in the First Aid roan would have been got into use earlier than the

  resusciffaiors which were in fact used.      It is unlikely that a Club

  resuscitator would have made any difference to these events. Mr. Wells

  felt that mouth-to-mouth resuscitation was at least as good.       It was his

 view and that of other witnesses including Mr._______ of the Fire Service

  that no equipment would have made any difference to what occurred.

         Secondly there is sane confusion as to whether or not a Club

 Physician to attend at the First Aid Roam was provided.       The Club believed

  that this was so, in the form of Dr. Purcell. Dr. Purcell was regarded as

  the Club Doctor.    Doubtless he would have attended if required so to do,

  even though he felt himself to be more specifically the Team Doctor.       It is

^1±ough: submitted that the absence of a Club Doctor to be available at the

 First Aid roan (if such was the-position) made no difference to these

  events and that was essentially the evidence of Dr. Purcell.




                                          41
                                   DRAFTING NEW CONDITIONS
                                   .he laDse of time between 6th May 1986 when
            Attention was drawn to the   ps
    _    . first referred to redrafting the conditions (Core at 314) and
Mr. Bownes first rererreu w                                  f
          absence   of any ^ e c t ^ —         versicn *            1939.   Mr. Bcwnes

^              answer is as set out in t o                             -    « « X n ^ r y in

the course of his evidence and which was incorporated as part of

written evidence on which the City rely.             So far    as his position is

€ k c e m e i it is with respect                  that Mr. B«nes has not acted

 unreasonably or in a dilatory way.
              so far as the City is concerned it must be r^embered that:-

    (i)       Analysis of the conduct of t o ^ i s t r a t i v e and I*gal a s - t o n t

              in respect of the alleged delay in a nenner apprcpriate to d i ^ s a

              ^     an action at law for want of P o t i o n      (of the siggesticns that

              a . delay was inordinate and inexa^sable) is inajpropriate.             This

              was not a matter of litigation nor even a matter         of   any   kind of

              dispute or confrontation between the parties.          9 » task which Mr.

              Bownes had set himself and e c h o e d by way of the re-drafting was

               exactly that kind of work which               be pit to « e side v*en work

               of a higher priority demanded attention.

     (ii)      * . Bownes did not feel that t o r e * s any risk which arose fro*



                  earlier    S i e v e d that the system .     « M r g reasonably well

                  assuiied that the ground « s reasonably safe.      His letters to t o

                  various parties involved in t o Offi-r W a r k i n g ^ - y              have

                  been referred to above a ^ the ans«rs he got « * l have                        a

                  view that t o re-drafting was not a natter of any great urgency.

      (iii, whatever time was taken up in redrafting the W                  ccnditi»s it

                  should not be sufposed that » r k in respect of administering

                  system or enforcing t o provisions of the * * stcjped.            The

                   inspections carried on.    Work continued.
                                                    42
    1   V




*
        (iv)      It was suggested that additional staff should have been taken on.

                  That ought not to be required where the work involved in dealing

                  with the certificating function ought not to have any significant

                  resource implications. In any event one member of staff was taken

                  on as an extra namely a clerical assistant in 1986.

                  It is though submitted that the absence of a re-drafted Certificate

        was not a cause of this tragedy.

                  The system as it was was such as to enable reasonable safety to be

        achieved for spectators at a football natch.     The system under the existing

        Certificate dealt with issues which were raised and responded to those

        issues.    There was clearly a general belief amongst those involved in

        organising such an event as this semi-final that it could be organised

        safely at this ground, with its fixtures and fittings as they were, and

        with the manpower which would by arrangement be available.      That belief was

        ever likely to affect the City in dealing with its certificating function.




                                               43
