The Times: Britain:Hillsborough police chief escapes retrial



 July 27 2000                                                        BRITAIN
                                                                                   SUBSCRIBE TO
                                                                                  THE NEW SPAPER

                                                                                    COMTACT US


                                                                                  Next: 'Sacked
                                                                                  surgeon’ report
                                                                                  for GMC




             David and Ann Duckeniield leaving court yesterday



     Hillsborough police chief escapes
                  retrial
                       BY PAUL WILKINSON



   THE senior policeman in
   charge of crowd control at
   the Hillsborough soccer
   stadium disaster will not have
   to face a fresh trial over the
   deaths of Liverpool fans in
   the tragedy.

   Mr Justice Hooper yesterday
   rejected a request by lawyers
   for the Hillsborough Families
   Support Group for a second
   hearing of two specimen
   manslaughter charges against
   former Chief Superintendent             phiI Hammond, whose son died in
   David Duckenfield.                      the disaster, ^ . f t e r the judge*
                                               Photograph: DAN CHUNG /
                                                       REUTERS
   Earlier this week the jury at
   Leeds Crown Court was discharged after failing to
   reach a verdict on the charges arising from the April
   1989 disaster. It had earlier cleared his deputy, former
   Superintendent Bernard Murray, 58.

   The judge ruled that the two defendants' costs,
   believed to be £3.25 million, and those of the
   prosecution, estimated at £750,000, would be paid
   from public funds.

   His decision to stay any father action against the
   former South Yorkshire policeman was met with
   anger by relatives of the victims who had brought the
   private prosecution. They accused the judge of bias.

   Alan Jones QC, prosecuting, had asked for a retrial
   before a different judge. One reason, he said, was the


http://www.the-times.co.uk/news/pages/tim/2000/07/27/tminwsnws02009.html
«The Times: Britain:Hillsborough police chief escapes retrial


  way Mr Justice Hooper had summed up and his
  answer to a question from the jury after they had
  retired to consider their verdicts. The judge said: "You
  are suggesting I should not hear this case because I am
  biased?" Mr Jones replied: "There is no question of
  bias, but it should be heard by another judge who has
  not heard the arguments. It is not an allegation of bias,
  it's an allegation that the wrong tests were put before
  the jury."

  Trevor Hicks, chairman of the support group, who lost
  his daughters Vicky, 15, and Sarah, 19, at
  Hillsborough, said later at a press conference: "The
  decision is not surprising following Mr Justic
  Hooper's pro-defence summing up. It is a sad
  reflection on English law that a few words from the
  trial judge can effectively override a seven-week trial
  and everything associated with it. We will consider a
  complaint to the Lord Chancellor regarding Mr Justice
  Hooper's inconsistency and bias."

   He said the decision marked an end to their campaign
   over the tragedy in which 96 Liverpool fans died. "We
   do not see this as a defeat. . . it is a limited victory.
   We will be accused of a witch-hunt and making
   scapegoats of the officers. We totally reject such
   allegations. We will be called 'vengeful' and
   'vindictive' but we respond with 'vindicated'."

  Margaret Aspinall, whose son, James, 18, was named
  in one of the charges, said: "I felt it was a miscarriage
  of justice on behalf of all those 96 victims. My son
  would not have wanted me to be vengeful, this was
  about accountability for 96 deaths, and nobody has
  been made accountable."

  William Clegg QC, for Mr Duckenfield, had told the
  judge that a retrial would be too oppressive for Mr
  Duckenfield and his family. The acquittal last Friday
  of Mr Murray, who would probably become a defence
  witness, meant that there would be no realistic chance
  of a conviction.

  Both men had been accused of negligence in not
  sealing off a tunnel leading to the pens in the
  Leppings Lane end of the Sheffield Wednesday
  ground after a perimeter gate was opened to allow in a
  crush of supporters arriving for the FA Cup semi­
  final.

  Mr Duckenfield, 55, of West Parley, near
  Bournemouth, did not give evidence. The jury was not
  told that the reason was because he is suffering from
  post-traumatic stress disorder. He left the court with
  his wife, Ann, surrounded by a cordon of police as
  several people shouted abuse.

   Later Mr Duckenfield appeared at a press conference
   at the Leeds offices of Ins solicitors, and his lawyer,


http://www.the-times.co.uk/news/pages/tim/2000/07/27/tininwsnws02009.html
Jh e Times: Britain:Hillsborough police chief escapes retrial


   Simon Eastwood, read a brief statement on his behalf.
   "As a husband and father, he has every sympathy with
   the victims' families for their loss of their loved ones."
   He made a plea to be left alone with his family so they
   could rebuild their lives.

   Peter Gammon, president of the Police
   Superintendents Association, said: "It was a travesty
   that two former senior officers should find themselves
   in the dock over a decision they took in the course of
   their duty so many years ago. The decision to open
   that gate was taken because lives were endangered
   outside the ground. They could never have predicted
   that death would result."

   Next page: 'Sacked surgeon' report for GMC

   Arts (Mon - Fri) | Books (Sat) (Thu) | British News | Business |
   Court page | Features (Mon - Fri) | Go (Sat) | Interface | Law
   (Tue) | Metro (Sat) | Obituaries | Opinion | Sport | Travel (Sat)
   (Thu) | Vision (Sat) | Weekend (Sat) | Weekend Money (Sat) |
   World News


 Copyright 2000 Times Newspapers Ltd. This service is provided
 on Times Newspapers' standard terms and conditions. To inquire
 about a licence to reproduce material from The Times, visit the
 Syndication website.
