                         QUESTION                  SEVEN

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.

Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the perimeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, rightly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authority and they decided that the gates should
be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
decision to leave the gates.

Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
would have to travel some distance. If it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
been at ground very very quickly.

Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson's statement "that anyone who had
considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
lot of persuasion about that".

When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
equipment.
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
'Breakin-Kit' on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement’. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 104 - 13 7, Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
example, the collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been
responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.


Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i O pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without success.
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.



Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report


Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open w herever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
Cutting Equipment

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind perimeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 17 and 21
17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.

21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fencing to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                                                     66

                                                                D.G. DUCKEHFIELD


                      Q. And he did take charge, did he not? - A. Yes, on the pitch.

                      Q. And he began to achieve a semblance of order with a chain
                         of Officers getting the bodies out of the pens? - A. But
                         there is a series of events before that in that as soon
                         as I realised the severity of the situation I asked fcr
                         assistance and a fleet of ambulances and implemented the
                         Major Incident Plan and we have jumped to that particular
                  B      scenario.

                      q   . I am sorry, I thought you had already dealt with that? - A.
                            That point has not been made clear.

                      0   . But that of course is to get help from outside? - A. Yes,
                            but as soon as I realised the severity cf the situation,
                            which was very promptly, and the Superintendents who were
                            cr. the ground there assessed it very quickly and they had
                            no d e i a v whatsoever communicating to me what the situation
                            was and*what action we should take.

                            I follow that, but did it not occur to you that unless
                            vou got people out of those pens more might be injured?
                            - A. Yes.
                  D
                            If this v/as crushing, which is by now what you realised,
                            the slower the process cf emptying the pens, the more likely
                            it is that more people are going to be hurt? - A. Yes.

                      0   . And therefore it is not enougn, ot course it is essential
                            and one thing you do is get the ambulances in from outside
                            out voi have cot to take steps inside? - A. Can I make the
                            p o m e , I have to accept tne grounc as xz is ana I am no-c
                            making any excuses for the Police Officers in the tunnel,
                            but we the Police Officers and the emergency services have
                            to work within the framework in that grounc and there are
                            difficulties.

                      O.            LORD JUSTIC2. TAYLOR: Did you send for., anything-to , •
                            cut t h e - framework away? - A. Yes'sir, wire.cutters, bolt,
                            cutters' and also the Fire Service to attend.     ;fe had to •
                            work within those difficult areas and 0-zicers were trying
                            their best under very difficult circumstances to effect a
                            rescue.

                      0.          MR. COLLIHS:   I am not intending or implying the
                            slichtest criticism of individual Officers when I talk
                            about "chaotic situation".   Of course they were doing their
                            best.  vJhat I am suggesting is their best v/as less than the
                            most effective if they were not under proper command and
                            if they were not given proper directions as to how they
                            should do their work.   That is what I am suggesting?
                            - A. Can I make the point, under normal circumstances
                            Officers would respond to command and the Superintendents
                            who work for me are excellent Officers, i.’hat you cannot
                  H         compare is what you call "normal circumstances".

                                                                                             104
I I U -arr>ham Itri
                                                           95
                                                                               D.G. DwCKENFIELD




                              Q. Well that is what I am asking you.      -   A. Well I have
                                 never heard of that.

                              Q.    Who called the Fire Brigade?   - A. I recall a request
                                   for bolt croppers or wire cutters and following on from
                      B            that I understand the Fir a Brigade attended, but as to who
                                   made the calls, and from what Control Room, Idon't Know.

                              Q. You didn't yourself specifically ask foe the Fire Brigade?
                                    A. No.  I was in the situation then by implementing a
                                 major incident plan and others in support were ....

                              Q.   So you can't, help us as to the genesis of the belief of a
                                   Police Officer that there had been the breaking down of a
                                   gate by the fans?     - A. No sir.

                                        MR. RYT n ER:   Thank you Mr. Duckenfield.

                                        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr. Jackson?

                                                  Cross-examined by MR. JACKSON;
                          D
                              Q. Superintendent may I make very clear that I don't
                                 differentiate between you, your colleagues, your junior
                                 Officers, your Constables, or the stewards.  Together,
                                 collectively, do you accept as a body of people who are
                                 responsible for the safety of the people who go to
                                 football matches?  - A. Yes sir.
                          E   Q. May I take the bull by the horns?  Am I right in saying
                                 that the man in charge thought there was a great deal of
                                 similarity betwen 24,000 Liverpool supporters anxious to
                                 beat Notts Forest again, and the people queueing for
                                 'Bam'oi' at the local Odeon? - A. Queues, sir, are queues.

                              Q.    You mean yes there is a similarity? Sfay I suggest'that’  '
                                   you don 1t mean that, it has never been the case and it is
                                   completely different.    - A. Why should a crowd of
                                   football supporters wish to behave differently to a crowd
                                   of cinema-goers?

                              Q. Chief Superintendent, regrettably I can't answer that
                                 question, but I can say they do and everybody knows they
                                 do, and to suggest that you didn't ....  - A. I am not
                                 suggesting that sir.

                              Q.    May I therefore move on.  Would you   take please two photo­
                                   graphs and compare them.    The first is in composite aloum
                                   number 1 at MWL10/20A.    It may well 'oe you don't need to
                                   be referred to the documents, but you will accept will you
                                   not that the duties of the three serials immediately
                                   outside was to take part in the forming of orderly queues.
                          H
                                                                                                  10
I I   H a r n h a m Ltd
                                                                  100
                                                                                  D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D

                      A
                                exit by the tunnel?   A.   No, what I am suggesting is
                                this - I am being helpful, I think - that question wants
                                addressing to the authorities other than myself.

                           Q. Because it is            quite clear, is it not, even with hindsight,
                              or maybe only            with hindsight, that the attempts to
                              rescue people            by means of the perimeter gate were close
                      B       to pathetic?              A.   There are difficulties associated with
                              the perimeter            gates because of the width and the fencing.

                           Q. Chief Superintendent, that is a nice polite answer.
                              Of course there were difficulties.   My word was "pathetic
                              A.   I would not choose that word.   I would say that the
                              ground was there as it was with the fence and gates and we
                              tried to rescue people as best we could»

                                Chief Superintendent, 1 am not suggesting for the moment
                                that Officers did not do more than anyone could possibly
                                expect them to do.   What 1 am suggesting is the ground
                                that they had to do it on had a gate which was pathetic
                                from a point of view of rescuing, people crushed against
                                the perimeter fence.    A.   the gate was a gate that had
                                been accepted by all the authorities concerned.
                       D
                           Q. And that makes it right?

                                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, I do not think it is
                                likely to be in the future, so I do not think you need
                                to pursue that.

                                             MR. JACKSON:      I am obliged to you, sir.

                           Q. Perhaps on the very same point, did you ever have any                             ^
                              problems with the positioning of the emergency services?
                              A.   In what respect, sir?

                           Q.    W o u l d    you   t urn'to TTab 15 , a memo   onemergency ■evaluation          ?;
                                procedure.              A.  Yes, sir.

                           Q.   Dated August, 1988.          Third paragraph:     "ASenior
                                Ambulance Officer already attends all home matches at
                                the Sheffield Wednesday ground and is allocated complimentary
                                t i c k e t s for the South Stand.      He is in direct radio contact
                                with Ambulance        Patrol," etc.      Last paragraph:   "It
                                was considered that this Ambulance Officer would be better
                                based in the North Stand so he could get to the gymnasium
                                without problems.          However, the Senior Ambulance Officer
                                who attends is off-duty and the Sheffield Wednesday
                                Football Club only wish to allocate the complimentary
                                tickets to the A m b u l a n c e Service for use in the South
                                Stand so that the Club Physio, Alan Smith, can signal
                                straight away to the A m b u l a n c e Ufficer if an ambulance
                                is required for a Wednesday player."            It does seem that
                                the priorities are a little bit askew, are they not. Chief
                                Superintendent?         A.      I have got to confess, sir, it is
                       H
                                the first time I have seen that report.
                                                                                                                106
i t   U a r n h a m I tH
                                                                 107
                                                                            n.G. PUCKEHFIELD



                          h         DO vou think the possibility may be that when you were
                                    look-*no over the West terrace you were not really thinking
                                    abou<- the possibility of crushing? - A. ho sir, I w«o
                                    looking for movement in the crowd and difficulties m the
                                    crowd as a result of the gates opening and £roi, where i was
                                    I did not appreciate there was a density.

                                    But were you looking specifically to see whether or not
                                    P u s h i n g was taking place? - A. If y o u s a y "crushing"
                                    specifically, no, I was looking tor maications.

                                    Tf vou now look over the page in those photographs whicn is
                                    i: n ^ u / e s - p a s t - S , tl-.at is a tine I think when you agree
                                    -hat vou realised there was serious problems and it was no
                                    longer a pitch invasion? - A. Excuse me sir, are you talking

                                    It is PP.2/1 and that is actually at 4 - m i n u t e s -past-3.   Get
                              Q.
                                    that? - A. Yes.
                                    t  think vou will accept, because it has been drawn to I/ o u r
                              Q.     attention already by Mr. Collins, people lying on .he crou^G
                                     and so on and so forth? - A. Yes sir.
                      D              JVt that time it must have been apparent to you that people
                              Q.
                                     were trying to get out of that pen? - A. Yes sir.

                                , And they were having difficulty in doing so by getting
                              Q.
                                  through the gate? - A. Yes sir.

                                     T a-n rn- necessarily suggesting this would be the solution,
                              Q-
                                     but'one"of the possibilities that would arise would be ec
                          E          ^                          -> _ 7\ Vae c T
                                     cut some o^ the fence down? - A. Yes sir.
                                     That would be a pretty obvious thought that would go tnrougn
                               Q.
                                     a n y b o d y ' s mind, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

                                     Did it    go   tlirough your mind? - A. ‘Not immediately: sirv. , - v
                               Q.
                                     Do y o u k n o w h o w long it took before anybody _asked for^ t h e
                               Q.
                                     Fir- Brigade to'coxae with their cutting equipment af^er
                                     t h a t photograph was taken? - A. I don't sir.

                                        Ten minutes.    Does that strike you as a very long time?
                               Q.
                                        A. Yes sir.
                                        well are you saying then even though you knew there was
                               Q.
                                        c m s h i S c u, against the front and you knew there was
                                        difficulty1 in people getting out, it never crossed your
                                          •” i -Q aet somebody to bring some cutters to release une
                                        nunc, w „           •   t-     as a request for cutters very
                                        ueople? - A. bir,                     ^
                                        ‘ r n ; or       At the moment the call v/as put ouu _or Ou.ier
                                        assistance and a request was made then for cutters and _I
                                        l e l l e v e that because none were readily available from the
                                        Police Service the Fire Brigade were called.
                      H
                                                                                                            107
I   M a r n h a m I frl
                                                  108         n.fl. PUCKSHFIELD



                              .•e not, the v;ay you told us about it before, nor is it
                      quite the way it appears in your              a ^ ^ ^ c a n i n g
                      in your statement in the same breath talking about L*e c^ii g
                      o- the -ire Brigade and also the request for cutters. Wien
                      Ite 5cu      telling us that you first heard somebody ashing
                      for cutters? - A. I can't specifically say. When I re<-lis~c
                      ♦•here was a disaster situation I gave instructions as to
            B         rislnt<al services to be called and implemented and I g a «
                      a l<st of instructions.   The comment_in my statement is tn*
                       t called for assistance generally,  i ga^e a li-u      i ^S w -u
                       tions and I was aware at that tine in that moment o_ crisi-
                       that somebody wanted some wire cutters.

                      Gh^ef S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Duckenfield, what I am^suggesting zc
                           .            en-iGbodv in vour situation laceo. vduu pecp_e
                      £ 2 S ^ r L l ° S escape'from the front of the pen and beer.
                         ... ,          •1.       9OllfiD0dV WOU.1G uniH/v .        H©
                       sorae°cutters , not'"general assistance, specifically cutters,-A.
                       And that request v/as made.
                       Fhat I an. asking y o u about then is this: at 1 4 -minutes-pasr-i
                       s o m e b o d y " actually summoned the Fire Brigade? - A. les sir.


                       As-'inc for cutting equipment.  Can you help us as to n°'<
                       tone  before that you realised that the Police nad got no
                       cutting ecuioiaent? - A. From the information x nave go- to
                       hand at this*moment, sir, I cannot give you an

                       Can "ou remember? - A. No sir, I c a n ’t. There m u s t b e a
                 Q.
                       message somewhere but I have not got cne information.

                       ,,hp ,e dia you expect the Police to be having the cutting
                 Q.                 -            a I have a recollection that someone asse
                       lor cutting equipment from the Police garage at claywneels
                       Lane.
                        rj-s a ness age sent to Claywheels Lane?. - ^ .Yea-..J^ . ^. s o r ^ ,   ^
                 0    . C l a y w h e e l s t a n e is nearby and it is a Police transpose ,

                        garage.
                        You are familiar with the facilities which can be offered
                 Q.     iy the Fire Brigade on their emergency tenders, are you?
                        - A. Yes sir.

                 Q.
                        T O ?     to anybody in t e r m s ^ f direct injury, very thicK
                        nieces ox metal.   Are you aware of t h e ?      A. Ye- sir,
                        I know they have got equipment to cut meua_ sir.

                     *„+■ thev could have gone through the stanchions without
                  Q. any problem if that was t h o u g h t appropriate immediately
                     Did you know that? - A. No sir.

            H     Q.
                         that could do that sir.                                            ^q g

I Warnham Itrl
                          140

                                   A.K. SEAMAN



Q. Exhibit 4, page 27. On to page 4 of the statement.
   Exhibit 5, page 307.  Exhibit 6 is not copied. Can we
   just look at it perhaps, Exhibit 6 in your bundle refers
   to the abolition on reconstruction of Local Government
   and the need to establish;,and’maintain liaison and so
   on.  It is a general note requiring the Fire Service to
   have their usual input in advising and liaising with
   the relevant Authorities. - A. Yes.

Q. Exhibit 7 is also not copied and is a letter from the
   City of Sheffield to the Fire Service anticipating the
   transfer of responsibilities under the Local Government
   reorganisation and suggesting a meeting of the 13th of
   March.  We have got the record of that meeting.

         Exhibit 8 is again not copied and is a memorandum
   from the County from the County Solicitor of South
   Yorkshire to the Chief Fire Officer of the 5th of March 1986
   referring to the arrangments for a meeting and general
   discussion because of the impending changeover.

         Exhibit 9, page 312.  Exhibit 10, page 381.
   Letter of the 14th May 1987, Exhibit 11 is page 399.
   Exhibit 12, 394.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am.just wondering, Mr. Collins,
   I am not being offensive but ins'teae of playing bingo-if
   we got a list we could ....

         MR. COLLINS:  I can give you a list.  I will give
   you a list which you will have by tomorrow morning.

Q. May I go to page 10. Mr. Seaman, you refer at    the bottom
   of page 10 to a meeting of the Officer Working   Party on
   the 12th of February to discuss Mr. Eastwood's   report
   and to consider the views which will be put to   tne Club.

          Nov/ that meeting or minutes of that meeting,
    Exhibit 17, are referred to at page 57 of our bundle.

          Then over the page you say:

          "With regard to the West Terrace you consider
          due to the lack of depth’of the terrace the offer to
          reduce to 7 , 200 and so on all would be well ...."

    Now you specifically refer to "total movement laterally
    throughout the terrace and the three entrance/exits in
    the terrace being well situated and the West Stand
    providing a minimum of fire risk. You go on:

          "The existing gates in the perimeter fence were
          discounted for means of escape purposes."




                                                                 109
                               141

                                         A.K. SEAt4AN

        A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Was this you at the time, Mr. Seaman, or someone else
   actually at the meeting.  I think it was someone else,
   wasn't it. You weren't titere. yourself. But the three
   exits that are referred to* those presumably are the
   three tunnels, two at the -ends of the Stands and one in
   the middle.  Is that right? - A. That is right sir, yes,
   the three tunnels.

Q. And those were looked upon, were they, as the natural
   means of escape if there were a fire? - A. Yes.

Q       It being assumed that there v/as very unlikely to be a
        fire in the Stand itself? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. Of course I suopose it v/as possible that the uunnels
   might be blocked off or one or more of them might be
   blocked off because of fire or possibly a bomb scare or
   something like that? - A. We thought it was very unlikely
   that we would lose one but’anything is possible.

Q. Yes, but doing the best you could you considered, did
   you^ that having regard to the lack of any constraints
   on the terraces themselves, all should be well in the
   sense that it met the reasonable requirements? - A. Yes
   sir.
0       Did you know of the width of the perimeter gates? - A.
        I can't say specifically.  I am not aware that anybody
        took particular regard of the width-of the gates at that
        time.
Q. Was that because it really was not contemplated that the
   perimeter fence would form any sort of means of egress
   in case of fire? - A. Yes.   We only saw a minor need tor
   the use of the gates.

Q.       Only a minor need for the use    of the        gates? - A.Yes.

Q        And it v/as on that basis that  you were prepared to approve
         the capacity of 7,200? - A. Yes sir.

 0- Can I go on please to page 14. You reier there to the
     Safety Certificate and then in the middle you refer in
     1930 to a memorandum from the Council stating:

               "Despite the fact that the Certificate had
               been issued as recent as the 21st of December,
               it was felt that the Sheffield District
               Officer ... to review the situation due
               to the pending F.A. Cup semi-final ...."

         Now so these are not in fact or this aspect is not covered
         in our bundle? - A. No.

    q   . I am not sure that it is of vital relevance and I can

                                                                          110
                                          A. K. S E A M A N

half way down the radial fence is a disadvantage?
A.   I think it would be better to have it at the rear.

You have got one at the        . A.   Again, I think you
have got to look at the irrdiv-idual circumstances.   The
terrace itself was relatively shallow;    it was not
a deep terrace.

May I move on to another matter?   In your evidence yesterday
you spoke of - in answer to Mr. Collins - the terraces
having access via three tunnels.  A.   Yes.

That is not right, is it?   A.    Well,   I agreed with Mr.
Collins' description, in fact.

Very well.   The perimeter gates that you were asked about.
Is this the situation, that the Fire Service did not regard
the perimeter gates as having any emergency egress purpose?
A.   Not other than a localised ---

Very local, to let   someone out who might be by the gate.
A.   Well, a fight   inthe crowd, for example.

A fight in the crowd?    A.   Well, that would be a crowd
disturbance, would it not?    People could be below that
and in those circumstances might need to. use the gate to
evacuate.   The Police could also need to be able to get
access to get in.

But was the Fire Service thinking this, that the perimeter
gates really should be discounted as means of emergency
egress?   A.   We didn't count them as means ----    Forthe
evacuation time which was calculated, they were not included.

You were aware that Dr. Eastwood attached some importance
to the perimeter gates as a means of egress, were you not?
Would you have a look, please, I think it is in your bundle
at page 54.   Sir, it is in the core bundle at 240.    A
letter from Dr. Eastwood dated 8th May, 1985.    You see
that letter, the last two sentences?   A.   Yes.

 "It is our view that in the event of emergency spectators
 can be evacuated quickly enough by the gates to go on to
 the pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear."    You
 saw the order in which Mr. Eastwood put those .matters.
 Did the Fire Service ever contradict that and say, "No, no,
 it was wrong;  the gates on to the pitch should not be
 taken into account"?   A.   Can I say that what that letter
 was referring to was the requirement for the second gate
 at the bottom of the radial fence.   He was not complaining
 about the one that we wanted at the top of the radial fence.

 Mr. Seaman, please, we may be at cross-purposes but would
 you just.look at the sentence, "It is our view that in the
 event of emergency spectators can be evacuated quickly
 enough by the gates on to the pitch and by the normal exit
 gates to the rear."   He is there giving a reason for not
                                 54
                                                        A. K. S E A M A N

      having other radial gates,      is he not?   A.    It can be
      interpreted in that way.

    Q. Do you understand it to mean anything else?   A.   I don't
       know why the Police specifically requested the additional
       ga t e .

    Q. It is Mr. Eastwood's observation, do you see?        Mr. Eastwood
B      there seems  to be attaching some significance and value to the
       evacuation of spectators in emergency through the perimeter
       gates.   A.     I d o n ’t think we ever said that the gate could
       not be used  but for a small localised emergency, not a mass
       evacuation to the pitch.

    Q. But that would be insignificant in terms of emergency
       evacuation, would it not?   A.   Yes.

    Q. The Fire Service were asked, I think, to check by the South
       Yorkshire Countyd Council on the working of the radial
       gates and I think indicated.,in — -   Sir, I have gone back
       in time to 1981.   It is document 44 in your bundle, if
       that perhaps helps us.    it follows a letter of 23rd December
       1981 and is dealt with in your statement at page 19, and
       this is on the radial fence question.     Had the Fire Service
D      actually checked upon the working of the radial fences,
       do you know, in order to answer that question?    A.   I
       could not be specific.    I think what it probably refers
       to was the reports that they were working well that came
       from the Police.

    Q. I apologise for coming to that point out of order, but
       may I go back to the perimeter gates?   A.   Yes.
E
    Q. As a means of access and egress and for purposes of emergency
     * egress, the Officer Working Party did pay regard to those
       gates, did it not?      A.   They certainly asked for those
       gates.      When the pens were created there was a requirement
       for a g a t e in a pen that would not otherwise have had one.

    Q. Is it n o t rather to overstate the Fire Brigade's case to
       say that they never regarded the perimeter gates as playing
       a part in the evacuation process?     A.   What we have said
       all along is that they were not counted for the evacuation
       time.




                                            /At Tab 62 in your




                                                                            112
                               55
                                       A.K. SEAMAN



At Tab 62 in your bundle, page 265 in the core bundle,
      is a meeting of the 29th July 1985 attended by
Mr Allcock        It talks about having pitch perimeter -ences,
      p ^ t e r ' g a t e s for the purpose of both security
and emercrency egress purposes- Tnat is ngh.-, isn t it.
- A. Yes, we have always said for localised emergencies.

May I move to one other matter please and I need your help,
Mr. Seaman.
      In your bundle, and I need to deal with it this way
because the documents are in a sequence there, in yoiu
bundle at page 50 there is a letter from Dr. A t w o o d ,
dated the 9th April 1935? - A. Yes.

    He is there preparing a scheme:
           "We have prepared the scheme shown on^the
           attached print of our drawing 6705/2.

    I think, Mr. Seaman, that the drawing that then follows
    is that which is in the bundle at 50. - A. Yes.

    Now that drawing has got some writing on it? - A. Yes.

    T, .c           a SCaie drawing.  It has the various areas of
    the West'"stand and terraces labelled A, B, C,D ana E and
    t h e r e a r e bits which have been put in in manuscript? - A.

    Yes.
    Do you recognise that writing? - A. Yes.

    Whose is it? - A. I believe it is Divisional Officer
    Grimshaw's.
  * ^ ™          drawinq the only measurements that appear to
• f d,      aa?es of an? description relate to gates in the
            SncJs?    That is ri#ht. isn't it. between C and D
     and D and E? - A. Yes.
  The drawing is then considered, if we follow      ^cumen-
' tation through, at the meeting on the 18th April 1985.
  - A. Right, sir.

• A n u hae
          v e9X a S
                  t*th» S S s a l f iS’S K . ^ S r S y ^ t h e
  n^tes that one was concerned with .... Do you have the
   letter of the 2nd May 1935 which is your document nurabe.. 53
  It has the p a r a g r a p h E on the second page:

            "Certain gates to have the minimum widths and
            metres indicated on the attached plan.

     A. Yes.
q   . HOW that is the plan th a t you have just looked at, isn't it
                          58

                                               A. K. SEAMAN

But did it have the effect that we can see - is that                 <4
right?   A. Yes, sir.

In fact, as far as Mr. Bownes is concerned, he, as you                   Y
said, did not produce an^Minutes, as Mr. Vaughan had                     '
done - is that'the posi'Cron?  A. The Minutes produced
bv Mr. Vaughan were always very, very prompt.  Sometimes
there were no Minutes at all when Mr. Bownes took
meetings.

If we look please at 78, would you just have a look at
that? Look"at 78. That is a report made by, I think,
Mr. Bownes to Mr. Mackrell relating to an annual
inspection which had taken place on the 6 th August?
A. Yes, sir.

Mr. Bownes is actually making the report to the Club
on the 4th December, 1987?   A. Yes.

 Many months later?     A.     .Yes.

Well into the next season?             A.   Yes.

Can I ask you now please to go to page 11 in your
statement?   I just want to ask you a little bit more
about the perimeter gates.   You have made the point
quite clearly there that the existing gates were
discounted as a means of escape. You have made that
point very clearly.  They were intended, as far as you
were concerned, to deal with a localised difficulty.
Can you just please look at the old green guide, if I
can describe it in that way, and ask you to look at
7.9?   A. Yes, sir.

The position is there that there is a specific require­
ment', is there not, to have such gates?  A. Yes, sir.

This is 7.9, "Pitch perimeter fence/wall: This fence
should be designed to keep spectators off the pitch
but gates or other access points should be provided
for use in an emergency— "? A. Yes.

Was that the emergency to which you regarded those gates
as being directed?   A. Yes.

That kind of emergency that might arise in the vicinity
or round about the gate?   A. Yes.

And I think the position has already been made clear
that at that time there was no specific requirement as
to how wide those gates should be? A. No, sir, there
wasn't.

 As far as the absence of exit signs at the perimeter
 gate is c o n c e r n e d , did'^ou think it would be desirable
 to have an exit sign above the perimeter gate? A. No,
 not at all.                                                       114   ~
                                   A. K. SEAMAN

So if 1, 2, 3, 4 ana 5 and so on were all evacuated,
which way would you expect the people in 1 and 2 to
move when they were told to evacuate? A. To the corner
exits of the terrace.

Would that then create ;arvacuum or an area at the radial
gate?   A. Yes, it wouia.

And it is into that radial gate that the people would then
go?   A.  Yes.

From pen 3?   A.   Yes.

Can I ask you then about another matter   please, if you
will go to page 17?    Paragraph 2.10.    This refers to
the problems that there had been at the   Wolves -v-
Tottenham Hotspur game in the summer of   1981? A. Yes.

You, I think, have looked through all your files in
your possession?   A. Yes.

Have you been able to find any letter or document which
aives details about what actually happened on that
occasion? A. No, sir, none whatsoever.

In particular, I think, in the general bundle at page 14 4,
14 6 * and 147, you have now seen those letters? A. Yes,
I have seen them.

For example, the letter written by Sheffield Wednesday,
but none"of those letters have you been able to find in
any of your files?   A. No, sir.

Or any report by the police or anything of that kind?
A . No.

And such enquiries as you have been able to make with
the various officers, can you help us as to what detail
thev actually had about what the problem v/as in 1981?
A.  I d o n ’t think they ever had any information other
than that there had been some sort of crushing incident.
They never knew the extent of the actual incident.

 In that connection, can you help us about this from the
 enquiries that you have made: Was there at that time,
 or at any time, any complaint about the size of the
 perimeter gate?   A. No, sir, none at all.

 Or any problem that anybody had felt had arisen in
 evacuating people, bearing in mind the size of the
 gate?   A. No.

 As far as you are aware, has there at any time been
 any general complaint by the Police or by anybody that
 there was difficulty iDecontrolling the number of people
 going into the pens?   A. No, sir.

 Or into the terrace as a whole?    A. No.
                                 89

                                                         A.HOPKINS

                                                                               *
     A.   I got information a little later about casualties
     at Leppings Lane end and deceased at Leppings Lane end
     of the ground.

Q. What was your means of communication at the ground itself
   with other Officers?   A.   Verbal.

Q. Speaking to them directly?               A.'   Yes.

Q. Could you not use any other form of radio or anything like
   that?   A.   You could use radios on talk-through but, I
   mean, it is not an ideal situation.   I think when you take
   charge of an incident, we were virtually operating in a
   given area - an agreed area - so communication did not
   become a problem.

Q. So now I think you went back to the gymnasium end and you
   spoke to Control and asked for the major accident vehicle.
   A.   Yes, I did.

Q. You very kindly supplied this morning a list of the equipment
   which is carried -- an inventory of equipment carried by
   this vehicle.    I do not want  to go into it all but I do
   notice one of the things that   it carries are bolt-crops
   and saws.   A.    That is correct.

Q. Is this in fact confined to the major accident vehicle or
   do other ambulances carry them?   A.    No, not at all.
   Emergency vehicles have what we  call a breaking-in kit which
   includes small bolt-croppers and saws and rope and gloves.

Q.   D o o r d i n a r y ambulances have these?   A.     What d o you mean
     by ordinary ambulances?

Q. An ambulance from the County Ambulance Service, does it
   have ___   A.    An emergency County ambulance carries a
   breaking-in kit.

Q. So the ambulance that Mr. Higgins had brought to the ground,
   would that have this breaking-in kit?   A.   It would have
   had a kit, yes, sir.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not know - you have seen
     the fencing, have you, at the Leppings Lane end?
     A.   Yes, my Lord.   Yes.

Q. I do not know what your bolt-croppers and saws were able to
   deal with.   Would they have been able to deal with that?
   Cut the wire or --- ?  A.   I think the big ones may have
   done.   The ones that were carried on the ambulance would
   probably have had problems.   The major incident — the large
   gauge — one  would probably have cut it but ———

Q. Can I get it clear?   The ambulance which was standing by
   at the ground which Mr. Higgins had had sane equipment of
   this kind but are you saying that would not have worked on
   this wiring, or what?   A.   I think the equipment carxied                | g
                                  90

                                               •A. H O P O K I N S

        on an emergency ambulance, my Lord, is equipment for
        gaining access to properties rather than breaking down
        security fences, and that is basically what it is on
        the ambulance for, for gaining access to property, really,
        when someone has collapsed inside.

Q       It comes to this - it might have worked but it was not
        designed for that, does it?   A.   My impression would be
        I would be doubtful on whether it would have, in fact,
        fulfilled that role.

    —        MR. PHILLIPS:   Perhaps we can get round that, sir,
        if I ask for a set of these bolt-crops to be provided
        and we can have them looked at to see whether they would.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

n            MR. PHILLIPS:   You then ask for the major accident
        vehicle to be brought to the ground.   A.   To be despatched,
        yes, sir.

Q       By the time you got back to the Penistone Road end you
        clearly had the idea that this was a very serious matter.
        A.  There was no doubt in ray mind it was a serious matter,
        sir.
    I   And you did then everything you could to get everybody
        there that you wanted.   You saw, I think, some St. John s
        people, did you at the gymnasium?   A.    I saw a group of
        St. John's Cadets, sir.   My initial reaction was to
        utilise them but they were quite distressed children, really,
        and not in a position to be utilised on what I wanted doing.

         Now, you went into the gymnasium,    I think,         A.    Yes, sir.

    Q. Did you see anybody in charge there from the Police?
       When you first went in?     I am looking at Paragraph 22 o
       your statement.   A.    I d i d n ’t see anybody at that time,
         sir.

    Q. You describe the situation as chaos,          A.       That's right,
       sir.
         Did you try to do anything to bring order to the chaos?
         A     Not really, sir.   The main concern I had was getting
         resources to the ground to remove what I had seen on the
         □itch      At the time I came off the pitch I was conscious
         of two things - (1) that at that moment in time I hadn't
         the resources to remove the casualties from the pitch,
         and I was conscious of the fact that the people on the
         Penistone Road end of the ground seemed to have a total
         unawareness of what was going on at the other end of the
         around and there was still quite a lot of clapping and
         chantinq as I came off.     My immediate reaction was to
         get an ambulance on to the pitch.     That w a s the forefront
          of my mind, mainly, yes, to deal with casualties but so the , y
          rest of the people -- to bring home to them that someth in g1 -*-*
                                                                                 ,
                                99

                                                   A. HOPKINS

Q.      May I ask you just about the problems of access that you
         have mentioned.  I think you said that ambulances were in
         fact able to get in and out?   A. We were able to reverse
         two or three ambulances in at any one time.

Q.      You were?    A. There were a number of vehicles in the yard
        which were Police vehicles, but one understood why they
         were there.

Q.      Are you saying, in fact, that their presence was an
         inconvenience but it did not really prevent you getting
         on with the job?   A. No, it didn't.

Q.      And if you had wanted them to be removed, you would have
         taken some steps?   A. Well, we did eventually get them
         moved, sir.

Q.      And tney were moved    as you requested?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.      The horses that you have spoken aboutwere no problem      for
         you, were they?   A.  I acknowledged their presence.     They
         did not give me a problem as such.

Q.      I imagine you are talking about horses with men upon them,
         are you?   A.  Yes, sir.

Q.      And if you wanted a horse moved, it would have     been a simple
         job to get it done?  A. Yes, sir.

Q.      And although you have mentioned horses, you are not
         suggesting that the vehicles there or the horses were
         really an impediment to getting your job done? A. They
         didn't stop us doing the job, sir.

Q.      Thank you.  Is it right that you did not in fact have any
        conversation with any of the men on the horses? A. I have
        a recollection -- I don't think I did, no. One spoke to
        me as I got to the ground, but I didn't have any
        conversations with them regarding the incident.

Q.      May I ask you about one further matter.  Bolt croppers or
        equipment on the ambulances have been referred to.  I think
        three of your ambulances actually went out on to the pitch?
        A. There were three ultimately, yes, sir.

q   .   what equipment is it that you have in mind on the ambulance --

             Mr. KALLIPETIS:     Sir, if it helps, I am having them
        brought here.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.

q.           Mr. WOODWARD:     Are you aware of any of the equipment
        having been used?       A . No, I'm not aware of it, sir.        __

Q.      It would follow, would it, that your experienced ambulance­
        men, if they thought they had got any tackle on board that    -
        could have helped, would have soon had it out? A. I thinkj a q
        they would have used it, sir, yes.                         Ale)
                                              57
                                                        W. EASTWOOD


                     to 5 7 . "comprehensive system of signposting".
    Can I go o n to b / .                svstem, indeed there was
    There was not a COI*Pr<r£e TepDingS Lane end of signposting
    a f t ^ h e r e ^ e o ^ e should go. Was that ever anything that
    as to vnere y .             vour concern? - A. No.
    you considered           «« -
                               It may be arguable that is not structural.
             M R . COLLINS t

                ;;;
     a°signpost i t a structural part because if it isn't be «re
     playing games.
                 MR. COLLINS:             No, I think probably not.



      1.1 metres, they were not? - A. Yes.
«     , clear breach of the Safety Certificate requirement.                       That
      may have been a causative one too.
            T m n JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, »r. Collins, I keep = = k m g
            LORD juoii'—“        ,  , .   cates any moreC
      you this: are you coming bacK to g

              ■ :. tm - :COI*IBS“ .,rNO,: I don' t . t j v i n k .l

                   LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R : ^ !                                          ,
          this: ' V ° f “ ®r®e!a ioinmany people out but to be able to let
          desire not to lew .00 ma y p P           lQn and the neec to let

          Z X V S :          in an ^

          There may be v5ri°gSk^ ® s 9 e!Se\ 1/eVi!lhperhaps hear about,
                 'and goodness knows^else w e ^ i lQt ^ d i f f i c u l t y _
          France
          but in ordinary te^ ‘           finds in many garage gates, o_
          is there in c o m g -,ha^ ° vou want to get something big out
          having a large ga e ^ middle of it when you want to get
          and a sn.aU one in .he middle of                     s±r_
          one person in?     a . i-aau
                                     i -i        nn i« on e» of structural
    Q -    s t r e n g t ^ b u t ”   that^car^be o ^ r c o m e or two different gates,
           one big and one small.
                       „ . TTWC. Yes one thing I should have come bac*
           to on ^ i e s ^ y o f p u t ^ y o i r e ^ e r your special bolt on,
                    Yss •
                     aoinq to go into the details of that. - A. Could
            I am nou going «-<-> ?
            I come back to my ^ord.
                       l0RD j u s t i c e TAYLOR;     Yes, by all
            r ha f t L T h i n S V a e
                                     s S E S           t^e'gatel could I pass this

            to my Lord?

                                                                                         119
                           59

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


Now, that would be the normal way out, and it gets you out
weli inside the 8 minutes which is required in emergency.    My
thoughts when we were putting the gates at the top, the 2
units and so on, were rather like this.    Suppose there was
some emergency that shut that tunnel.   Obviously there could
not be a fire in that particular tunnel but say somebody put a
bomb there, you have now got to get people out in 8 minutes.
If you look at the 2 units to the top left, 2 units to the
top right through these gates, that is 4, and if you count the
gates on to the pitch, which are very adequate for 1 unit, you
have 6 units of exit from that area. My belief was that even
if somebody blocked the tunnel there were 6 units of exit,
which at 360 per minute, 60 per unit width, would take
 something like 6 minutes to completely empty those two pens.
 This appeared to me to be very reasonable secondary emergency
 exit.  I had no idea it could possibly happen that gates could
 be open, that gates would not be open, and that there would be
 people trapped there for a long time as there were.   I
 believed I had a very reasonable secondary escape system in
 place, even though only two were on to the pitch. With the
 other two you could completely replace the tunnel and get
 everybody away.

  I am not sure that can be right, with respect to you, because
  the one thing we have made absolutely clear throughout all
- this jis .that^the exist gates or: the gates on to^tfee'ipitch
  not, treated and were never treated as emergency evacuation ..
  gates for the purpose of determining capacity?

       LORD J U S T I C E JAYLOR:   Speed of evacuation. - A. A gate
" is a gate     The gate has a quick release device.      It has got
  somebody outside.        It could therefore in my thinking become an
  exit gate.
      MR COLLINS:    If it was to be an exit gate then even
 under the 1976 Guide it must be 1.1 m at least, if it is going
 to be used as an exit gate.  That is paragraph 15.5.3. - a.
 This is looking at it, if you like, legalistic is the wrong
 word, but the common sense view is that there is a gate with a
 quick release device, a Policeman standing beside it, and if
 people want to get out they can get out of that gate.

 But all I am suggesting is that this is a ex post,facto
 iustification for something which was not actually part of the
 thinking at the time? - A. That is completely incorrect.  At
 the time when these radial barriers were put in I had great
 cause for concern to think what the effect would be. and I did
 think about it.
  Particularly when in pen 3 you were concerned that it would
  have been perfectly all right for there to be no exit gates
  through the perimeter fence? - A. We still had 5 units of exit
  just like the tunnel.
       MR. COLLINS:  Sir, I have very little more.  Do you want
  me to finish it? I have got about two or three minutes, I
  hope.
                                                                 120
                                   71

                                                      W. EASTWOOD

Q. So whatever they did with it, they certainly knew what your
   opinion was?   A. Yes.

0. And as far as you were concerned, it was important, as far
   as practicably possible, to adhere to those figures? A.;Yes.

q   . I just want to ask you now please one or two things about
      the perimeter gates. As far as the perimeter gates are
      concerned, they were never intended, were they, to be
      anything other than a means of escape if there was some
      localised problem which would require people to come out
      at the front?   A. That was their prime purpose. Obviously
      we must have in mind that in emergency they could be used,
      but that was their prime purpose, I agree.

Q. Obviously if there is an emergency somebody might open the
   gates.  A. But the prime purpose.

0       For the purpose of any calculation that was done, those
        gates did not feature in terms of determining the capacity?
        A. No.
0       You have mentioned the width of various gates that you have
        had to deal with elsewhere.  Am I right in saying that you
        mentioned one which is 1.7 metres and that was at Bramall
        Lane? / A. That is so..      •' v                1        ;:U•

0   That is for a gate on a wooden stand, is it not? A. Not
- ‘ on ■a^-woodBir-'srtantt.^--Ur'-s- a~<terrace - v e ^ ldkeriArin^Tm^fiid"*'-**
    the stand behind _has a lot of timber in one half of it.

    Q. So that is obviously a consideration which certainly does
       not apply here?    A. Everything is analogous except at
       Bramall Lane there   is a lot of timber in the stand.

    Q. And, of course, there being a lot of timber, you have to
       have a quicker rate of escape?   A. Yes.

    Q. And hence you have to have either more gates or wider gates?
       A. That is so.

    0   As far as the others at Bramall Lane are concerned, where
        j think you said it was 1.2 metres, I am not sure that the
        situation has yet been resolved, has it? Is there a safety
        certificate as far as Bramall Lane is concerned yet? A. I
        believe there isn't, but I don't know.  I mean I have
        discovered since this incident that Bramall Lane didn't
        have one either.
    0   But am I not right in saying that Sheffield United Football
        Club - perhaps you as well - are urging for those gates,
        which are 1.2 metres, to be used as part of the normal
        route of escape?  Isn't that right?    A. You say "are
        urging" now?
       Yes the discussion is still going on. In other words, the
    Q. position is not analogous to this at all In the case of
       Bramall Lane where you are talking about 1.2 metres, the
                                 72

                                                  W. EASTWOOD

     •jpa is that those gates are used as part of the recognised,
     ioraai roIlS of escape? A. Yes. Well, this is not now.
     Going right back ten years or so, this was part of a
     recognised picture.
Q. But that is a totally different situation from the one
     here?       A. Yes.
A    ran t as k vou to look at 7.9.2 which deals with perimeter
q   . Can I as     y               7.9.2:   "Access points should be
                         - and the word used is "controlled" as opposed
     ^ n «maiied" - “so that immediate access to the pitch or
     to manne                        ensured in the event of an emergency
     N o w ^ t h ^ v i t a l thing about any perimeter gate is that that
     should happen?            A.   Yes.




                                         /Q. And that there should be —




                                                                            1 22
                              73       17.   SASTWOOP



and +-v*at there should be extreme vigilance and speec m
opening the gates if the necessity arises? - A. Yes.

and it is essential that everybody involved in operating
the system should be fully aware of that? - A. Yes.

ran I a«k vou please in the core bundle to have a loox
at 2^0.~ It is'a letter dated the 3th of May.   I raise
this"with you because it does rather appear that you
are talcing a slightly different view as to tne runcuion
of the perimeter gate in that letter, because whan you
sa'<r in the penultimate sentence on that page:

        " t is our view that in tne event of an
        emergency spectators can be evacuated   ^
        nuicklv enough by the gates on to^ the pitch
       •ana by"the normal exit gates at tne rear.

it is certainly an unhappy way of phrasing it, isn't it?
- a . Yes, a rather daft letter in a sense.

 Because it reallv rather sounds there as though you are
 nutting ori*e emphasis on the gates on to the PIlc.: «*~c
 l>en going on to a secondary basis dealing witn Oie
 I**- qates at the rear. The position being taat reall*
 v o u -ddn’
           jt ^take-'the gates on the- pitch
 -if      isn't -that right? - A. I- nave. no. -re~oxlecu-*on...cu...
 ± 1 tKis         about whatever.    I can't imagine wmc**
             if-it ai'-minute.    x - « o » K need the-letter-end-
 the drawing.      - -
       LORD JUSTIC2 TAYLOR:  >?e looked at this tnis
 morning and at the letter to which this was a reply.

       rrp:? ••jTTiiESS: Oh sorry, we are back to Sheffield^
 Uednesday. 1 ^'thought we were still at Sheffield United.
 I am sorry, I am v/ith the wrong Club.

        '1R rULLSR: The position is simply tnis, isn
 it that in considering escape you really should net
 be'tak’nc into account the perimeter gate a. all, .s^oulc
 :           I did. You see I explained tnis morning wiui
 lv>is drawing that my own calculations ror the seconciarv
 r-ans of escape this was me satisfying mysel*.    a cic
 A k e account o‘f the fact that the gates were there
 and "re 3 minutes 29 seconds or whatever it was unat
 vou worked out, when I added in that third gate became
 i-atever it is, 5*i minutes, so I had been taking in^o
 accoun? the fact that with my quick opening device in
  oosition, which it was going to be any Gay, it vres ^
  in -act several months away, we could oe ou.e the*-
  v/oulc be possible to open the gates.
well of course that reduces it. The more gates you put
in the more it is going to reduce it? - A. Yes.

But' what I am suggesting to you, Dr. Eastwood, that
even Vithout including those gates, the radial gates a-
a secondary means of escape, which of course is a very
unlikely eventuality, are perfectly adequate bearing^,,
mind the kind of Stand you have got? - A. *t is w ve.,
good Stand from that point of view.

r _n T ^hen turn to another matter.   In 1931 tnere .»c.»
-n incident of which you have some knowledge at a Cup
“ inal between Wolves and Tottenham Hotspur and _uhe ^
oosition is this, isn't it, that althougn .nat “ J?1-**-
s-r occurred, there was no suggestion o*. complaint a -
 that time by anyone about the width of the gate? - A. So
■Far as I know there v/as no suggestion.

vou certainlv at that time   from what youknew,you weran't
saving:  "Well perhaps we ought to have wider gaues
we"have already got"? - A. Ko.

    can I then go to another matter as far as^ that is
    concerned.  As early as 1981 you         anou- tnis
    embrvo, the plan of having separate ^ n . a l e s .o.
    part of the terrace? - A. £es. ...             : "    ' ~c........ '

 How that was something which wasi private as it were
'between you and the Club? - A. Yes.

    Tt was   not   something that    was made known to the Local
    A utho r i t y ? - A. I did not make it known.

    ■jell it certainly does not appear in any of t h e correspondence.
'      a     th?t tim° in 1981 when you are emphasisxiig tn<-u
    o? cSSrse « n t r S l is important'and people were appreciating
    ?Hat control was important, there was no sugges-.icn .as
     ^    . ™ a t vou are aware of, that people were h a v i n g _
    difficulty in controlling people in numbers going^ir.uo «n*
         those pens? - A. The pens had not appeared au uie u_ae
     of the Spurs, incident.
     But thev subsequently appeared in 1981 and when they were
          in in 1981 vou were not saying to anybody on -we
     ^orvincr PartyT nor as far as you were aware was anybody
     say incr to the Working Party:  "Look, we have got problems
     w?th controlling people getting into tnese pens ? - A. r.o,
     T       nSt savinc that.  You will know that there was    _
     correspondence as to how well the pens were worning anu
      <       the Chief Constable went to Io o k and uie*e are
                  in the Sorbing Party Uinutes that they aypear
     'to be working well up to to the moment and so on.

     v   coo i* there had been concern on your part or on c.ie
     part of the Club oron the part of the Police about controlling



                                                                   124
                               37


                                                         W. EASTWOOD

        not it complied with the technicalities of the Green code?
        - A. Yes.

Q       Hay I give you one example? I take it very shortly.    It
        was within your knowledge that the width of the perimeter
        gates, rightly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
        deliberate decision of the certifying autfiority? - A. Yes.

Q. Had been discussed at some length and the two opposing
   views considered? ~ A. Yes.

Q. And they had decided in their wisdom that the gates should
   he less than the recommended guide? - A. Yes.

Q. They having expressed their satisfaction with that position,
   did you believe that the effect of the certificate was to
   override that satisfaction and to impose an absolute legal
   obligation on you and your clients? - A. I believed that
   the effect of a certificate was to ratify the decision to
   leave the gates.

Q. And looking at paragraph 15 and the full context and the
   words that were omitted the last line with the words and
   in all cases to the satisfaction of the Council did you
   believe that if you had a decision, for example, on the
   width of the gate which was to the satisfaction of the
   Council that you could lawfully act on that satisfaction?
   - A. I did.
             MR. GLASGOW:   Excuse me one second.      Thank you
        very much, Dr. Eastwood.

                     Cross~examined by MR. WOODWARD:

0       Dr. Eastwood, you held a continuing retainer from the club,
        did you not? - A. No, sir.  I was retained from time to time
        throughout this period.

Q. I see. ~ A. It would be wrong to say I had a continuing
   retainer.

    Q    But there was no other consulting engineer acting on behalf
         of the club throughout this period, was there, in relation
         to these matters about which you have spoken? - A. Mo, no.

    Q    And the appointment or your part begins by documentation
         by document page 7 in the bundle, 1st December, 1978,
         commissioned to act on our behalf in our dealings with
         the club, and that is indeed what you did? - A. Can I
         just come back, please, to your previous question? There
         was another engineer employed on some works in the club
         during my period of office.

    Q. Any of the works to which we have been giving our attention
       here? - A. No, no.


                                                                       125
.X

                                                   101


                                                                    B. D. M U R R A Y

              Q. Did you stay down on the track or did you go back to the
                 C o n tr ol Ro om?        A.  Af ter the game had been stopped,
                 I i m m e d i a t e l y went down to the Control Room and then
                 r e t ur ne d to the pitch and r eq uest ed Hr. Duc ke nfield.
                 When I was l e a v i n g the Con trol Room I can remember
                 P.C. B i c h a r d a sk in g for an a mb ulan ce or a couple of
                 a m b u l a n c e s to be on sta nd -by.   When I got down on to
     B           the pitch, I co uld see. the peo ple d i s tr es se d against
                 the fence who were o b v i o u s l y injured, and there were
                 o b v i o u s l y man y of them, and an amb ul an ce - —   Excuse
                 me.
              Q. You rea li se d, I think --
                              LORD J U S TI CE TAYLOR:   Just a second, he wan ted to
                    c o m p l e t e som et hi ng .
                         THE W IT NE SS : One amb ul an ce or two a m b ul an ce s were
                    not goi ng to be enoug h.

              Q.           MR. PHI LL IP S:      So what did you do about that?
                            LORD J U S T I C E TAY LOR:      Officer, would you like a
     D        Q*
                    short b re ak ?         A.      No, thank you, my Lord.        I didn't
                    have a radio. My ra dio was on the desk.                   I wan te d some
                    a mb ul an ce s.      I went and I a pp ro a c h e d a Ser ge an t and I
                    took his radio off him.                I cal led the Control Room and
                    I was a c k n o w l e d g e d .    I asked for a fleet of ambulances.
                    I could see at the bac k of the L eppi ng s Lane Stand that
                    peo pl e were just s t a n d i n g there, looking out on to the
                    field as t ho ug h n o t h i n g was happening.          I had realised
                    that p eo pl e wer e j am me d ag ain st the fence, that Offi cer s
                    were h av in g gr eat d i f f i c u l t y in ge tti ng them out of the
                    gates and that the only r el ie f would be if people would
                    move back.            I as ked for tannoy m e s sa ge s to be pas sed to
                    tell p eo pl e to move bac k and I think I asked for some
                    cut ti ng e q u i p m e n t for the fences.         If I didn't ask for
                    it then s o m e b o d y who was imm ed ia te ly in my vici nit y
                    did, but I see m to think it was me.

               Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:          We re those tannoy mes sa ge s pla yed?
                    Did you hear any?           A.    I can not say I heard any.

               Q. Did you mak e any fu rth er req uest for tannoy m es sa ge s?
                  A.       Yes, I did.          As I stood I noticed that the people
                  were still s t a n d i n g there, there was still no mov em en t
                  and I asked for fu rth er m e s s a g e s to be passed, keep
                  p a s si ng m e s s a g e s to tell people to move back, and while
                  I stood there and w a t c h e d I could see no mov em en t at
                  all at the bac k o f those pens.
               Q. In r e s p o n s e to your la ter req uest were any tannoy
                  m e s s a g e s p l a y e d to your r e c o l l e c t i o n ? A. I ca n't
                  r ec al l m e s s a g e s b ei n g played.          I can't recall that I
         H|       cou ld hear the m but I do n't know whether I wo uld hear
                  them on the field of pla y anyway.
                            116

                                        B.D. MURRAY


       MR. JACKSON: My Lord, it would have been, or will
 be my submission that anyone who had considered the
 possibility of crushing at the Leppings Lane end would have
 instantly realised that the gate at the front was pathetically
 inadequate.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I follow that point. As I think
 I have said earlier in this Inquiry, I d on’t think I an
 going to require a lot of persuasion about that.

        MR. JACK5O H :    I •am-obliged, my Lord.

       MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, I do apologise for interrupting,
 but i* the Officer is being asked that men on the field
 should have done something and it is being put that things
 could have been done, sir in fairness to the Officer pernaps
 Mr. Jackson would put what it is precisely suggested tnose
 Officers should do.  He has not answered that point.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I was raising that point ar.c
  then I rather think Mr. Jackson shifted his ground on to
  saying that the gate was inadequate.

        MR. JACKS01I: My Lord, may I make it very clear.
  My point is exactly the opposite of that which apparently
  I have given the impression.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Oh by all means let's ses v;kat
  it is.
        :1R. JACKSOM: The Officers were distressed; _they were
  standing apparently doing nothing; there was nothing they
  could do in the circumstances, but the picture that woulc
  be presented to the fans would be a large number of Orticers
  doing nothing at a time of emergency.  That would be wny
  the Officer would receive and his colleagues would receive
  abuse from fans thinking they were doing nothing.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Again I am not wanting to stop
  you but I think that is pretty clear, isn't it?

        MR. JACKSON:  That is what I thought.         That iswhy
  I am rather surprised at the intervention.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: With Mr. Woodward I thought
  you were suggesting there was some special technique j-Oj.
  getting people out'of a tennis court gate if they all coL
  crushed inside, but you are not saying that.

           MR. JACKSON:    I am obliged.

Q. Mr. Murray, may I take just one aspect o f fthe evidence that
   you have given and extend it a little.

         We have heard throughout the Police evidence that
   this was unprecedented the crush at the Leppings Lane


                                                                     127
                                               119

                                                                        B. D. HURRAY



                     Q. What I am suggesting to you is that those gates should
                        have been manned in order to encourage people to do
                        precisely that? - A. Well, I cannot see, if you are going
                        to lock the gate back, there does not seem to be any point
                        in manning it, sir.

                     Q. Precisely the reason I am putting it to you.  In order
             B          that the Officers who are there will keep the gangways
                        clear to make sure that people do not pack up right to the
                        back, but go through, into the next pen?

                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Hr. Huller, do you mind my
                          asking how this matter is related to the Fire Service?

                               HR. HULLER:   It relates to the situation that the
                          Fire Service was concerned with matters of egress from the
                          pen and, of course, they were responsible, with others on
                          the Working Officers Committee, for allowing that position
                          to arise which did arise, namely that there was the gate
                          at the back and it was part, as the Fire Service
                          understood it and said to the Working Party, that it was
                          to be a condition of those gates being there, and only
                          those gates being there, that would be under the manning
              D           of the Police:

                      Q   Can I now ask you about another matter.   Can you help me,
                          please, a.m I right in understanding that it would be no
                          later than about seven minutes past three when you were on
                          the pitch itself or the perimeter of the pitch and then
                          realised that people were being crushed up against the
                          perimeter fence? - A. Seven or eight minutes past three,
                          yes.
                      Q. And at that time you say, "I think I asked for cutting
                         equipment"? ~ A. Yes, sir.

                      Q   Am I right in understanding that, although you do not
                          specifically remember it, you would not at all be
                          surprised if, in those circumstances, you would be asking
                          urgently for just such equipment? - A. I think I did.  If
                          I did not,- someone else very close to me did.

                      0    But was it something that struck you as being obvious that
                           was required at that time? - A. To get the fences down.

                      Q    And can you help us at all, from anything you may have
                           discovered since or otherwise, if that happened about
                           seven minutes past three, how it came about that it was
                           not until 14 minutes past three - some seven minutes later
                           - that somebody was asking the Fire Brigade to provide
                           cutting equipment? - A. Well, my enquiries revealed, sir,
                           that the first request was made to our CJaywheels Lane
                           Depot and an Accident Unit was directed, but I think that
                           would have been travelling from some distance.  PresttB&bly
                 H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                       128
                              120

                                                       B. D. HURRAY



        at Claywheels Lane there was no cutting equipment
        available.

Q. Was it within your knowledge, as a Superintendent of
   Police, that the Fire Brigade had all Banner of cutting
   equipment which could, if required, have cut down that
   fence very quickly, without causing direct injury from the
   cutting to people in the pen? - A I would certainly hope
   so, sir.

Q. But did the Police have similar cutting equipment? - A.
   It is to my knowledge that we do have power tools in
   Accident Units and, if there had been an Accident Unit on
   standby at Claywheels Lane, as there could well have been,
   he could have been there very, very quickly indeed.

Q. It depended, therefore, on there being such a unit
   available at the time? - A. It did, indeed, sir, yes.

                    Cross-examined by HR. HAXWELL:

q   .        HR. HAXWELL:   Hr. Hurray, your understanding was
        that it was the responsibility of the Police and the Club,
        by its stewards, to monitor the fans that went into pens 3
        and 4? - A. I think it is a general responsibility, sir.

Q. And that was done for the purposes of seeing whether there
   was overcrowding, not by counting heads, but by a visual
   check? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And that would be generally true in the event of any kind
   of problem arising on the terraces, that you would carry
   out that visual check? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Having in mind they are fighting or drinking or any sort
   of disorderly behaviour? - A. If there is something wrong,
   I would expect a Police Officer to bring it to our
   attention or a steward to bring it to a Police Officer’s
   attent ion.

Q. Thank you.  Now, in the context of your understanding, I
   want to draw your attention to this, that it was evidently
   part of the standing instructions that there was to be
   a pre-match briefing of stewards? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Hr. Duckenfield thought that you might be able to assist
   the Inquiry about that.  Was there on this occasion a
   pre-match briefing of stewards? - A. The Inspector in
         charge of the four stands briefed the siew&rda working in
         those particular areas.

 Q. So my enquiries should be put better to an Inspector
    rather than to yourself? - A. Well, the Inspector of the
    stand that you are interested in, yes, sir.




                                                                      129
                          55


                                           T. BICHARD

Q. Did you know why you were calling the Fire Brigade?
   What I am getting at is did you know what you wanted
   from the Fire Brigade?   A. I was paying attention to
   what Sergeant Goddard was doing in relation to the
   Brymac and obtaining the cutters, and when the realisation
   was that he was not successful in getting those from
   Claywheels Lane, I offered to contact the Fire Services.

Q. But the Fire Brigade would want to know what they were
   dealing with, would they not?  It was not a fire, for
   example, and they w o u l d   A. Certainly I can remember
   passing a message that we required the Fire Service
   and for the Fire Service to bring cutting equipment.

         Mr. COLLINS:  I think that is all I need ask you,
   thank you, Mr. Bichard.

                Cross-examined by Mr. HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Bichard, I want to investigate, if I may, just what
   your duties were.   You clearly were an expert in
   investigating the monitors and the cameras?    A. I think
    'expert' might be an exaggeration;  experienced.

Q. Experiened.   Were yourduties simply to operate your
    machinery, your technology, under supervision and
    direction, or did you have duties which derived from
    your own initiative?    A.   The supervision of the monitors
    and the operation of them is my initiative.    If I could
    perhaps explain:  if I see an incident or notice something
  f on the monitors, I will bring it to the attention of
    the Control Room staff.    Obviously if they see something
    in particular, they will mention it to me.

Q. So this may be two ways.  Somebody may say to you, "Zoom
   in on the centre of the South Stand, there's something
   happening over there", and you will do it?   A. Yes.

Q. You, on the other hand, if you are watching the monitors,
   may *spot something and zoom in yourself? A. Yes.

Q. And if you can see it, youwill then say to somebody
   "There is trouble there"?    A. Yes.

Q. Is there always an officer of the rank of Inspector or
   above in the Control Room?    Are there occasions when
   the senior officer there is Sergeant Goddard? A. There
   are odd occasions when Sergeant Goddard, P.C. Ryan and
   myself are in the Control Room.

 Q. But would it be normal for the officer in charge of the
    game or the commander on the ground to be in the Control
    Room?   A. It would be normal for Superintendent Murray
    to be present.            4




                                                                   130
                                    64

                                                T. BICHARD



O. Now one other matter I would like to ask you about. We
   have b e e n provided with the VHF Channel 1 tape. I don't-
   know whether you have had an opportunity O j. seeing it.
        A. No   sir.
o       I think it may well be that this records what you say
        to Sn?g Hill, and I put it to you, it is at page 16? - A.
        May I have an opportunity to look at it.

n       Tf there is one available.  You see in the top left-hand
        corner it gives the time between 15.13 and 15.14_at tne
        bottom.  Have you got that? - A. Yes, I have that.

Q. If you look at the right-hand side, just over halfway down
        it says:
                                         "Hillsborough ground control could
                                         you contact the Fire Service,
                                         Fire Service, we want some
                                         hydraulic cutting equipment to
                                         the ground to cut some of the
                                         metal fences. Fire Service urgent
                                         required Leppings Lane over".

         Then the reply comes, am I right;

                "Roger Fire Brigade
                urgent up to Leppings
                Lane Roger".

         A. Yes.
    0    Am T right in saying what we see on the right is what you
         were saying? - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q    Therefore no mention there, if this transcript is right,
         about anybody breaking down the gates or anything? - A. 1,0.

    Q. And what is important, a specific mention by you of Leppings
       Lane? - A. Yes, I did.
    n    Have vou any idea, because subsequently we shall hear, that
         whin a message was sent from Snig Hill, the people at
         Sn!S M U apparently did not know where the Fire Brigade
           = rS.,      4dV - A well it is quite clear, it is the
         Leppings Lane end of the ground. Obviously ^        ? ire Service
         IS* not (joiner to bring their fire equipment, the tender
           ^ 1 |v into the ground.      They are going to bring it to
              nearest point, it is the actual cutting equipment tnat
         we w o u l d require in the ground and that would be dealt with
          on the ground.
    n     B u t vour r e c o l l e c t i o n certainly accords with that, not only
          did you say Leppings Lane but the person at Snig Hill
          c o n f i r m e d Leppings Lane? - A. That is right.



                                                                                     131
                            12                                    W. JACKSON



Q. Can you help us about that, Hr. Jackson? - A. Yes, that
   would be Officers who were summoned for Operation Support
   coming from the various Divisions.

Q. Then I think, at 3.17, over the page, ue have a reference
   to Hammet, RHSH Casualty put on standby for large numbers
   of casualties? - A. Yes.

Q.     Can you help us aboutthat, Hr. Jackson? - A. Yes, during
     the implementation of the major incident, I asked for
     certain additional things to be done, such as turning out
     the Head of CID to look into what had actually happened
     and also to make sure the      casualty— .

Q.        '.LORD'JUSTICE TAYLOR: Sorry,     was that because you
     thought  that: it ihad resulted from   m i s b e h a v t t m r ? :A.r Se 1:1:,v:;*
     I thought basically that we would      need to have the matter
     investigated when, quite clearly,      we had a number of
     people injured, sir.

Q.       J HR. CQLLHiSt  I think the other relevant *es-sa^e:^
     that we might laak at is over the pageg. or page 1 2 ./ A^t-
     3.19 there is a reference to cutting equipment.    "GC21
     with cutting equipment to scene.  GF11 COHHS vehicle.
     GBS1 Leppings Lane to block road." GC2/21.    Is that a
     Police reference? - A. Can you just tell me where that one
     is?

Q. I am sorry, it is on page 12.      It is the next page from
   one we were just looking at about RHH. :Have you got it?.
   It 1 S 3-.19, about four 1 ines' down. "GQ21 with cut-fetng
   equipment to scene?" - A. Yes, that would be a Police
   veh icle.
Q. Because I think ’we heard from Hr. Duckefffield that          -
   Police garage, was communicated with in cela-tion to curtting
   equipment- rather than the Fire Br igade-'in-itialiy?-'*
   Yes, I heard him saying that.

Q. And is GC21 a Police garage or someone from a Police
   garage or is it just a Police car? - A; f think that, would
   be a Police car — the Police car with this, equipment.




                      /Q. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            Was a n y ----




                                                                               1 32
                         13


                                                 W- JACKSON


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Was any cutting equipment brought
to bear upon these fences that afternoon? - A. No, I think
what happened, my Lord, was that when we implemented the Major
Incident Plant the Force Operations room have certain
responsibilities.   In those responsibilities they turn out the
essential services, the ambulances and the Fire Brigade.   I
think on this occasion, having reviewed the situation, the
Force Control room did not immediately ask for the Fire
Brigade.   I think we had another call for the Fire Brigade and
we   asked again.  That was how the calls went out.

     MR.    COLLINS:I think the Fire Brigade      was not in fact
summoned    until... - A. 15.13.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, that did not quite
answer my question, which was, and. I put it more specifically,
did any cutting equipment ever get to bear on these fences? -
A. Other than the Fire Brigade, no, my Lord.

        MR. COLLINS:   I d o n ’t think the Fire Brigade did, in
fact?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Did any?

     MR. COLLINS:   It had already been kicked in by then as
far as it could be. Were you were - you could-see, -no doubt;
you were up in the control room - Police Officers and others,
and fans, trying to kick the wire in? - A. Yes, I could.  I
was not quite sure when the Fire Brigade had arrived because
of the crowd whether they had still used some.of-their -
equipment.

Y e s , I -follow. Effectively, whatever could have been achieved
by getting the fencing out of the way had been* achieved before
the Fire Brigade came, as I understand? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     They were sent for at 3.13?

      MR. COLLINS:   3.13 or 3.14, and they arrived at 3.17, I
 think, the first fire tender.

        MR. MULLER:    3.22.

        MR. COLLINS:     3.22.   I am obliged:

 Mr. Jackson, did you remain in the control room during this
 stage when we have been looking through these various
 messages? Were you in the control room all this time? - A.
 Yes, I did.  I went down to the pitch a little later on to
 speak to Mr. Nesbit.

 That was when you saw him arriving on the pitch, was it, and
 obviously taking charge on the pitch? -A. It was a little
 bit after that.

 Were you aware of him taking charge? -A. Yes, sir.
                                                               133
                                          44

                                                     W. JACKSOH



        pressing for this, as far as you know, because they were
        quite satisfied with the existing means o. control? - A. I
        don't know about that situation, I am sorry.

o           can I then ask you about another aspect. The perimeter fence
            round the pitch, the track perimeter fence and the gates in
            it am I right in understanding that the Police never regcrd*.d
            those gates as being a means through which the whole of the
            pens would be evacuated? - A. I think the evacuation in
            normal circumstances can be one of two ways depencing on
            the circumstances, whether on to the pitch or through t. e
            various exits.
q   .       The exits b e i n g through the tunnel or through:the.gate in
            the radial fences? - A. Yes.

q.          T h o s e   be, the norual means of :escap<^ifthere-was an
                        would                                                  •,/
            emergency? ~ A. Yes.
0           How 'asfar as -the- perimeter f e n c e i s concerned and^rhe .gate. ~
            'in that, that was only considered, am I-right,, oy the Eol^Cc,
            as being a means of taking out a few people it tne neec arose,
             not a means of taking out the fttll-l,00.0....peopl,e?   A.
             accept that.
                   MR. COLLINS:   Sir,   I d o n *t know whether it helps my
             learned friend and I am   trying purely to help, w e w i l l be
             call-nq Mr. Calvert who    is the Police LiaisonO . a c e . a u .
             tfe Ground between 1979   anfi 1987 .; He will       the 0:1jeer -
             Who can deal■■with?alI these matters in conjunction y * ^ ^
             the production of all the relevant Minutes ;o; the w o r ^ n g : ;
             Party-
                        It   would   seem, as I understand it, that Mr. Jackson.
             was: not ditectly in charge of this in the Sense^that: he jras
             nn-'>1 ir e c t i v ‘ involved and this was something wnien w a s :^Y ~ -
             clearl" delegated to others and Mr. Calvert I think woulc
             be S      right man to deal with this aspect o£ the matter.

                         MR. MULLER:   I shall do it in that way.

    n         Then there is just one other matter I want t o ;ask you. about..
              Could you have a look please at- the 1 ^ . t a which^you were:;
              referred to earlier on and particularly at.page,1 2 ^ , rC,an .
              vou L i p me to interpret that. That is. at 1 9 -minutes-past-l,
              am I right, there is an entry in relation to cutting equip
              rnent? - A. Yes.
    r,        tw>c; that mean that that is when it has been called for
              o° when i t is actually on its way, or w h a t does i t mean?
              -~A. I think that means when it is supposedly on its wav.

        n     T-rnuld one expect to find in this log anywhere the request
              for such equipment.    I say that because I confess I cannot
              f?nd it’ - A. If we call through the extended incident


                                                                                134
                                                      C. CALVERT

When the 1985 proposals were being considered and going
through there was a suggestion at one stage from the
Police that there should be a second gate in the radial
fences. - A. I have seen that on the papers.

Was that something that you initiated, that suggestion?
- A. I have looked at it and I will be quite honest, I
cannot remember initiating it.  I can remember it now
but it was not one of my main priorities.

Can you remember what the specific purpose of the
suggestion was? - A. Not really, no.

Go to page 265 and 6. Notes of an officer working party.
You were not present. - A. No.

The natter I would just like your help with is on page
266, Letter I, a reference to the gates in the pitch
perimeter fence being for both security access and
emergency egress purposes. - A. Yes.

Was that your understanding? - A. Yes.  I heard the
comment about the gates and I have always considered
the gates were used for both purposes.

Did you:^ give?-any ■thought as to what;1emergency’fstightr^ ^ r'cun.xu
occur at that end of the ground? - A. One of the reasons
I have seen the       gates used for is when there has been
fighting on. the      terraces and I have also seen itused
when there has been a flare discharged, an emergency ships
flare discharged on the terraces, which has caused
total chaos.

And has that resulted in large numbers of people being
evacuated on to   the pitch?- A. We have certainly brought
them out.  I would not say large numbers.

Because we now know that on the day this disaster occurred
the gates were not large enough for people to .come out
either quickly or in any numbers.  Is that not something
you have considered beforehand?- A. When we have had to
use them for any purpose in the past they have been
adequate for bringing the numbers out we wanted to bring
out.  We have brought then out to transfer them round
from one pen to the other when they have got themselves
into the wrong area of the ground and certainly it has
been adequate.

Can you go, please, to page 292? These are the minutes
of an officer working group, 13th of November, 1985, at
which you were present. - A. Yes.

And it is items 5 and 6 that I would like to ask you
about.  Item 5, the Police reported on the continuing
                          43


                                                   C. CALVERT

  fences?   Could you please turn to 153 in the bundle?
  Nov;, I appreciate that you were not present at that
  meeting.   It was the meeting at which the radial fences
  were first approved of in 1981, is that right, by the
  working party and the stipulation was made that they
  should be under Police control?- A. T h a : is the record, yes.

0. And it was of course for the Police, once that had been
   drawn to their attention, to carry out that instruction?
   - A. Yes.

Q. To control it. Were you aware when you were trying or
   when the Police were trying to interpret that of the
   way in which the Green Guide at that time, that is to
   say, in 1981, dealt with the question of controlling
   the’perimeter gates? -A. Not offhand.

Q. You see, if we look at the Green Guide, and I do not
   want'to be tedious about it but I must draw your
   attention to it since I asked the question, what it
   says at 792 is access points should be controlled -
   this is perimeter gates - so that immediate access
   to the pitch or perimeter track can be ensured in
   the event of an emergency. - A. The perimeter gates
   were controlled.

Q. They were controlled and how were they controlled?
   - A. The perimeter gates always had a Police Officer
   on the track.

0 V Yes. What was happening, when it came to the question
   of control in relation to perimeter gates, the requirement
   for control was carried out by having an Officer in the
   immediate vicinity of the gate? -A. Yes.

0. Now, in the context of that Green Guide, a further
   requirement for controlling another gate is imposed
   on the Police? - A. I do not think we ever understood
   it as that.

0. What I am asking you, you see, is why when the word
   control is used in that way in relation to the perimeter
   gate you applied a different meaning to it when it came
   to the radial gate? - A. I do not think we understood^it
   as an evacuation gate.  Merely an access gate.  Certainly
   the senior Officers who attended I am sure did not believe
   it to be an evacuation gate, merely an access gate.

0. If the position arose that the tunnel was blocked, which
   could happen, I suppose, could not it? - A. Yes.

0-. And you realised in the Green Guide there had to be. an     ...
    alternative means of escape? - A. Yes.




                                                                i n
                             44


                                                      C. CALVERT

Q. People would have to be taken to left and right through
   those radial gates, would not they? - A. The perimeter
   gates.

Q. Through the perimeter gates? - A. Yes, the perimeter ....

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      No, no, you are at cross­
     purposes. ~ A. Sorry.

Q. He is talking about the gates at the top of the radial
   fences. - A. Yes, sir.  I am saying he is talking about
   evacuation through there.  I am saying the evacuation,
   as far as we'were concerned, would be on to the pitch
   if we had to.

Q.       m r . MULLER:  You are suggesting the alternative
     route would be through the perimeter gates.  Is that
     right? - A. We would use them.

0. If the perimeter gates were to be envisaged as a means
   through which the whole of the pen should be evacuated
   in an emergency then the G r e e n G u i d e required that-it
   should be 1.1 metre wide even in 1976, did not it? - A.
   It did, sir.

Q. Were not you then concerned about that if that is how
   you saw'it? -A. No, sir, I was not concerned.  We have
   heard that the gates on either end would be used for
   evacuation in an emergency.

Q./ Either end of what? - A.      Of the ground.

0.   Yes. - A. And they would be and these gates were put in
     and our understanding of control is that if they were
     locked or closed there would be a Police Officer behind
     them and that was the case and is the case and if they
     were open they would be open for people to flow through.

Q. Can I iust understand?  Are you saying that it was the
   Police'understanding that if the tunnel became blocked
   the alternative means of escape for all the people who
   were in pens 3 and 4 was to be through the perimeter
   gate? -A. That would be one of the uses.  You have brought
   these up.  Obviously you would.  You would use whatever
   means possible.

Q. But did you not appreciate, the point I am putting to you,
   that'if anybody, including the Police, were contemplating
   that the perimeter gate could in any circumstances be used
   to evacuate all the people in those pens ....

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not think that is what is....
     being said, Mr. Muller.   As I understand it - we have been
     through this a number of times - what the Officer ds saying




                                                                   137
