              i   I




                      y! *j&J• *
                      * 1              ■ /r .jtv -' ^ c c ^Mr
                                                           Mrg C°Lee
                                                                  9 b i1_1 I * Div
                                                                                04
                      I l-           §x     I            llMiss Wooldridge - F2
                        V            I            k           Rex - Cl


Mr Goddard              #    t t               f}rs ? •        I          *      *
F8 Division                  \ys1U


BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES


     In response to your note of 17 December, I attach for
your consideration draft instructions. These incorporate the
instructions previously drafted in respect of the ticket
temping offence.


     2.   On a very minor point, I have a spare copy of the
Taylor Report which I can send to Counsel.


     3.   Paragraph 1.3 designates types of matches rather
than grounds. This makes designation easier (rather than
setting out a long list of addresses). It also emphasises
that the offences are football related.


     4.   Am I correct in assuming that you do not want the
offence of ticket touting to be included in Schedule 1 to the
Football Spectators Act 1989? The argument against so
including it is that the touts are unlikely to want to gain
access to the football ground. The offence also differs from
the offences proposed in Chapter 9 of the Taylor Final Report
in that it does not concern unruly behaviour.


     5.   At the end of paragraph 10 of your note, you
marginally favour the view that the offence of missile
throwing should catch someone outside the sports ground who
successfully throws a missile into the ground. I can, of
course, see the reasons for your view, although presumably
this is not a common problem (in the case of football stadia
the missile would have to clear the height of the stands).
E.R.
       Nevertheless there seem to be disadvantages in extending the
       offence to places outside the grounds. The other offences
       with which Part III of the Instructions are concerned can be
       committed only within the grounds. I wonder whether this
       might not be to our advantage in presenting the Bill and, in
       particular, justifying the fact that offences such as the one
       of racial chanting do not extend to other sporting events.
       One could argue that the provisions are necessary to deal with
       the particularly bad behaviour of football fans. The argument
       is to some extent lost if this offence can be committed from a
       public place outside the ground. The nuisance of persons
       throwing missiles from outside a sports ground into the ground
       a ^^ies equally to other sporting events.


             6.   There are two difficulties with missile throwing.
        The first is that Parliamentary Counsel will not create a new
      . offence in respect of activities that are sufficiently covered
        by existing offences. I hope t h a t I have succeeded in
        demonstrating in paragraphs 3.5 to 3.7 of the draft
        Instructions that whereas some of the missile throwing
  / activities are covered by the existing offences, some are not
  | and that a new offence is necessary to fill the gap.
  i


            7.   The second difficulty concerns the extent of the
       offence. I shall expand the dummy paragraph 3.10 once you let
       me know which of the examples given there should be covered by
       the new offence. I would be grateful if you could think of
       other examples of the types of things that are or may be
       thrown at football matches. It may then be possible to
       elaborate the instructions as to the test for missiles other
       than those that cause injury.


            8.   I think the example of throwing rolls of loo paper
       is a good one in testing how far you want to go. One might
       regard the activity as childish but not, by itself, likely to
       hurt anybody, although it is liable to annoy most other
       spectators.   But does this justify the creation of a criminal


                                                                        2
, E.R.
r

         offence in respect of which the offender may be arrested? "I j t ^     ,
         hereby arrest you for throwing a roll of Andrex" could be the
         basis for a good "Spitting Image" sketch.


              9.   Paragraph 3.12 perhaps reflects too much my own view
         of regarding the banana throwing with contempt rather than
         regarding it as being serious enough to be offensive.
         However, I think I should raise (in one form or another) the
    \    point that one could not be sure that a test based on
    * offensiveness and reasonableness would necessarily secure
    I convictions.


             10. I have included paragraph 3.19 so as to forestall
        Counsel from raising the same point. I envisage that the
        "chanting" "grunting" offence will be extremely difficult to
        draft and Counsel might initially resist doing so on the
        grounds that no successful prosecutions could be brought in
        respect of it. Should the Bill make provision for recordings
        of the "grunting" being admissible in evidence? I am                ^
        concerned lest the courts have the same difficulty in
        imagining the relevant sound that I have.


             11. With reference to paragraph 3.20 I think that your
        additional proposal about gestures needs to be a separate
        offence. I do not see how it can be wrapped up in the offence
        about chanting etc. I would be grateful if you could give me
        further information as to the type of gestures you have in
        mind. Are there gestures that are offensive because they are
        racialist? If so, what? Is it appropriate to have the power
        of arrest in respect of gestures? if this is an offence that
        you decide you want, notwithstanding the fact that it is
        additional to Taylor's proposals and cannot be incorporated in
        a Taylor offence, references to the number of offences in
        paragraphs 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 will need to be amended.


             12. Does paragraph 3.22 correctly give effect to your
        intentions by making it an offence to run onto the pitch after


                                                                        3
•t
     E.R.
            the match has finished? Is this conduct sufficiently serious
            to justify the power of arrest applying to it?


                 13. In paragraph 3.24 I have placed "linesmen" in square
            brackets because I do not know whether they are present at
            football matches. I know that there are ball boys at tennis
            matches, but are they also present at football matches?

                 14. Also in paragraph 3.24, by whom should the
            authorisation to be on the pitch be given? The home club will
            not be sufficient because of matches played at Wembley etc.

                 15. With reference to the question in the first sentence
               paragraph 7 of your note, section 31 of the Public Order
            Act 1986 will apply as long as the match at which the offence
        was committed is of a description which has been prescribed
        for the purposes of Part IV of the 1986 Act. I imagine that
        this will be the case.


             16. Finally, do you see the Bill as a suitable vehicle
        to make the corrections to the Football Spectators Act 1989
        which we had identified as being necessary? However, I can
        see that it might be unwelcome to open up the possibility of
        other amendments to that Act being in order in view of the
        controversy over some of the provisions in Part I of that Act.
        Much may depend on the scope of the Bill. Since it concerns
        football it may, in any event, be difficult to ensure that
        amendments to the 1989 Act are out of order.




                                                           J
                                                              R J CLAYTON
                                                   Legal Adviser's Branch
        21 December 1990


                                                                           4
