 From: Paul Pugh                                            Mr Michael
       Head of Opera                                        Mr O’Brien
       Policy Unit                                          Lord Williams
       Room 529                                             Sir Richard Wilson
       Queen Anne’s                                         Mr Boys Scoitfi
       » 273 3141                                           Mr Halliday
       23 May 1997                                          Ms Wheldon
                                                            Miss Drew
                                                            Mr Fulton
                                                            Ms Loudon
                                                            Mr R Evans
                                                            Mr Edmundson
                                                            Mr Horlock
                                                            Mr Granatt
                                                            Mr Warner
                                                            Mr Owen


Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue


1.    To consider the possible scope of the judicial examination of the recent
representations.

Timing

2.    W e are to discuss this on 4 June.           You asked for advice on the terms of
reference as a basis for that discussion.

Consideration

3.        There are seven key issues to consider:

            (i)        the nature of the inquiry

           (ii)       its scope

           (iii)      its purpose

           (iv)        terms of reference

           (v)         timetable


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd.doc
          (vi)        who should do it?

          (vii)       handling.

4.      On the nature of the inquiry, it will not fit any of the conventional patterns for
inquiries - such as Royal Commission, tribunal of inquiry, inquiry under the Police
Act, or non-statutory judicial inquiry. (Those different forms of inquiry are considered
in detail in my submission of today’s date about an inquiry into policing of minority
ethnic communities.) This will be a judicial examination of the substance of
representations calling for a full public inquiry, inquest or prosecution - in effect to
determine whether a full-blown inquiry is warranted.

5.     You have indicated that the scope of the judicial examination should not
extend to a re-opening of all the matters dealt with by Taylor.      No-one has
questioned Taylor’s conclusions and recommendations about safety at sports
grounds and the policing of football matches. The scope should be limited to
consideration of the recent representations made by the Hillsborough families and
others. Those representations fall under four broad headings:

           (i)        the ten allegedly ‘unresolved questions’ raised in the Granada
                       programme;

           (ii)       allegations about video evidence;

           (iii)      medical evidence about the time of death of the victims;

           (iv)       other allegations by the families about police conduct.

6.    I suggest the focus should be the evidence which has been put forward to us,
together with any other relevant material which those concerned want to submit. It
should be mainly a review of the written material, although you wanted to allow the
opportunity for representations. If the examination is, to be manageable, however,
we will need to avoid hearings or legal representation: there are (at this stage) no
parties or plaintiffs.

7.    The purpose of the examination will have to be several-fold, because - as my
submission of 8 May drew out - it is very difficult to separate matters potentially
relevant to an inquiry, or inquest, possible criminal proceedings or disciplinary
matters. In practice, the inquirer will have to form a view about whether there are
grounds for;

           public inquiry:

           consenting to a new inquest;

           new criminal investigations;




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd.doc
             instigating disciplinary procedures;

            or any combination of those options.

That means that the inquirer must report not just to you as Home Secretary,
because only the first of those four issues is for you to determine. The inquirer must
report also to the Attorney General, the DPP, and - on the last point - to the relevant
chief officer of police.

8.          That suggests terms of reference something like:

            “To carry out an independent examinatiorybf whether there is new evidence
            relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which
            provides sufficient grounds for:
                    <          t'- i J f     ^

                         (i)        the Attorney-General to apply to the High Court under section
                                    13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

                         (ii)       the Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                                    charges against any person;

                         (iii)      the relevant Chief Police Officer to take disciplinary action
                                    against any police officer.

            ~                          ............................................................... -   he-Home-Secnetary
            tCLestahlish

9.     It is important that we should put an end to speculation with the minimum of
delay. A timetable of no more than 2 or 3 months is important. That will have a
Bearing on who should do the job. You have already said that it is essential to
appoint a judge. Anyone starting from scratch in considering these issues would
have a huge amount of background to assimilate - the Taylor inquiry alone produced
over 120 files of written material. One possible candidate for the job with a head
start would be Mr Justice Collins, now a High Court judge, but Counsel to the Taylor
inquiry in 1989. W e have not approached LCD to see if he would be available, but
could do so if you wish. There would be some risk that he might be perceived -
although not, I think, by the Hillsborough families - as not totally impartial because of
his previous involvement with the inquiry,

10.   The scope and timetable will have implications for the costs to the
department. There is no provision for such costs at present.

11.     On handling the next step will be to secure the agreement of the Attorney and
the DPP. I have told their offices broadly what you have in mind and that you are
likely to approach them formally soon. The Heritage Secretary should also be kept
informed because of his responsibility for safety at sports grounds. The Lord
Chancellor will have to be approached to nominate a judge.




f:\oppuVhou\longsub\pp0212pd. doc
12.    Once you have colleagues’ agreement we will put forward advice on handling
an announcement and how to inform the main players. W e see those as being the
Hillsborough families, the Merseyside MPs, and the South Yorkshire Police. Others,
however, also have a close interest and arrangements will have to be made to warn
them in advance - particularly former chief superintendent Duckenfield who will be a
focus of media attention.




                                   PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd.doc
