                                              N/OIONALlfiONOFPUBUCEMPLJCYEES
                                              CMC HOUSE
                                              20 GRAND DEPOTROAD
                                              LONDON SE186SF
                                              TELEPHONE018542244

                                              General Secretary RodneyKBickerstaffe

                                              Yourref                                    Ourref. RM P/DC/HILLS
Mr Whalley,
Room 662,                            PcU'
Home Office
Queen Annes Gate              k          U                             r-r -                  - •n
LONDON SW1H 9AT               ^ ^       ^               J                    '            -                '           C~U,
                             [ j,                                ! U_c,..|       iVLl^               <jC       c i^

5 th J u n e , 1989           i v U . L J   - - j   :I^ < £     V\ ^ i V iH M             <V>cL                 fk ^

                                                                £j      'S 'H v<-         TT
Dear Mr. Whalley,                                                                ^
                     ^       V'Jo^Jd                 U'-< N ,                                  b> h«Kvc ^ o.-                7
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                       ^                                        I             ’^ ^

Enclosed you will find a proof of evidence from the NATIONAL UNION OF
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES thatwe would like to be considered by the
Hillsborough Inquiry. It is the wish of the Union that we should come                                                   J
and give oral evidence and we would appreciate it if the appropriate                                                   nh
arrangements could be made.                                                                                              '

It would be our intention that the evidence will be given the under­
signed who will be accompanied by two or three of our local ambulance
representatives in Sheffield and we will of course be more than pleased
to answer any questions that the Inquiry may wish to put to us about the
matter.

I look forward to hearing from you at your earliest opportunity.

YafursyBincerely/


NATtQNAi ’SECREm&Y tE S lS K A T E
(ENC) / ]
EVIDENCE FROM THE NATIONAL UNION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO THE
HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

The NATIONAL UNION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES is the 5th largest Union
in Britain with 650,000 members.

Approximately 250,000 of those members work in the National
Health Service and are spread across all grades of staff.   The
Union is by far the largest Union in the ambulance service and
ambulance staff who attended the tragedy at Hillsborough are
members of the NATIONAL UNION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.

The Union's evidence will be presented at the Inquiry by Mr Roger
Poole, the Union’s Health Service National Secretary (Designate)
who is also Trades Union Side Secretary of the NATIONAL AMBULANCE
COUNCIL and
Chair of the AMBULANCE OFFICERS JOINT NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE.

The Union is represented on all of the major Ambulance Committees
in this country including the NHS Training Authority's Ambulance
Staff Training Committee.  The Union is critically involved in the
professional issues surrounding the ambulance service and is
acknowledged as the major organisation representing ambulance
staf f s .

The Union does not intend to comment on any of the operational
decisions that were made on the day at Hillsborough as that is
something which will be dealt with by the South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service and which our members working in
that service will have an input into.

It is however the intention of the Union to give evidence on
matters of public policy which we feel arise out of the tragedy
at Hillsborough and are issues on which the Union has held views
for a long period of time.

The role of the ambulance service

The ambulance service   is one of the country's 3 emergency
services.  Its job is   to attend to victims at any accident or
emergency; to provide   immediate care for those victims and to
transport them to the   nearest hospital for further treatment.
Ambulance crews are highly trained and accident and emergency
crews are trained for the wide variety of conditions which face
them in the sort of work they do.  Their training consists of 8
weeks at a regional ambulance training school, followed by a
further L2 months working with a qualified ambulanceman/woman
during which time they again experience in all aspects of
accident and emergency work.  They undertake regular
post-proficiency training and many of them now go on to do what
is known as extended training in defribillation, intubation and
infusion techniques.  Early attendance of an accident and
emergency vehicle with trained ambulance staff is therefore
crucial in ensuring that an injured person receives the most
appropriate treatment possible prior to their admittance to a
hospital.

It is recognised by all concerned that response times for 999
calls are critical to a patients wellbeing and ambulance services
strive to attend all emergencies as soon as they possibly can,
and certainly well within the limits laid down by something known
as the GRCGN STANDARDS which are Department of Health
recommendations for response times for emergency vehicles.

The Tragedy at Hillsborough

Without wishing to comment in detail upon the events at
Hillsborough there can be little doubt that had an extended
trained ambulance crew been on duty at the ground with
defribillators, then at the very least, there would have been the
opportunity of saving the lives of some of those people who so
tragically died.

Whilst it must be the job of the Inquiry to make recommendations
on football grounds safety that will ensure to the best of
everyone's ability that such a tragedy will never occur again, it
is the job of the emergency services to plan for events of that
sort and wherever possible to be in a position to take whatever
action is necessary to alleviate suffering and, of course, to
save lives.

It is the Un i o n ’s view that the South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance
Service acquitted itself extremely well on that occasion taking
into account all of the problems that they faced.      However, the
Union would like to comment upon certain aspects of the events
that day and to recommend to the Inquiry that recommendations
could be made which would ensure that the role of the ambulance
service was even more effective on any future occasion.

The provision of extended trained ambulance crews at public
events

It is the view of the Union that at all major public events {and
here we talk about events where large numbers of people are
congregating and would include all football events) there should
be on duty extended trained ambulance crews provided by the local
NHS ambulance s e r v i c e . T f t e promoters of the event (in the case
of a football match, the football club) should pay an appropriate
sum to the local health authority for the provision of that
ambulance attendance.

At the moment the only medical attendance at the majority of
these events are that provided by the voluntary St Johns
Ambulance and Red Cross.               " ~    ““      "

The view of the Union is that both St Johns and the Red Cross
play a very valuable role in attending functions of this sort and
are very capable of dealing with simple first aid matters.
However, they are not trained or equipped to deal with more
serious incidents amongst which we would include serious injury,
heart attack etc.

We see no reason why St Johns and the Red Cross should not
continue, to provide the very useful function they do but that
that needs to be supplemented by trained ambulance crews capable
of providing much more sophisticated care for seriously injured
or ill people.

Our first recommendation, therefore, is that qualified NHS
ambulance crews should be made available at major public events.


First Aid and rescue equipment

It was clear from the television pictures at Hillsborough that
the football club had made little provision for dealing with
casualties on their ground.  There were no stretchers readily
available and football fans were seen tearing down advertising
placards to use as stretchers for friends and colleagues.

Our understanding is that all public places have to have a fire
certificate before they are allowed to hold public events.           Our
second recommendation therefore is that all public places
including football grounds should have what we are terming a
First Aid Certificate.           It is our view that anybody wishing to
put bri"”a ~puTd1TcT event on premises to which the general public pay
for access should have a certificate from their local health
authority which will lay down the minimal requirements of the
health authority both for equipment and methods of escape for
p e o p l e T V h o suffer injury o r illness whilst at the event. The
local health authority who have a great deal o f expertise in
these matters would call upon their ambulance service to discuss
with the proprietors of such events the minimum equipment and
facilities necessary for a First Aid Certificate to be issued to
    the premise.

    Assaults on ambulance staff

    3 members of the ambulance service were as we understand it
    assaulted on the afternoon at_..Hj.llsborough . There has been an
    unfortunate tendancy in recent years to treat ambulance staff as
    figures of authority rather than as people who are completely
    neutral in all of these events, wishing to give attention to all
    those who need it regardless of who they are.     Some of the fault
    for this lies within the ambulance service itself which still has
    a rather militaristic attitude to its work and the way it treats
    its own staff, but some of it arises out of the general malaise
    and break down in respect for one another in society generally.
    If the ambulance service is to do its work effectively in very
    difficult situations, then it is most important that it is always
    looked upon as a neutral body of men and women dedicated to the
    relief of suffering and pain and the saving of life.     Regardless
    of what other tensions there be in society, the ambulance service
    should always be able to go into those situations in the
    knowledge that ambulance crews are going to be left untouched by
    whatever event is taking place in order that they can provide
    support and comfort to those who need it.

i
    We would therefore ask the Inquiry to consider saying something
    about this in your report in order that all those who work in the
    service and those who are responsible for it, along with the
    public at large, will understand the necessity to treat the
    ambulance service in a manner which will always allow ambulance
    staff to do the job for which they are trained, without the
    constant fear of themselves being assaulted.

    Stress and trauaa--

    The last issue we wish to give evidence about is an issue that
    affects ambulance staff themselves.  Unfortunately major
    tragedies have become a way of life in this country in recent
    years and whenever they occur, it is members of the three
    emergency services who are called upon to clear up the problems.
    To attend any of these disasters and be faced with the horrific
    problems that one has to deal with has an adverse affect even on
    the most experienced and hardened of staff.  I know very well
    that experienced members of ours who attended Hillsborough were
    very badly affected by what they saw and had to do deal with and
    whilst they dealt with the matter very professionally, it was
    after the event was over and they had time to reflect on the
    situation that they become very stressed indeed.  It is, of
    course, not only in major disasters where stresses occur,
    but very often in the day to day work of the ambulance service.
    Members of the service are called upon to deal with horrific
    injuries - very often to young children, which leave a major mark
on them after the event.   I have to say that our members in the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service who attended at
Hillsborough have been very complementary about the way in which
the health authority have tried to assist them in relation to
these matters afterwards.   The Union has no criticisms of the way
in which the health Authority has handled the matter.   However,
it is very difficult for any employer on the spur of the moment
following an incident of that sort to put into place the sort of
counselling that maybe required by staff who have gone through
quite dreadful experiences.   It is therefore our view that
consideration should now be given to the setting up of an
appropriate organisation with Government funding which would have
available to it, professional help upon which employers could
call to provide counselling facilities for any of their staff
when it is needed.  Our last recommendation therefore is that the
Government should be asked in consultation with the appropriate
Trades Unions/Government Departments and Employers to set up an
organisation of the sort described above which could provide the
advice needed immediately when it was required.
