                      iU iL .




OjuJL          C n jb , ujz't*-   ^   ib tu js v -

t&Ul t'2-zSS'^ 5"2o
                                               cc   Mr Boys Smith
                                                    Mr Malone-Lee
                                                    Miss Edwards
                                                    Mr Sandiford



Mr N A Nagler
Finance Division 2


HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - COMPENSATION COSTS


1.   Thank you for your note of 1 December drawing my attention
to press articles on that day about South Yorkshire Police's
offer to pay compensation to victims and the bereaved from the
Hillsborough disaster. The reports mention that payments could
reach a total amount of £30 million to £50 million.

2.   When I met Mr Johnston, the Clerk to the South Yorkshire
Police Authority, on 14 September the question of compensation
was discussed.      Mr Johnston said that they had insurance cover
of up t o £ 8 . 5 million. He also referred to press reports which
had mentioned figures up to £50 million which in his opinion were
probably an exaggeration, but the insurers at that time thought
the £8.5 million might well be exceeded.       Mr Johnston thought
that the sum was more likely to be in the region of £10 million
and asked whether any costs which were not met by the insurers
might qualify for special grant.

3.    I responded by saying that the special payment arrangements
had not been agreed with a view to including any element of
compensation.   Although the Authority's insurance might not be
sufficient to meet the costs, it appeared that, depending on the
timescale of any likely settlement, there was an opportunity to
budget for any costs. However, if legal advice were to be that
damages must be paid during the current financial year so as to
avoid the greater costs of any action, then an application for
a special payment could be made although I did not give any
guarantee as to its likely success.     If costs were to be more
likely to spread into future financial years, the Police
Authority was in a position to increase their precept so as to
meet them.     Mr Johnston said that South Yorkshire Police
Authority would be likely to ask formally for special aid on an
unspecified sum as soon as they got into their budget cycle. I
replied that in formal terms and on present information it was
hard to see that the Home Office would be in a position to agree
to any special payment.

4.   On 27 October Mr Johnston wrote to me about compensation
claims (copy of that letter is attached at Annex A) asking under
what circumstances and to what extent the Home Office would
consider giving further special assistance to South Yorkshire
Police^ Authority in connection with uninsured compensation
liabilities which might arise from impending civil actions
against the Chief Constable.    I replied on 6 November and I
attach a copy of my letter at Annex B for your information.

5.   With regard to your specific points, I would consider
compensation paid by the police authority on legal advice that
they would otherwise be likely to have to meet claims arising
from negligence by police officers as expenditure for police
purposes. It should therefore qualify for police grant. Section
48 of the Police Act provides for payments in respect of torts
committed by constables or settlements in respect of such claims
to be met from the police fund.

6.   It is for South Yorkshire to make a case for special payment
if large compensation is to be paid this financial year; to date
they have not done so. As I explained to them, we would expect
them to budget for any payment likely to fall in 1990/91.     You
mention that you were not forewarned of the present announcement.
Neither were we; but police authorities can of course act
independently.

7.   We shall probably need to return to Ministers if this
reaches the stage of a formal approach by South Yorkshire Police
Authority, with a proper estimate of costs involved. The local
publicity does not indicate that they know of anything more
definite now than they did at the time of our earlier
correspondence.   (But the last report I saw in the press - a
couple of days ago - said that the authority had stated that
their insurance did cover the offers of compensation which they
were reported to have made to disaster victims and their
relatives.)




                                    M J ADDISON
FI Division
5 January 1990
