                                                                    (0




                      HOME OFFICE


M
             THE HILLSBOROUGH
              STADIUM DISASTER
                       15 APRIL 1989

                         INQUIRY BY



                  INTERIM REPORT

                            Presented to Parliament
               by the Secretary o f State for the Home Department
                          by Command o f Her M ajesty
                                    August 1989




                                  LONDON
                  HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
                                 £10.30 net

    Cm 765
             HOME OFFICE


   THE HILLSBOROUGH
    STADIUM DISASTER
               15 APRIL 1989

          INQUIRY BY
THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


         INTERIM REPORT

                   Presented to Parliament
      by the Secretary ofState fo r the Home Department
                 by Command o f Her M ajesty
                         August 1989




                         LONDON
        HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
                                          CONTENTS
                                                                         Paragraph    Page
INTRODUCTION                                                                             l
PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
CHAPTER 1 - TH E G R O U N D AND PRE-MATCH
ARRANGEM ENTS                                                                   4
       Fixing The Venue                                                         21
       The G round                                                              22
       The Turnstiles                                                           29
       Travel to the G round                                                    33
       Allocation o f Places and Tickets                                        35
       Access from Leppings Lane                                                37
       Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles                                      40
       Policing Arrangem ents                                                   47
       Sheffield W ednesday’s Arrangements                           ~          48
       Police C om m unications                                                 49
CH A PTER 2 - 1 5 APRIL: T H E BUILD U P TO 2.30 pm                                      9
         Early Arrivals                                                         54
         Public Houses                                                          55
         The G athering Crowd                                                   57
C H A PTER 3 - TH E CRISIS AT TH E TURNSTILES                                           11
          “ Open the Gates”                                          ‘          66
C H A PTER 4 -T H E DISASTER                                                            13
C H A PTER 5 - TH E AFTERM ATH                                                          15
          Rescue Attem pts                                                      81
          First Aid                                                             87
          In the Control Room                                                   91
          No Inform ation                                                       97
          M isinform ation                                                      98
          Public Announcem ents                                                100
          Fire Brigade                                                         101
          South Yorkshire M etropolitan Am bulance Service (SYMAS)             10 5
          G ym nasium                                                          107
          T he D ead and the Injured                                           108
CHAPTER 6 -S P E C IF IC IN CID EN TS                                                   19

PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?
C HAPTER 7 - TH E LAYOUT AT TH E LEPPINGS LANE END                                      21
        The H istory                                                           119
        The 1981 Semi-final                                                    123
        Three Pens                                                             125
        The 1985 Changes                                                       127
        New Radial Fences                                                      128
        Barriers                                                               129
        The Turnstiles and Concourse                                           130
        Barrier 144                                                            133
        Effects o f the Layout                                                 134


                                                 iii
                                                                           Paragraph     Page
CHAPTER 8 - LACK O F FIXED CAPACITIES FOR TH E PENS                                        24
       D epartures from the G reen G uide                                        139
       Safety Certificate                                                        143
       Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?                               147
       The City Council                                                          150
       Sum m ary                                                                 159
CHAPTER 9 - LACK O F EFFECTIVE M O N ITO R IN G O F THE TERRACES                          28
       W ho should M onitor the Terraces?                                       161
       The Interim Popplewell Report                                            163
       The Final Popplewell Report                                              164
       Arrangements at Hillsborough                                             166
       Case for the South Yorkshire Police                                      168
       H arris -v- Sheffield U nited Football Club Lim ited                     169
       Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End                                 170
       “ F ind T heir Own Level”                                                171
       W hen is an Area “ Full” ?                                               175
       Fear o f Hooliganism                                                     182
       Sum m ary                                                                183
CHAPTER 10 - TH E BUILD-UP AT TH E TURNSTILES                                             33
       The Physical Layout                                                      186
       T he N um ber o f Turnstiles                                             187
       The “ Late” A rrival o f Liverpool Fans                                  191 ,,
       Traffic Delays                                                           193
       Fine W eather and Drinking                                               194
       Was D runkenness a M ajor Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?        196
       Reduced Efficiency o f the Turnstiles                                    198
       Were Fans W ithout Tickets a M ajor Factor in the Build-Up?              200
       The “ Conspiracy” Theory                                                 203
       Liverpool Supporters at Away M atches                                    205
       No Conspiracy                                                            208
       T he Police O peration at Leppings Lane                                  209
       Previous Experience                                                      213
       Policing in 1988                                                         214
       Police Intelligence in Advance                                           216
       Police Intelligence on the Day                                           221
       M r M arshall and M r Greenwood                                          222
     > Control Lost                                                             223
       Postponem ent o f Kick-off                                               226
       Sum m ary                                                                228
CHAPTER 11 - TH E BLUNDER ON O PEN IN G TH E GATES                                         40
CHAPTER 12 - TH E BARRIERS IN PEN 3                                                        41
       B arrier 144                                                             233
       W hen did B arrier 124a Fail?                                            236
       D r Eastwood’s Testing o f the Barriers                                  237
       C orrosion                                                               240
       C ausation                                                               243
CHAPTER 13 - TH E C RU SHING NOT RECOGNISED                                                43
       Observation from Control Room                                            244
       Officers on the Track                                                    245


                                                   iv
                                                                Paragraph        Page

CHAPTER 14 - TH E RESPONSE O F TH E POLICE                                        44
       The Officers in C om m and                                    250
       Police on the Pitch                                           253
       Fans on the Pitch                                             255
       False Reports                                                 257
CHAPTER 15 - TH E PERIM ETER GATES WERE TOO SMALL                                 45

PART III - CONCLUSIONS
CHAPTER 16 - BRIEF SUMMARY O F CAUSES                                             47

CHAPTER 17 - TH E FA’S CHOICE O F G R O U N D                                     48

CHAPTER 18 - POLICE                                                         49
       Choice o f Ends by the Police                                 272
       Police Planning                                               273
       Policing on the Day                                           277
       The Police Case at the Inquiry                                285
CHAPTER 19 - TH E CITY CO U N CIL AND TH E SAFETY CERTIFICATE                     51
CHAPTER 2 0 - T H E CLUB AND D R EASTWOOD                                         52
CHAPTER 21 - FIRST AID AND EM ERGENCY SERVICES                                    53
       No Fault by the Emergency Services                            296
CHAPTER 2 2 -C O M M U N IC A TIO N S                                             54
PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
CHAPTER 23 - IN TR O D U C TIO N                                                  55
       Lim ited Objectives                                           304
       Perim eter Fences                                             306
       Reduced Num bers                                   ..         313
       Safety Certificate                                            314
CHAPTER 2 4 - T H E RECOM M ENDATIONS                                             57
       M axim um Capacities for Terraces                               1
       Filling and M onitoring Terraces                                4
       Fences and Gates                                                6
       Crush Barriers                                                 11
       Safety Certificates                                            13
       D uties o f each Football Club                                 18
       Police Planning                                                26
       C om m unications                                              31
       C o-ordination o f Emergency Services                          35
       First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances                  39
APPENDICES
1.   Plan o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough G round
2.   Leppings Lane: the perim eter gates and turnstiles
3.   The west stand and terraces
4.   Arrangem ent o f barriers at west terrace
5.   The west terraces at 2.59 pm
6.   Specific incidents
           M r Hicks’ Evidence
           The G oalkeeper and G ate 4
           Oxygen
           Calling the Fire Service
           M r Kenny Dalglish
7.   List o f parties and their representation
8.   List o f those giving oral evidence to the Inquiry in order o f appearance
The R t H on Douglas H urd CBE, M P
Secretary o f State for the H om e D epartm ent


                       THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                   15 APRIL 1989

                                      INTERIM REPORT OF INQUIRY


                                                  INTRODUCTION
   1. On 15 April 1989 a football m atch to decide a semi-final round o f the FA Cup com petition was to be
played between the Liverpool and N ottingham Forest Clubs. The neutral venue chosen was Hillsborough
Football Stadium , Sheffield W ednesday’s ground. Only six m inutes into the game, play was stopped when it
was realised that spectators on the terraces behind the Liverpool goal had been severely crushed. In the result,
95 died and over 400 received hospital treatm ent.

  2. On 17April 19891 was appointed by you to carry o u t an Inquiry with the following term s o f reference:

      To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
      recom m endations about the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports events.

   3. Two Assessors were appointed to assist me: M r Brian Johnson QPM , C hief Constable o f Lancashire,
and Professor Leonard M aunder OBE, BSc, PhD , ScD, FEng, FI M ech E, Professor o f M echanical
Engineering at the U niversity o f Newcastle upon Tyne. T heir help has been invaluable and I am very grateful
for their expert advice and wise counsels. W hile the sole responsibility for this report is mine, I am comforted
in the knowledge that both Assessors agree with it.

  4. M r R obert Whalley was appointed Secretary to the Inquiry. H e and his assistants have worked
prodigiously and skilfully to give me all the advice and support I could have wished. I also wish to acknowledge
the help I have received, as always, from my clerk, M r Ernest Pott.

   5. The policing arrangem ents for 15 April were in the hands o f the South Yorkshire Constabulary. The
efficacy o f those arrangem ents and their im plem entation was from an early stage called into question. It was
therefore decided th at the investigation o f the disaster and the gathering o f evidence for this Inquiry should be
conducted by an independent police force. M r Geoffrey D ear QPM , C hief Constable o f West M idlands
Constabulary, undertook this task. He was m ade responsible directly to me; he appointed Assistant Chief
Constable M ervyn Jones to take full-tim e charge o f the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both o f them .

   6. On 18 April I visited Hillsborough Stadium . I inspected the scene o f the disaster on the terraces and all
relevant parts o f the stadium and its approaches. My Assessors and I have m ade further visits during the
Inquiry. I also visited Liverpool on 21 and 29 April.

   7. The Lord M ayor and the Sheffield City Council kindly offered to m ake the accom m odation an d facilities
o f Sheffield Town Hall available for the hearing o f oral evidence. This offer was gratefully accepted and I would
like to record my thanks for those facilities and for the co-operation afforded to the Inquiry by the authorities
in Sheffield.

   8. On 28 April 1989,1 held a prelim inary hearing to announce the date when the oral evidence would begin,
to give some directions as to the procedure I intended to follow and to hear applications from those wishing to
be represented at the hearing. I accorded representation to the following:
      (i) Those bereaved o r inj ured as a result o f the disaster.
      (ii) The Football Supporters’ Association.
      (iii) The Football Association.
      (iv) Sheffield City Council.
      (v) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club together with the Football League, the C lub’s casual staff and
            their insurers, the Sun Alliance.
      (vi) South Yorkshire Constabulary.
      (vii) South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.


                                                         1
Subsequently, during the hearing, I further accorded representation to:
     (viii) Trent Regional Health Authority, for the South Yorkshire M etropolitan Ambulance Service
            (SYMAS).
and (ix)    D r W Eastwood, consultant engineer to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

  9. Since the circum stances o f the disaster raised urgent questions o f safety, especially a t football grounds,
you indicated at the outset that you would welcome any recom m endations, even o f an interim nature, which I
m ight be able to give in advance o f the new football season due to commence in mid-August 1989.1 therefore
announced at the prelim inary hearing on 28 April th at I would conduct an oral hearing with all possible
expedition as the first phase o f the Inquiry to discover the facts and causes o f the disaster and enable me to
make any im m ediate interim recom m endations necessary in the short term.

   10. The West M idlands Police investigation began on 24 April. A “Freephone” num ber was advertised to
enable m em bers o f the public, especially those who had attended the match, to offer th eir evidence to the
Inquiry. Initially this num ber was available for three days on 28 different lines. The response from the public
was such th at the lines were continued for a further three days by the end o f which 2,666 calls had been
received. There were also many written offers o f help. Some 440 West M idlands officers were deployed on the
Inquiry. To service this operation, special police offices were established in Birm ingham , Liverpool and
Sheffield and com puter technology was used to the full. In all some 3776 statem ents were taken. There were
also some 1550 letters to M inisters, to the Inquiry and to me personally all o f which I read. The police,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the BBC had video cameras filming at the ground on 15 April. In
aggregate, they recorded some 71 hours o f film covering the period before, during and after the disaster. Thus
the m aterial gathered and potentially available for presentation at the oral hearing was enorm ous. From this
mass it was essential to select only sufficient good and reliable evidence necessary to establish the facts and
causes o f the disaster.

   11. W here it seemed likely that any allegation or criticism might be m ade o f the conduct o f ajjy person or
party, the Treasury Solicitor, after consultation with Counsel for the Inquiry, wrote to the partyfeoncerned
setting out the likely grounds for com plaint. This followed the practice established by the Royal Com mission
on Tribunals o f Inquiry (the Salmon Commission).

  12. The hearing began on 15 May. It continued, sitting long hours, for 31 days concluding on 29 June. In
that period, 174 witnesses gave oral evidence. Counsel’s submissions were delivered in writing on 7 July and
on 14 July I heard their brief oral submissions supplem enting the written argument.

  13. W itnesses were not sworn. Since this is a departm ental inquiry, there was no power to adm inister the
oath b ut there was no instance o f any witness giving evidence which I considered m ight have been different
had he or she been sworn.

   14. The witnesses called were only a small fraction o f those from whom statem ents were or could have been
taken. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that they were sufficient in num ber and reliability to enable me to reach the
necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from presenting an interim report in the
required tim e and would not have added significantly to the relevant evidence. I have, however, been able to
take into account m any written statem ents in addition to oral testimony.

   15. A part from the evidence called by Counsel for the Inquiry which was drawn from statem ents taken by
the West M idlands Police and others volunteered by individuals, each o f the represented parties was given full
opportunity to put forward any witnesses they considered should be called. A final subm ission was m ade by
Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police that since the investigation by West M idlands Police is still continuing,
all the evidence has not been assembled and it would be unsafe for me to m ake findings o f fact. I should
therefore m ake clear th at the investigation continues principally to furnish as m uch detail as possible to HM
C oroner for the City o f Sheffield as to the cause o f death, the precise position at death and the care and
m ovem ent o f each o f the 95 victim s individually. I am assured by C hief Constable D ear and Assistant C hief
Constable M ervyn Jones that it is m ost unlikely any further evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to
the history o f events which emerged at the hearing.

  16. I should like to thank all those who m ade it possible for the oral hearing to take place so soon after the
event and for evidence to be efficiently presented and tested so as to give a full and fair account o f what
happened in all its aspects w ithout irrelevancy or duplication. I pay tribute particularly to the West M idlands
Police for their speed and dedication in gathering the evidence and to all those responsible for processing it.


                                                        2
The m ost eloquent tribute to the fairness and thoroughness o f the police investigation came from the Secretary
o f the Football Supporters’ Association. He said there had been initial anxiety in Liverpool as to w hether that
investigation would be fair and objective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness statem ents
themselves. Having heard the opening statem ent by Counsel to the Inquiry based upon the evidence gathered
by the police, he found th at it accorded entirely with his Association’s evidence and the initial anxiety was
wholly dispelled.

   17. Before and during the Inquiry I derived great assistance on a wide range o f technical issues from the
Health and Safety Executive who providentially have a laboratory in Sheffield (the Research and Laboratory
Services Division) where tests were conducted and reports prepared swiftly and efficiently. This was done
in close consultation with Professor M aunder. I am m ost grateful to the Director, D r A Jones, and to the
Deputy Director, D r C E Nicholson, for their invaluable help.

    18. I wish to com m end Counsel to the inquiry, M r Andrew Collins QC, M r Alan Goldsack and M r
Bernard Phillips for their industry, care and fairness in selecting and presenting the necessary evidence; also,
Counsel for all those represented who tested that evidence fully but expeditiously. This Interim Report could
n o t possibly have been prepared in so short a tim e had I not had the whole-hearted co-operation o f all those
m entioned and many others.

   19. The second phase o f the Inquiry will be directed to m aking final and long term recom m endations about
crowd control and safety at sports grounds. I need to consider in depth inform ation, opinions and arguments
from a wide range o f sources and contributors both here and abroad. It was clear from the outset that this
second phase could not be carried to com pletion before the next football season. However, at an early stage of
the oral hearing I invited evidence from all who wished to contribute to it and specifically from m any sporting,
local authority, emergency service and police bodies as well as technical consultants. I asked th at submissions
should be in writing and should be m ade prom ptly so th at the second phase o f the Inquiry could
follow im m ediately after the first. I shall now proceed to consider the large body o f written evidence which has
been subm itted. I shall want in some instances to have further oral evidence or discussion in conjunction with
my Assessors. We will also need to m ake a num ber o f visits and inspections.

   20. I now present my Interim Report and Recom m endations. I shall prepare my Final Report and
R ecom m endations as soon as reasonably possible.




1 August 1989                                                                                  PETER TAYLOR




                                                         3
                   PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
                                                   CHAPTER 1

                          T H E G R O U N D AND PRE-M ATCH ARRANGEM ENTS

Fixing T he Venue
   21. On 20 M arch 1989, the Football Association (the FA) requested that their Cup semi-final between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest be held on 15 April at Hillsborough Football Stadium. The corresponding
semi-final between the same two team s had been held there in April 1988. The arrangements had been
successful in the view both o f the police and o f the host club. Sheffield W ednesday (the Club) were therefore
willing to accom m odate the 1989 m atch. South Yorkshire Constabulary were prepared to police it but only if
the ticketing arrangements were the same as those for 1988. Otherwise, the FA would have to look elsewhere.
Those arrangements did not please Liverpool or its supporters either in 1988 or 1989. They thought the ticket
allocation was unfair for reasons to be explained later. Reluctantly, however, the police requirem ent was
accepted and the m atch was fixed for 15 April at Hillsborough.

The Ground
  22. The Hillsborough Stadium is some 2h miles to the north-west o f central Sheffield in the district of
Owlerton. The ground was opened in 1899 on what was then a greenfield site by the river Don. The pitch lies
roughly east to west. A plan o f the ground and its im m ediate environs is at Appendix 1.

  23. The west end, with which this Inquiry is principally concerned, is known as the Leppings Lane end. The
east end abuts on Penistone Road, the A 61. To the south is the river Don and to the north a residential street,
Vere Road, which runs between Leppings Lane and Penistone R oad N orth.

   24. Alongside the river is a private roadway giving access to the south stand, to the D irectors’^ i d players’
entrances, and to the adm inistrative block under the stand. T he roadway gives both vehicular and pedestrian
access between Penistone Road and Leppings Lane, but there are gates which can shut it off at each end. There
is some car parking along this roadway principally for Directors, players and employees o f the Club. The south
stand dates from 1914 and is the oldest at the ground. It is all seating with places for 8,800. 5,500 o f those are
roofed over and 3,300 are uncovered.

  25. The north stand is also all seating and accom m odates about 9,700. Behind it is a gymnasium or sports
hall. There are also a first aid room and police room close by.

  26. The east end is all terracing and is known as the Spion Kop. It was enlarged and roofed over in 1986 and
now accom m odates some 21,000 standing spectators. There are crush barriers in the Kop running parallel to
the goal line b ut no dividing fences to prevent free movement from side to side.

   27. At the west or Leppings Lane end o f the ground there is terracing close to the pitch. Behind it is the west
stand which provides covered seating and was built in 1965 for World Cup m atches, some o f which were held
at Hillsborough in 1966. The covered stand accom m odates 4,456 seated spectators. The terracing in front o f it
extends higher in the corners between the stands and its total capacity was stated to be 10,100. At both the Kop
end and the west end access to the pitch is barred by perim eter fencing. The fencing is about eight feet high
m ounted upon the low wall at the foot o f the terracing. At the top o f the fencing the wire returns back at a sharp
angle for some 15 inches to m ake it difficult for anyone to clim b over towards the pitch. There are gates at
intervals along the perim eter fencing to afford access between terrace and pitch. These gates are less than a
m etre wide and were designed to be opened only from the pitch side for police purposes or in an emergency.
They are m arked and num bered on the plan Appendix 1.

  28. Unlike the Kop end, the west terracing has not only crush barriers parallel with the goal line b u t radial
fences at right angles to it, dividing the area into pens. This division was begun after an FA Cup semi-final in
1981 when crushing occurred due to overcrowding and gates had to be opened. It proceeded in stages, the final
arrangem ent being shown on the plan Appendix 1. The first section o f the west terracing moving south to north
contains gates 1 and 2 and is known as pens 1 and 2 although in fact constituting only one pen. Next is pen 3
with one gate; next pen 4 with one gate; pen 5, which is extremely narrow, was intended as a sterile area to
divide pen 4 from pen 6. This was to isolate hom e and away fans on occasions when both m ight be
accom m odated on the west terracing in separate pens. Finally there is pen 7 at the north-west corner. Pens 5,6
and 7 each have a perim eter gate. At the back o f the pens, under the front o f the west stand, there is a gate in


                                                         4
each radial fence. W hen those gates are open, the back row o f the terracing is intended to perm it access from
pen to pen along the whole west side. In practice, when substantial num bers are present, those gateways are not
readily visible or accessible. The present layout o f the pens, fences, crush barriers and gates has resulted from a
series o f piecem eal changes. The nature and effect o f those changes m ust be considered later.

The Turnstiles
   29. Because o f the housing in Vere Road there is no access from the north side o f the ground. Along
Penistone Road N orth there are some 46 turnstiles which usually give access both to the Kop and to the east
end o f the north stand. They are m arked 43 to 88 inclusive on the plan. The 12 num bered 77 to 88 are designed
to feed the north stand b ut were n ot used for th at purpose on 15 April in order to segregate supporters o f the
two team s as appears later. Two o f them , 77 and 78, were however used for access to the Kop.

  30. At the south side o f the ground there were 24 turnstiles (num bered 19 to 42 on the plan). Those
num bered 37 to 42 led to the Kop and the rest to the south stand.

  31. In summary, the south and east sides o f the ground accom m odated some 29,800 whose access on the
day was through 60 turnstiles.

  32. The other two sides o f the ground, north and west, with a capacity o f 24,256 were fed solely from the
Leppings Lane entrance where there were only 23 turnstiles.

Travel to the Ground
  33. M ost supporters were expected to come by road although rail transport was available. Nottingham
supporters travelling by train would arrive at the m ain line Sheffield M idland Station whence they would be
directed and escorted northw ards by the police. They would arrive at the ground along Penistone Road.
N ottingham supporters travelling by coach, m ini-bus or car would approach Sheffield from the south mainly
on the M 1. Again their arrival at the ground would predom inantly be via Penistone Road or Herries Road.

   34. Liverpool supporters travelling by norm al rail service would arrive at Sheffield M idland Station just
like their N ottingham counterparts. The police aim ed to segregate the rival fans and put them into separate
coaches. Liverpool fans could alternatively travel by special train to Wadsley Bridge, a British Rail station
catering solely for football supporters and situated to the north o f the ground. A police escort was available to
conduct them on foot to the Leppings Lane entrance. Those coming from Liverpool by road would approach
Sheffield either via the M 62 and down the M 1 from the north or across the Pennines from the north west. All
such routes would bring them to the ground via one o r other lim b o f Leppirigs Lane as shown on Appendix 1.
Broadly, therefore, arrivals from Liverpool would be from the north and west; arrivals from N ottingham
would be from the south and east.

Allocation of Places and Tickets
   35. Experience in recent years has produced a policy o f segregation to prevent trouble between supporters
o f rival teams. The need for this policy to be m aintained was endorsed and em phasised by the Popplewell
Report following the Bradford City disaster in 198 5. Accordingly, before the 1988 semi-final the police decided
that sections o f the Hillsborough Stadium should be allocated so as to achieve efficient segregation o f
Liverpool and N ottingham Forest fans. The section to be granted to each was determ ined by the direction
whence each predom inantly approached. Thus, Liverpool were allotted the north and west sides o f the ground
for which access was from Leppings Lane. N ottingham Forest were allotted the south and east sides with access
from Penistone Road.

   36. The effect o f the decision was th at for this all-ticket Cup Tie, Liverpool were allotted only 24,256 places
as against 29,800 for N ottingham Forest. This, although average attendance o f supporters at home matches
was substantially higher at Liverpool than at N ottingham . Moreover, with standing tickets at £6 and seats at
£12, N ottingham Forest had 21,000 standing places com pared with Liverpool’s 10,100. So, Liverpool’s
allocation was m ore expensive as well as smaller. Understandably, Liverpool were aggrieved by the allocation
o f places and tickets. They sought with some support from the host club and the FA to have it changed in
1988, but the police were adam ant. To switch ends would, in their opinion, have involved rival supporters
crossing each other’s paths when approaching the ground thereby frustrating attem pts at segregation and
creating a risk o f disorder. In 1989, when the same plan was proposed, Liverpool again challenged it. The
police, however, m aintained their view, adding that those who had attended in 1988 would be fam iliar with the
arrangem ents and that any change would lead to confusion.


                                                         5
Access from Leppings Lane
   37. As the plan Appendix 1 shows, the approach to the west turnstiles is across a narrow neck or forecourt at
a bend in Leppings Lane where, coming from the north, it turns to the south-west and crosses a bridge over the
river Don. Parking areas for the Liverpool supporters had been arranged north and west o f the ground. They
were therefore expected to arrive on foot along both limbs o f Leppings Lane and would converge on the
forecourt at the bend. In an arc across that forecourt is a line o f railings with six sets o f double gates. Inside
those perim eter gates is the short approach to the turnstiles. As shown in the photographs Appendix 2, the
latter are in two sections divided by a fence. The northern section consists o f turnstiles 1 to 16. Num bers 1 to
 10 gave access to the north stand. Thus there were 10 turnstiles for the 9,700 with north stand seats. T heir
tickets were m arked “Entrance A” and were colour-coded brown. Turnstiles 1 to 10 correspondingly had the
letter A above them and brown boards on the wall.

   38. Turnstiles 11 to 16 were for those with seats in the west stand. Thus 4,456 were served by six turnstiles.
They were the next block to the right o f those m arked A. However, instead o f these turnstiles and the west stand
tickets being m arked B as m ight alphabetically have been expected, they were m arked C. T heir colour-code on
tickets and boards was red.

   39. On the other side o f the dividing fence in the approach area, there were only seven turnstiles to serve
 10,100 with tickets for the west terracing. Those seven turnstiles were labelled A to G. This was because there
had originally been 18 turnstiles at Leppings Lane and the sequential num bering continued from 19 upwards
on the south side o f the ground. When the num ber at Leppings Lane was brought up to 23 the present
arrangements o f 1 to 1-6, A to G and then 19 upwards was adopted to avoid re-num bering all round the ground.
However, above the lettering A to G was a large letter B. “Entrance B” also appeared on tickets for the west
terrace. Thus, the three blocks o f turnstiles encountered by a ticket holder at the Leppings Lane end read from
left to right A, C, B. The colour-code for west terrace tickets and the boards beside turnstiles A to G was mauve.
To the right o f turnstile G is a tubular steel barrier to divide the queue for th at turnstile from the roadway to the
south stand.

Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles                                                                  '^
  40. Turnstiles 1 to 10 gave access to a passageway leading to the north stand. There is an exit gate (m arked A
on Appendix 1) between turnstile 1 and the adjacent housing.

   41. Inside turnstiles 1 to 16 is a concourse leading to pens 6 and 7 and the steps to the west stand. There is a
wall dividing this area from th at inside turnstiles A to G. It had been built to segregate hom e and away fans at a
tim e when the Club intended they should share the west terrace. T hat idea was not pursued b u t the wall
remained. There was, however, a gateway in the wall w hich did perm it access between the two areas. An exit
gate (m arked B on Appendix 1) was provided from the area inside turnstiles 11 to 16.

  42. Finally, anyone using turnstiles A to G entered a concourse bounded on the left by the wall just
m entioned and on the right by the wall o f the private roadway coming from the south stand to Leppings Lane.
There was an exit gate in the latter wall (m arked C on Appendix 1) ju st inside turnstile G.

  43. All three exit gates, A, B and C, were o f concertina design. They could be opened only from the inside
and were not intended for entry o f spectators into the ground.

   44. Those entering through turnstiles A to G had three options once inside the ground. They could by
moving to the right go round the south end o f the west stand and gain entry into pens 1 and 2. They could go
through the gap in the dividing wall towards the concourse behind turnstiles 11 to 16 and then round the north
end o f the west stand into pens 6 or 7. However, there were no conspicuous signs inviting them to take either of
those courses. The obvious way in was straight ahead o f the turnstiles where a tunnel u nder the m iddle o f the
west stand gave access to pens 3 and 4. Above its entrance in large letters was the word “Standing” and a large
letter “B”. Thus B ticket holders were drawn towards the tunnel.

   45. The length o f the tunnel is some 23 metres. It rises slightly at first then levels off but finally descends
towards the terraces at a gradient o f 1 in 6. As it emerges onto the terrace, the way ahead is bisected by the radial
fence between pen 3 on the right and pen 4 on the left. A short spur o f brick wall proj ects forward from each side
o f the tunnel at its m outh. Those emerging are thus guided straight forward rather than to either side. The
photograph at Appendix 3 shows the west stand and terraces.

  46. As with the layout on the terraces, the configuration o f the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the areas inside
them was effected by a series o f piecemeal changes. Again, it will be necessary to analyse their resultant effect.


                                                          6
Policing Arrangements
   47. At the 1988 semi-final, policing had been under the control o f C hief Superintendent Mole, then
Com m ander o f F D ivision within whose area Hillsborough lies. He was still in post on 20 M arch 1989 when
the FA broached the 1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over com m and o f F Division on 27 M arch to
Superintendent Duckenfield on the latter’s prom otion to C hief Superintendent. Both were present at an initial
meeting on 22 M arch, b ut on 27 M arch M r Mole bowed out and M r D uckenfield took over. U nder him were
Sector Com m anders, all Superintendents w ith m uch experience o f policing football m atches at Hillsborough
and elsewhere. In particular, Superintendent M arshall was in charge o f the area outside the Leppings Lane
entrance and the approaches to it. Superintendent Greenwood was in com m and inside the ground, b u t this
included the area between the turnstiles and the perim eter fence. They thereby swapped roles from the
previous year. U nder M r Duckenfield’s overall com m and were some 801 officers and men on duty at the
ground plus traffic officers and others from D Division to deal with the influx of supporters into the city centre.
In all, therefore, some 1,122 police were deployed for this m atch am ounting to about 38 per cent o f the total
South Yorkshire force. Included in the m ounted section o f 34 were officers from Liverpool and N ottingham to
assist respectively in m arshalling their hom e supporters. The total at the ground was divided into serials
consisting usually o f eight to ten Constables plus a Sergeant and an Inspector. The serials were posted to duties
at various stations in and around the ground in three phases: before, during and after the m atch. All o f this
was provided for in an O perational O rder which followed closely the O rder drawn up for the 1988 semi-final
and took into account the force’s “Standing Instructions for the Policing o f Football G rounds”. The O rder
described the duties o f each serial at each phase. It was supplem ented by oral briefings before and on the day o f
the match.

Sheffield Wednesday’s Arrangements
  48. The Club provided 376 stewards, gatemen and turnstile operators for duty on 15 April. The stewards
were briefed as to their duties on the m orning o f the m atch by police Inspectors and were allocated round the
ground. They wore yellow tabards. The Club’s control room , situated below the south stand, could
com m unicate by VHF radio with the stewards. Closed circuit television was installed by the Club with
screens in th eir control room showing all the turnstiles round the ground. A com puterised counting system was
incorporated in the turnstiles. This flashed onto a screen in the Club control room the running total o f
spectators passing through the turnstiles section by section. Thus, at the Leppings Lane end, there would be
separate running totals for turnstiles 1 to 10 (north stand), turnstiles 11 to 16 (west stand), and turnstiles A to G
(west terraces). W hen the total for any section was w ithin 15 per cent o f its perm itted capacity a warning pulse
showed on the screen. For the west terracing that warning would occur when the num bers were within 15 per
cent o f the total terrace capacity o f 10,100. W hat the system could not do was m onitor the distribution o f fans
on the terracing, pen by pen. It could give no warning therefore if one pen was full beyond its safe capacity.

Police Communications
   49. The nerve centre for police control is the control room or box situated at the south-west com er o f the
ground between the south stand and pen 1 o f the west terracing. The box is elevated and reached by a num ber
o f steps. It has windows com m anding views across the pitch and straight along the line o f the west perim eter
fence. The box is very small and has seats for only three officers. Superintendent M urray was in control o f it
and was advisor to M r Duckenfield as he had been to M r Mole the year before. N ext to him sat Sergeant
G oddard who operated the radios. The third seat was for Police Constable Ryan who operated the telephone
and public address systems. At the back o f the box stood Police Constable Bichard who was in control o f the
police closed circuit television system operated by a row o f consoles on a bench in front o f him and behind the
three seated officers.

   50. There were five television screens showing views o f five roving cameras fixed at high points on the
stands and directed both inside and outside the ground. There was also a m aster screen which flicked in
rotation from one cam era view to another and which m ade a video recording. The cameras have a zoom
facility to close in on any point o f interest. Specifically, there were good cam era views o f the west terracing, o f
the Leppings Lane turnstiles and beyond them o f Leppings Lane itself.

  51. The Tannoy public address system was relayed through speakers fixed at vantage points inside the
ground and outside the turnstiles. It was used by a disc jockey, housed under the police control box, to relay
music before the m atch, b u t it could be overridden by the police. Messages could be relayed through all
speakers or if appropriate to one area only.
   53.    Radio contact at Hillsborough from control to serials operating both inside and outside the ground was
U H F on channel 25. There was a W 1FU portable base station in the control box and if it failed there was a
stand-by station under the operator’s bench. H and sets were issued to all ranks o f Sergeant and above.
C om m unity Constables on duty would already have their own. O ther Constables had no radio.
Com m unication was on “talk through” i.e. any message from any source would be heard by everyone tuned in
and if m ore than one source spoke messages could become garbled. Ear pieces were issued to some officers in
an attem pt to overcome the loud crowd noise which m ade receipt o f signals very difficult. There were other
radio channels open to Sergeant Goddard: V H F to police Headquarters at Snig Hill, channel 35 to FI
Sub-divisional H eadquarters at H am m erton R oad and channel 19 used by CID. There was also a set tuned to
Sheffield W ednesday’s radio system between its control room and the stewards.




                                                       8
                                                   C H A PTER 2

                                   15th APRIL: T H E B U ILD -U P TO 2.30pm

Early Arrivals
   54. 15 April 1989 was a warm sunny spring Saturday. The m atch was a sell-out, so 54,000 ticket holders
were expected. O thers would com e w ithout tickets hoping to acquire them or even to gain access otherwise.
T he following account concentrates, as did the evidence, on the western approaches and the Liverpool
supporters since the disaster occurred at their end. They began to arrive in the Hillsborough area quite early in
small num bers. Some brought cans o f beer with them and were seen drinking as they walked; others took
advantage o f the weather and sat about on walls and open spaces. W hen the public houses opened, many
resorted there, drinking inside o r spilling out into the sunshine. Leppings Lane and its environs comprise a
m ixed shopping and residential area. Local residents saw groups o f Liverpool supporters keen to find a public
house or off-licence. M any were asking for tickets or “spares”. There were a few touts selling them at inflated
prices. From an early stage, some o f the fans were using private gardens and yards to urinate. As the m orning
wore on, num bers increased. Requests for tickets and trespass to urinate also increased. Still the prevailing
m ood was one o f carnival, good hum our and expectation.

Public Houses
  55. There were some 74 shops with off-licences in and around Sheffield. In general, they opened at 8 am.
Liverpool supporters did visit them but the evidence did not suggest a great am ount o f alcoholic drink was
bought there.

  56. Opening tim e at public houses was in general 11 am. Some rem ained closed all day. O f the others, some
72, m ostly in the city, were frequented by local patrons only. Some 23 public houses, however, served over a
hundred Liverpool supporters each. A nother 51 served m ore th an 20 each. Little trouble was reported, but
m any supporters drank enough to affect their m ood. At first excitement: later frustration.

The Gathering Crowd
   57. Towards the end o f the m orning, fans gathered on and around the bridge near the Leppings Lane
entrance. They seemed reluctant to enter the ground early. All turnstiles were open at 12 noon and one or two
as early as 11.30 am. Some 53 police had been deployed to operate outside the turnstiles and in the Leppings
Lane area. They enquired at random whether fans had tickets. Those who had not were advised to go away;
nevertheless, m any returned m ore than once. Those who had tickets were guided in the right direction. The
police tried to persuade them to enter the ground early. Officers, m ale and female, had been posted outside
each turnstile with the duty o f searching entrants for weapons, drink or drugs. Once through the turnstile, an
entrant was liable to be searched again by one o f a serial o f officers positioned just inside.

   58. At about 12 noon C hief Inspector Creaser asked Superintendent M urray w hether the pens on the west
terrace were to be filled one by one successively, but was told that they should all be available from the start and
the fans should find their own level.

   59. By 2 pm it was apparent to those inside the ground and those m onitoring events in the police and Club
control room s th at the num ber o f N ottingham fans in their places greatly outnum bered those from Liverpool.
The Kop and the south stand were filling up steadily, but the north and west stands were h alf empty. It was
noted about that tim e th at the turnstile figures showed only 12,000 had entered as against 20,000 at the same
tim e the previous year. On the west terraces, although pens 3 and 4 were filling, the wing pens 1 ,2 ,6 and 7 were
nearly empty. At 2.15 pm a Tannoy message asked fans in pens 3 and 4 to move forward and m ake room for
others.

  60. There h ad been three special trains from Liverpool in 1988. This tim e, there was only one. It arrived
early, ju st before 2 pm , at Wadsley Bridge station. The 350 passengers were m et by b oth m ounted and foot
police officers who escorted them in a crocodile down Leppings Lane. They were orderly and passed through
the turnstiles into the ground by about 2.20 pm w ithout incident.

  61. By this tim e the police Traffic Division reported that the Liverpool routes were clear, so the m ajority o f
Liverpool fans were in the Sheffield area. The num bers converging on the Leppings Lane entrance were
increasing rapidly. Between the perim eter gates and the turnstiles the crowd becam e congested. There was no
longer a separate queue at each turnstile b u t a single phalanx filling the whole approach area. The foot officers
outside the turnstiles were no longer able to search everyone and had difficulty in searching even selectively.


                                                         9
M ounted officers in and outside the turnstile area were having difficulty m anoeuvring in such a dense crowd.
The police were beset by fans bem used by the ticket and turnstile labelling asking for directions. M any had
been drinking but up to and ju st after 2.30 pm the m ood rem ained good.

   62.     Superintendent M arshall was on foot am ongst the crowd. He becam e anxious about the num bers
coming down Leppings Lane and spilling out onto the roadway where buses and cars were moving. At 2.17
pm he radioed to control to have m otor traffic in Leppings Lane stopped. This was eventually done at about
2.30 pm. U p to this tim e, despite the large mass outside the turnstiles and the num bers still approaching, there
was still no panic in the crowd; no perception o f crisis by the police. In the control room M r Murray, who could
see Leppings Lane on the video, advised M r Duckenfield that they would get everyone in by 3 pm. M r
Duckenfield reaffirm ed to him the policy about a delayed kick-off. It would be ordered only if there was some
m ajor external factor such as fog on the Pennines or delay on the motorway: not if spectators merely turned up
late even in large num bers.
                                                   CH APTER3

                                     THE CRISIS AT THE TURNSTILES

    63. In the 20 m inutes from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm there were crucial developments both inside and outside
the ground. In pens 3 and 4 there was a steady increase in pressure as m ore fans came through the tunnel to the
favoured area behind the goal. By 2.50 pm these pens were already full to a degree which caused serious
discom fort to many well used to enduring pressure on terraces. The num bers at that tim e were clearly in excess
o f the m axim um density stated by the Hom e Office G uide to Safety at Sports G rounds (1986 Edn) (the G reen
Guide) i.e. 54 persons per 10 square metres. (Although the G reen G uide has no statutory o r legal force, it is the
only official advice available about safety at sports grounds.) In the wing pens 1, 2, 6 and 7, there was still
ample room and bare patches o f concrete were visible.

   64. Meanwhile, the crowd grew at the Leppings Lane entrance. As m ore arrived at the back the crush at the
front grew worse. Entry to the turnstiles becam e more difficult. T heir efficiency was im paired and their rate
reduced. Arrivals at the back exceeded deliveries through the turnstiles, so the build-up increased. The foot
officers outside were unable to function and in danger themselves so they went through the turnstiles and out
again through gate C where they did w hat they could to relieve pressure by the tubular barrier. The m ounted
officers were surrounded by the dense m ass o f people and becam e ineffective. Superintendent M arshall was in
the m idst o f the turm oil. He extricated him self and stood on a parapet o f the bridge to get a clear view. A
drunken fan tried to push him off: a beer can was thrown at a m ounted officer. But these were isolated acts by
individuals; the menace came from the massive num bers single-mindedly determ ined to be in for the kick-off
with tim e running out. At the back o f the crowd fans were frustrated by the lack o f progress as 3 o’clock
approached. Some, m ostly young m en who had been drinking, tried to push and force their way forward. At
the front, people were jam m ed together and against the turnstile walls. Some panicked as the pressure
intensified. Some youngsters and women were fainting and in distress. They were helped out through the
tubular barrier by turnstile G or were passed over the turnstiles elsewhere. Fans clim bed up and over the
turnstile building or on to the dividing fence. This was to escape the crush rather than to gain free entry since
m ost o f them had tickets.

    65. At 2.44 pm M r Marshall radioed for reinforcements, for the Tannoy to request the crowd to stop
pushing and for a vehicle with loudspeaker equipm ent to come and request the same. Unhappily, at about 2.40
pm, radio com m unication on channel 25 becam e defective. For a period o f two o r three m inutes the control
room lost contact. A com m unications officer came prom ptly and switched to the standby station. W ith the use
o f a handset at control, contact was restored. Despite this hiatus, two o f M r M arshall’s requests were received.
The Tannoy was used b u t with little effect. Reinforcements, including m ounted officers from Penistone Road,
were sent. The third request, for a Landrover, was received direct by its driver PC Buxton who arrived at 2.46
pm and urged the crowd by loudspeaker not to push. This was no m ore effective than the Tannoy. The
m ounted officers besieged near the turnstiles came outside the perim eter gates. An attem pt was m ade to shut
them against the crowd outside, to enable the throng inside to be dispersed o r a t least thinned through the
turnstiles. The pressure from without, however, opened the gates again. M ounted officers, now reinforced to
greater num bers, form ed a cordon across the elbow o f Leppings Lane from the sweet shop to the bridge, again
with the object o f reducing pressure inside the gates. They were successful in this for some m inutes despite
desperate individuals forcing their way under or between the horses. However, this exercise was overtaken by a
more dram atic relief o f the pressure.

“Open the Gates”
   66. Between 2.40 pm and 2.45 pm the crowd inside and outside the turnstile approach had swelled to
over 5,000. At the head o f the phalanx conditions had becom e intolerable. Those who got through were short
o f breath and sweating profusely. M any com plained to police officers on the concourse inside the turnstiles
and asked them in forceful term s to do something. Exit gates A and B were being shaken. It was clear the crowd
could not pass through the turnstiles by 3 pm. Police Constable Buxton radioed from the Landrover to control
asking th at kick-off be postponed. The suggestion was acknowledged but rejected.

  67. Superintendent M arshall realised the crowd had becom e unm anageable. Although loth to do so, since it
was contrary to basic police strategy, he decided to request the exit gates be opened to relieve the pressure.
Otherwise, he feared fatalities would occur. O ther senior officers outside the ground agreed. At 2.47 pm he
radioed control to perm it the gates to be opened. At 2.48 pm , whilst M r Duckenfield was considering the
request, gate C opened to eject a youth who had clim bed in with no ticket. Immediately, fans outside took
advantage and about 150 m anaged to get in before a m ounted officer enabled the gate to be closed again. M r
M arshall repeated his request. Still no response from control. He repeated it a third tim e, adding th at if the


                                                        11
gates were not opened someone was going to be killed. In the control room, M r Duckenfield had not m ade a
decision. M r M urray asked him “Are you going to open the gates?” . M r D uckenfield gave the order and Sgt
G oddard radioed to M r M arshall “Open the gates” . N either the Club control room no r any police officers
inside the turnstiles were told o f this order before or after it was given or o f any action it would require.

  68. At 2.52 pm, gate C was opened wide. Fans behind turnstiles A to G and from the concourse beyond
cam e round to flow through it in large numbers.

   69. About two m inutes later the pressure outside gate A led Sgt Higgins to radio, despite the gateman’s
objection, for it to be opened. I f it was not, he said, “It’ll go and someone will get killed” . Perm ission was given,
b u t this tim e reserve serials were alerted to m onitor the inrush towards the north stand. G ate B was also briefly
opened against the gateman’s wishes and about 200 o f those pressed at turnstiles A to G gained entry to their
left.

   70. The largest entry, however, was through gate C. In the five m inutes it was open about 2,000 fans passed
through it steadily at a fast walk. Some may have had tickets for the stands. N o doubt some had no tickets at all.
The m ajority had tickets for the terraces. O f these, some found their way either right to pens 1 and 2 or left
through the dividing wall to 6 and 7. But a large proportion headed straight for the tunnel in front o f them .




                                                                                                        .'W




                                                          12
                                                   CH A PTER 4

                                                THE DISASTER

   71. The initial influx through gate C, augm ented by entrants via the turnstiles, came through the tunnel
with great m om entum . Fans spoke o f being swept through, feet off the ground. The 1 in 6 gradient accelerated
their progress. U pon reaching the crowded pens, some wished to go back b u t were unable to do so. The new
arrivals found themselves pushed forward and the pressure becam e intense. At 2.54 pm, shortly after this
influx began, the teams came onto the pitch. As usual, this was greeted by a surge forward. M any were now
acutely uncom fortable and some were in distress. The m ass seethed about but voluntary m ovem ent by any
individual was difficult; hands down could not be raised and some fans found it hard to breathe. Still the flow
continued through the tunnel causing further surges forward. There were shouts for help and for the gates to be
opened to the pitch. Police officers on the perim eter track did not im m ediately react. In the deafening noise
from chanting and shouting they did not at first recognise the problem . Realisation came at different m om ents
to different officers in different places.

   72. G ate 3 sprang open under the intense pressure from within. An officer quickly closed it. Shortly
afterwards, it sprang again; officers tried to shut it. Those seeking to escape were urged and pushed back. Gate
4 was opened by a policem an who noticed the crushing. People began to spill out through it and were directed
to the wing pens where there was still am ple room. Meanwhile, gate 4 was closed again and then re-opened. At
gate 3, a Constable, now alive to the crisis, followed strictly his w ritten orders and radioed for perm ission to
open that gate. Receiving no reply, he took it upon him self to open it.

  73. Just before 3 pm , the m atch kicked off. At the same tim e, gate C, which had been closed at 2.57 pm,
was reopened and a steady trickle continued to enter through the tunnel.

   74. To escape the crush, fans began climbing the radial fences out o f pens 3 and 4 into pens 2 and 5. Others
tried to get over the front perim eter fence b u t were at first turned back by police who feared a pitch invasion.
N ear the front, fans, m ostly youngsters, were weakened to the point o f collapse and in some instances death but
they were held upright by pressure all round. F urther back, m ost were so preoccupied with the pain o f being
pressed against barriers and w ith breathing problem s that they saw nothing o f the game. But at the rear there
were m any who, although cram ped, were watching the football unaware o f the distress at the front.

  75. At 3.04 pm, Beardsley for Liverpool struck the crossbar at the Kop end. There was a roar from the
Liverpool fans and at the same tim e a powerful surge forwards in pen 3. The several surges which occurred after
the influx from gate C carried the pressure down the pens towards the pitch. The force became such as to twist
and break two spans o f a crush barrier towards the front of pen 3. The evidence does not establish with
certainty when this happened. Probably it was triggered by the surge at 3.04 pm. But I am sure it occurred after
the influx from gate C so greatly increased the pressure in the pen. W hen the barrier broke those whom it had
supported were projected towards the perim eter fence. M any fell and the involuntary rush o f those behind
pressed them down. The crushing force was transm itted and dispersed so th at all along the front o f pen 3 fans
were pressed hard up against the low wall and the wire m esh o f the fence above it.

  76. In pen 4 no barrier broke. Nevertheless those at the front were crushed against wall and fence. F urther
back, two barriers were bowed and some individuals succum bed to the pressure around them .

   77. Surges on terraces are com m on. Usually, they go forward, then recede. Here, with the weight o f
num bers, there was no receding. The pressure stayed and for those crushed breathless by it, standing or prone,
life was ebbing away. If no relief came in four m inutes there would be irreversible brain damage; if longer,
death.

  78. In the control room no-one noticed the overcrowding o r anything am iss in pens 3 and 4 until the first
fans spilt out onto the perim eter track ju st before kick-off. Then, the officers in com m and assum ed that there
was an attem pted pitch invasion. They called up reserve serials waiting in the gymnasium and all available
officers elsewhere to go to the pitch. A request was m ade to H Q for dog handlers.

   79. Superintendent Greenwood, the G round Com mander, was by the players’ tunnel at the kick-off. He
noticed fans on the track and went to the west end behind the goal. As he approached, he did not think the pens
overcrowded until he was very close and saw those pressed against the fence. Even then, he thought the
situation “retrievable” if those higher up the pen relieved the pressure. He clim bed on the wall below the fence
and signalled with both hands to those behind to move back. O ther officers joined him. It was impossible.
Those fans who would have wished to comply were powerless to do so. Behind them , there were still many


                                                        13
unaware o f the crisis, watching the game. The football continued to joyous shouting and singing round the rest
o f the ground while those crushed and trapped slowly expired.

   80.   W hen M r Greenwood’s signals to move back proved fruitless, he tried to radio for the m atch to be
stopped. At first, his message was not received by control, so he signalled with his arm s towards the control
box. M r Duckenfield sent M r M urray down from the box to have the m atch stopped via the linesman, the
agreed emergency drill. Before he could do so, M r Greenwood ran over the pitch to the referee who stopped the
game. It was 5/2 m inutes past 3.




                                                      14
                                                   CHAPTER5

                                               T H E AFTERM ATH

Rescue Attempts
   81. From 3 o’clock, gates 3 and 4 had been open and rem ained so. A t first, fans had walked or staggered out
winded and faint. But the final surge at 3.04 pm, and the struggle to reach the open gates, caused a horrendous
blockage o f bodies. The dead, the dying and the desperate became interwoven in the sump at the front o f the
pens, especially by the gates. Those with strength left clambered over others submerged in the hum an heap and
tried to climb out over the fence. They were now helped by police and other fans who hauled them up and over.
Num bers o f fans were climbing over the radial fences into adjacent pens. At the back, many were hauled up
into the west stand to relieve the pressure.

   82. The steps from the sump at gateways 3 and 4 were so congested with bodies live and dead that each had
to be prised from the pile by the police. Initially, no officer took effective charge. A num ber of individual
officers and fans worked frantically to free those trapped b u t the gateways were so narrow that only two or three
could get at the entwined bodies Willing hands got in one another’s way. M ore officers arrived from the
gymnasium and elsewhere in the ground. Many used their own initiative to help those laid out on the pitch, to
assist in getting others over the fencing and to com fort the distressed. But some stood in groups near the
perim eter fence not knowing w hat to do. They h ad been sum m oned in response to what was thought to be a
threat to public order. W hat they found was a horrific scene o f carnage and some young officers were shocked
into im potence by w hat they saw.

  83. It was truly gruesome. The victim s were blue, cyanotic, incontinent; their m ouths open, vomiting; their
eyes staring. A pile o f dead bodies lay and grew outside gate 3. Extending further and further on to the pitch, the
injured were laid down and attem pts m ade to revive them . More and m ore walking survivors flooded out on to
the pitch as the players left. The scene was em otive and chaotic as well as gruesome. As the enorm ity o f the
disaster was realised, m any o f the fans milling about were bitter and hostile to the police, blaming them for
what had happened. Officers were confronted, abused, spat upon and even assaulted. A small num ber of
hysterical fans had to be subdued.

   84. Adding to the chaos, a num ber o f press photographers dodged about among rescue workers apparently
avid to secure photographs at point blank range o f those dying through the wire mesh and those laid on the
pitch. Angry fans sought to assault them . Police had to intervene.

   85. At about 3.12 pm, C hief Superintendent Nesbit, C om m ander o f the Traffic Division, arrived on the
pitch. H e took charge at gate 3 and organised a chain o f officers to simplify and expedite the extraction o f
casualties from the pen. In the absence o f any m echanical means, police and fans together pulled and worked
at the wire mesh with their bare hands and their feet to breach the fencing. They succeeded in both pens,
enabling officers to get in and fans to be got out.

   86. By now, some officers o f their own initiative went round from the pitch to the tunnel where they met
other officers from the turnstiles and the west stand. Together, they tried to persuade fans at the rear o f the pens
to go back through the tunnel. Some complied, b u t many resisted, wishing to stand their ground. Casualties
were brought out through the tunnel, and as the pressure in the pens was relieved, officers were able to get
further in and bring out m ore casualties, dead and alive. They were laid on the ground in the concourse outside
the tunnel and attem pts were m ade to revive them .

First Aid
  87. The St John Ambulance Brigade had some 30 personnel posted round the ground for the m atch - 25
adults and 5 ju n io r cadets, They were quickly on the scene when the first casualties emerged and sought to
revive them . T heir Divisional Superintendent, M r Wells, tried unsuccessfully to help those pressed against the
fencing by feeding oxygen to them through the mesh until they could be got out.

   88. D r Purcell, Sheffield W ednesday’s doctor, came from his seat in the south stand and attem pted
resuscitation. Assisted by a male nurse from the crowd, he moved from patient to patient doing what he could,
b ut in m ost cases it was too late.

  89. At 3.13 pm a St John’s am bulance came onto the pitch at the north-east com er and drove to the
perim eter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and nurses on the public address system until
nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the m inutes ticked past, some o f them came onto the pitch to help of their


                                                         15
own accord when they saw the casualties and the am bulance and realised the gravity o f the situation. Many
fans also worked prodigiously in attem pts to revive the dead and the dying, in some cases their own relatives
and friends. Artificial respiration, m outh to m outh respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled
and the unskilled but usually in vain. Those capable o f survival mostly came round o f their own accord. The
rest were mostly doom ed before they could be brought out and treated.

    90. There was an urgent need to get casualties off the pitch and to hospital. There were six stretchers in the
first aid room and three in the St John’s am bulance. They were quickly brought into use. Then the fans
im provised by tearing down the hoardings around the edge o f the pitch and against the stands so that lengths of
board could be used as stretchers. Im provising in this way, parties o f fans and police ran repeatedly the length
o f the pitch bearing casualties to the north-east comer. A num ber were dead on arrival there.

In the Control Room
  91. M r Duckenfield stayed in the control room. C hief Inspector McRobbie was there in civilian clothes as
an observer. M r Duckenfield sent him down to the track to tell a policewoman at gate 1 to adm it those
displaced from the centre pens. M r Duckenfield did n ot realise there were injuries until he saw someone laid
on the pitch. Even then, he did not realise the nature o f the problem or its scale.

  92. M r M urray returned from his attem pt to stop the m atch and M r D uckenfield sent him down again to
clear the pitch and assess the situation. A message was broadcast requesting fans to clear the pitch. This was
because M r D uckenfield could not from the control room see clearly w hat was happening for the milling and
increasing num bers.

   93. The Assistant C hief Constable (Operations), M r Jackson, had attended the m atch in civilian clothes as
a guest o f the Club. He came from his seat in the south stand to ask w hat had happened. M r Duckenfield was
unable to say; he did not tell M r Jackson that the exit gates had been opened on his authority. M r Jackson went
down to the pitch to discover the situation.

   94. At 3.06 pm M r Duckenfield, still prim arily concerned about public order, caused a m elfage to be sent
to H eadquarters asking for O peration Support. T hat was a call for all available additional police resources to
come to the ground to strengthen the police presence.

   95. M r Jackson was told by M r Greenwood that there were casualties and returned im m ediately to control
to m ake sure emergency services were alerted. Meanwhile, M r M urray had seen the plight o f those behind the
fence. He radioed to control that a fleet o f am bulances was required. He also asked for a Tannoy broadcast to
those in the pens to move back but there is no clear evidence that it was made.

  96. Only when M r Duckenfield received the request for a fleet o f am bulances did he realise the nature and
gravity o f the situation. Then, supported by M r Jackson, he caused messages to be sent converting O peration
Support into calls for the M ajor D isaster Plan.

No Information
   97. A part from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical assistance about 3.30 pm, no
inform ation or advice was broadcast on the public address system. M r Duckenfield feared that the crowd
m ight turn hostile or might all attem pt to leave together thereby ham pering the emergency services if they were
given inform ation about w hat had happened. The result was th at apart from those close enough at the west end
to see the terrible truth for themselves, the m ajority o f the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially
N ottingham supporters in the Kop, still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other m isbehaviour by
Liverpool fans. They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool fans who
were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end. The police feared violence m ight result on
top o f the existing disaster. Accordingly, they deployed a large num ber o f officers to form a line across the
w idth o f the pitch at the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as they
moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing. O ther officers were posted to
the perim eter track facing the north stand for the same purpose. To those distressed and distraught who
wanted urgent action, this large contingent o f passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.

Misinformation
  98. At about 3.15 pm, M r G raham Kelly, C hief Executive o f the FA, M r Kirton also o f the FA and M r
G raham Mackrell, Secretary o f Sheffield Wednesday, went to the control room for inform ation. M r
Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities and the game was likely to be abandoned. H e also said a


                                                        16
gate had been forced and there had been an inrush o f Liverpool supporters. H e pointed to one o f the television
screens focussed on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said “T hat’s the gate that’s been forced: there’s
been an inrush”. Inevitably M r Kelly was interviewed a little later live on television. He spoke o f the two stories
concerning the gate - the fans’ account th at the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had
forced th eir way in.

  99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom . M r Duckenfield went there and
m et M r Kelly, the referee and representatives o f the three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. M r
D uckenfield indicated the m atch was likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. H e added that
he did not want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd ham per the emergency
operations.

Public Announcements
   100. Later the m anagers o f the two team s were asked to go to the control room. They were invited there to
m ake a public announcem ent to calm the crowd. M r Kenny Dalglish agreed to do so. H e told the crowd that
there were problem s and asked them to assist the police and those rendering first aid. He asked for calm and his
message was well received. It was then 3.56 pm. At 4.10 pm it was announced th at the m atch was abandoned
for th at day. Again that message was received calmly by the crowd m ost o f whom behaved responsibly as they
dispersed.

Fire Brigade
   101. M eanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3.10 pm a request came from the
perim eter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire mesh. Sergeant G oddard contacted the police garage
close by w ithout success. At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested H eadquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipm ent to the Leppings Lane entrance.

   102. There was no arrangem ent for a fire officer to be present during the match. However, the M ajor
D isaster Plan required all emergency services to be alerted. After ’phone messages which m ust be described
later, fire appliances arrived at both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road a t 3.22‘pm. At both entrances their
arrival surprised police who were uninform ed as to why they had been called or where they should go.

   103. At Leppings Lane a police Inspector told Station Officer Swain “I don’t really think we need you” .
A nother police officer then asked for m ore resuscitators as people were dying so M r Swain radioed for ten fire
appliances. Each carries oxygen and resuscitation equipm ent.

   104. At the Kop end, Leading Firem an Housley arrived with an emergency tender and Station Officer
Fletcher in another appliance, each w ith a crew. The emergency tender came along the roadway by the south
stand but owing to its height was unable to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings
Lane entrance losing some eight m inutes. From there, M r Housley and his crew went onto the pitch with
resuscitation equipm ent. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium. M r Fletcher and his m en ran
along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipm ent and oxygen cylinders. W hen they arrived at the
fence, the cutting equipm ent was not required as by then the last o f the dead and injured were being removed
from the pens. M r Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen assisted in carrying
victim s as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS)
   105. Before 1986 there had been no SYMAS representative routinely present at Hillsborough matches. The
Club was content, as indeed are m any other clubs, to rely upon the St John’s Ambulance Brigade and a 999 call
if necessary. From 1986 onwards, after representations, the Club provided two seats in the south stand for
SYMAS staff at League matches. At one stage it was suggested they would be best placed in the north stand
close to the gymnasium which had been designated as the casualty centre in the event o f a m ajor incident. The
south stand seats were allotted as they placed the SYMAS staff closer to the players’ tunnel should a player be
injured. These seats were, however, not available at Cup semi-finals. SYMAS representatives nevertheless
attended at the semi-finals by arrangem ent with the police in 1988 and again in 1989. The SYMAS officers
stood on the ram p leading to the pitch at the north-east com er. They had one am bulance outside the ground
and one on standby.

   106. On 15 April 1989, Officers Higgins and Eason were at the ground with an am bulance and crew. They
noticed fans on the track and went to the Leppings Lane end whilst the game was still in progress. They began
to attend to casualties. Meanwhile, at 2.59 pm , there had been a call from Police Constable Waugh at police


                                                         17
H eadquarters to the Hillsborough police control asking if am bulances were required. This was on the
instruction o f C hief Inspector Edm undson who had heard over the radio, as had Police Constable Waugh
himself, crowd noise and snatches o f speech from Hillsborough suggesting distress and possible injuries. The
reply from the control box was: no reports o f injuries but keep standing by. At 3.07 pm after hearing from the
ground that there m ight be injuries, police H eadquarters notified SYMAS that am bulances m ight be required.
Then, seconds later, M r M urray’s request for a fleet o f am bulances was relayed to SYMAS. They reacted at
once. Ambulances began to arrive at the Leppings Lane entrance at 3.13 pm and at the Penistone Road
entrance at 3.17 pm. In all, some 42 ambulances attended, 31 o f them from SYMAS and 11 from
neighbouring authorities. By 4.30 pm, they had conveyed some 172 casualties to the N orthern General
H ospital and the Royal Hallam shire Hospital.

Gymnasium
   107. The gymnasium had been in use for serving meals to the police. When the M ajor D isaster Plan was
ordered, it was cleared and divided into two. One end became a tem porary m ortuary; the other was used as a
casualty clearing area for the injured. As the stretchers, designed and improvised, brought in more and more
casualties, the scene was initially and inevitably chaotic and harrowing. There was intense distress amongst
the injured and bereaved; relatives were reluctant to be parted from the dead and sought to revive them . There
were people looking for missing friends and relations; there were recrim inations, there were scuffles. Some of
those involved were the worse for drink. Doctors and nurses had followed the casualties in from the pitch and
sought to attend the injured as best they could in the adverse circumstances. Those in m ost urgent need of
hospital treatm ent were taken to am bulances as they arrived, triage being employed to determ ine priorities.
Doctors were requested by the police to examine each person thought to be deceased to confirm and certify
death. A police Constable was detailed to attend and guard each o f the dead and a photograph o f each was
taken by a police photographer so that relatives coming to identify bodies could be spared the ordeal of
searching amongst all who had died.

The Dead and the Injured
  108. O f the 9 5 who died, the evidence suggests that at least 16 and probably 21 came throug^jgate C after it
opened at 2.52 pm. T hat is established by the statem ents o f relatives and friends who came through with them
but survived.

   109. By com m endable hard work, a team o f pathologists headed by Professor U sher completed
post-m ortem exam inations on all the deceased within 48 hours. They found th at 88 o f the victim s were male
and seven female. Thirty-eight were under 20 years o f age, 39 were between 20 and 29 years and only three were
over 50. In virtually every case the cause o f death was crush asphyxia due to com pression o f the chest wall
against other bodies or fixed structures so as to prevent inhalation. In all but nine cases th at was the sole cause.
In one, pressure on the chest had been so great as to rupture the aorta; in six cases there were also injuries to the
head, neck o r chest; in the rem aining two cases, natural disease was a contributory factor. In 18 cases bones
were fractured. Thirteen o f those were rib fractures. However, one was a fractured femur, one a fractured
radius and the rem aining three involved fractures o f bones or cartilages round the voice box. These injuries
suggest the victim s may have been trodden while on the ground.

  110. Blood samples were taken from the dead. N o alcohol was found in any o f the females. O f the males, 51
had no m ore than 10 milligrams per cent in their blood which is negligible; 15 had over 80 milligrams per cent
and six over 120 m illigrams per cent.

  111. Although the great m ajority o f those who died were in pen 3, at least five were in pen 4. M ost deaths
occurred at the front o f the pens but there were a few fatalities further back.

  112. In all, some 730 people com plained o f being injured inside the ground and 36 outside it. O f the 730,
about 30% are thought to have entered through gate C after 2.52 pm. The largest category o f injury was
bruising, especially to the ribs and chest.
                                                  C H A PTER 6

                                           SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

  113. I have given my findings as to the basic factual background and the m ain sequence of events in
narrative form. There was very little conflict as to the principal events save as to some timings and numbers.
Indeed, the consistency o f the evidence has been a rem arkable feature o f this Inquiry. The experiences o f most
witnesses were unforgettable and no doubt the early hearing helped to preserve accurate memory. Also, the
existence o f tim ed videos and photographs and o f logged and taped messages provided reliable checks by
which to prom pt and test witness recollection. Accordingly, I have not for the m ost part burdened the narrative
with citations from the evidence o f individual witnesses.

   114. However, there were several instances of detailed evidence and assertions being highlighted by the
m edia in dram atic and em otive term s during the hearing. Since some o f those much-publicised incidents gave
rise to unfair criticism , they ought to be the subject o f specific findings. I have therefore dealt with them
individually at Appendix 6.




                                                       19
                                   PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?


                   “Events o f the m agnitude o f Hillsborough don’t usually happen ju s t fo r one
                single reason, nor is it usually possible to pin the blam e on one single scapegoat.
                . . . Disasters happen because a whole series o f mistakes, m isjudgm ents and
                mischances happen to com e together in a deadly com bination. ”
                                                                D r John Habgood, Archbishop o f York, preaching at
                                                               the Hillsborough M emorial Service on 23 April 1989.

   115. This disaster was the worst in the history o f British football. It happened because pens 3 and 4 became
grossly overcrowded. They were uncom fortably overcrowded by 2.50 pm at least to a degree which required
that they should be closed to further arrivals. Even the num bers coming through the turnstiles in the last 10
m inutes would have increased the pressure beyond danger point and there would have been injuries if not
fatalities. As it was, the influx through gate C after 2.52 pm so increased the pressure in the two pens as to
cause fatal crushing.

  116. The overcrowding up to 2.52 pm was due to a num ber o f factors which can be considered broadly
under three heads.
   (i) The layout at the Leppings Lane end.
  (ii) Lack o f fixed capacities for the pens.
 (iii) Lack o f effective m onitoring o f the terraces.

    117. The crushing and fatalities after 2.52 pm m ust be considered under a num ber o f headings.
  (iv) The build-up at the turnstiles.
   (v) The blunder on opening the gates.
  (vi) The barriers in pen 3.
 (vii) The crushing not recognised.
(viii) The response o f the police.
  (ix) The perim eter gates were too small.




                                                          20
                                                   C H A PTER 7

                               THE LAYOUT AT THE LEPPINGS LANE END

  118. I have already observed th at the layout o f the turnstile area, o f the terraces and of the concourse
between them was the result o f piecem eal changes. A brief history o f these changes is now necessary.

The History
   119. Before 1965, the Leppings Lane end consisted entirely o f terracing like the Kop. In that year, the west
stand was built and the terraces rem aining in front of it were truncated to their present depth, front to back. As
to width, they consisted o f a single standing area with no dividing fences. During the early 1970’s, hooliganism
and pitch invasions m ade it necessary to prevent access to the playing area and the perim eter fences were
therefore erected in 1977.

    120. Section 1 o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 empowered the Secretary o f State to designate a
sports stadium having, in his opinion, accom m odation for m ore than 10,000 as a stadium requiring a
certificate from the local authority. Hillsborough was so designated with effect from 1 January 1979 by SI
 1978/1091. In anticipation o f th at date, Sheffield W ednesday instructed Eastwood and Partners, a firm of
consulting engineers, to act on their behalf especially in their dealings w ith the local authority. D r Eastwood,
th e principal o f the firm, is a highly experienced civil and structural engineer and has advised several m ajor
football clubs. He recom m ended that a num ber o f additional crush barriers should be added since those
already in place were insufficient to com ply with the Green G uide (1976 edition). T hat work was approved
and carried out during 1979.

  121. The relevant local authority at the tim e was the South Yorkshire County Council. It set up an Officer
Working Party consisting o f representatives o f the police, the fire service, its own building surveyor’s division
and its own legal and adm inistration departm ent. The Working Party m ade inspections and consulted with the
Club and D r Eastwood. A Safety C ertificate was issued on 21 D ecem ber 1979 for ah indefinite period. It has
rem ained in force ever since and has not been amended.

   122. Schedule 3 o f the certificate sets out the m axim um crowd capacity for various areas in the ground. The
figure for the west terrace is 7,200 and for the north-west terrace 2,900. These figures were intended to be in
accordance with the Green G uide (1976). Paragraph 15.4 provided for a m axim um “packing density” of
between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres depending on the condition o f the terrace. D r Eastwood had
calculated 8,000 for the west terrace on the basis o f 54 per 10 square metres. He thought this a justified starting
figure in view o f his im proved system o f barriers. However, he reduced it to 7,200 because there were no
gangways on the terrace and he did not think it feasible to provide any. So, the total figure for the Leppings Lane
terraces was and is 10,100.

The 1981 Semi-Final
  123. As already m entioned, there was crushing at the Cup semi-final in 1981. The m atch was between
Tottenham H otspur and W olverham pton Wanderers. The police debriefing m inutes after the incident
prophetically refer,

  “to the late arrival o f a large num ber o f spectators who were still waiting to enter the Leppings Lane
  enclosure when the m atch started. The flash point occurred when Tottenham scored” (at the Kop end) “after
  only three m inutes. The spectators ju st entering pushed forward to see w hat was happening and caused a
  crush, which resulted in the injuries”.

   124. Those being crushed called for the perim eter gates to be opened onto the track. There was no
im m ediate reaction, according to M r Vaux who was there, b u t fortunately a police Inspector gave instructions
and the gates were then opened. About 250 came out onto the track. There were broken arm s, legs and ribs and
38 were treated either in hospital or by the St John Ambulance Brigade. It is clear from the docum ents (a) that
the turnstile readings showed the capacity figure o f 10,100 had been exceeded by over 400 (b) th at the police
shut o ff further access to the terraces because o f crushing, and (c) the police view after the event was th at the
capacity figure o f 10,100 in the Safety Certificate was too high. This latter view was com m unicated to the Club
by the C hief Superintendent then in com m and o f F Division b u t it was not pursued.


                                                        21
Three Pens
  125. After this incident in April 1981 the police requested that the terrace should be divided into sections.
The object was to improve crowd control by reducing sideways movement. Division would enable m ore even
distribution to be effected when there was a capacity crowd. It would also enable the west end to be used for
both hom e and away supporters who could be segregated in separate pens, if necessary with an em pty pen
between them.

   126. This proposal was agreed by the Club and the Officer W orking Party and was approved by the local
authority. Two radial fences were accordingly fitted in November 1981. They are the fence now separating pens
2 and 3 and th at now separating 5 and 6. The result was to divide the whole terrace into three pens. Access from
the concourse to the m iddle pen was through the tunnel and to the wing pens round the sides o f the west stand.
D r Eastwood suggested and illustrated an altered layout which would have provided separate access through
separate banks o f turnstiles to the north stand, to each end o f the west stand, and to each o f the three pens.
W hilst the m ain object o f this was segregation, such a layout would have enabled each o f those areas to be
m onitored num erically via the turnstiles so as to ensure its m axim um capacity was n o t exceeded. The plan was
not adopted. The m axim um capacity for the new centre pen was calculated at 2,200, but no alteration was
m ade to the Safety Certificate so to lim it it nor was there any m eans m echanically o f counting the num bers
going into that pen.

The 1985 Changes
   127. By 1985, Sheffield W ednesday had been prom oted to the First Division and was drawing larger
crowds. The im provem ent o f the Leppings Lane end was raised again by the Club and D r Eastwood prepared a
num ber o f drawings. These illustrated various schemes for achieving segregation by providing m ore turnstiles
in separate banks and divisions of the concourse. The police wanted further divisions o f the terrace itself,
again to improve control and segregation. There was m uch discussion o f these schemes which included
suggestions o f 29 and even 34 turnstiles in total. In the result, the following alterations were carried out in
1985.

New Radial Fences
  128. On the terraces, two m ore radial fences were fitted. One divided the existing central pen into the
present pens 3 and 4. G ates were fitted at the m outh o f the tunnel to enable each o f those pens to be closed off.
The second fence was placed in the new pen 4 so as to create the narrow pen 5 intended to be a sterile area. U ntil
those two fences were added there existed only perim eter gates 1 ,2 ,4 ,5 and 6. The creation o f pen 3 required a
new gate 3 to be fitted which was done.

Barriers
   129. The lines o f the new radial fences ran across existing crush barriers so th at w ithout m odification those
barriers would have run through the fencing. The police considered the barriers would be used by fans as
convenient m ounting points to scale the new fences, thereby defeating their object. They therefore wished
spans to be removed from the barriers. H ad their wishes been m et in full the result would have been an
unim peded run in pen 3 from the m outh o f the tunnel down the south side o f the new fence to the perimeter. D r
Eastwood dug his heels in against that proposal which he rightly regarded as dangerous. He did however agree
to some m odification to the m iddle row o f barriers in the newly created pen 3, chiefly to facilitate access.
Likewise in the new pen 5. The 1985 m odifications to the pens are shown on the plan Appendix 4.

The Turnstiles and Concourse
   130. At the entrance, m odification but no increase in num ber was m ade at the turnstiles. The bank 1 to 16
was divided from A to G by the metal fence now in place and that division was projected across the concourse
inside the turnstiles in the form o f a brick wall. A personnel gate was provided for access through th at wall but
was enlarged to its present size at the request o f the police. Those alterations were m ade in the interests of
segregation. The m ore elaborate divisions which D r Eastwood had suggested, giving separate access to each
sub-division o f the accom m odation, were not pursued for financial reasons. In May 1985 the Bradford
disaster occurred. The south stand at Hillsborough had wooden decking and the Club realised it would have to
undertake expensive rem edial works there. The cantilever roof o f the same stand was also discovered to
require expensive repairs.

   131. In fact, shortly after the new dividing fence and wall had been built at the Leppings Lane entrance and
concourse, the Club, by agreem ent with C hief Superintendent Mole, ceased to accom m odate hom e supporters
at the Leppings Lane end. There was therefore no longer any need for segregation at that end, but the wall
remained.


                                                         22
   132. Also in 1985, electronic counting equipm ent was installed at all turnstiles. T his conveyed the running
count for each bank o f turnstiles, for example A to G, to a television screen in the Club control room where the
figures were displayed. In 1986, an electronic eye was installed in each turnstile booth to catch and record
anyone who clim bed over the turnstile.

Barrier 144
   133. In June 1986, the police requested th at the crush barrier nearest to the tunnel at the entrance to pens 3
and 4 should be removed to assist the flow o f fans into the pens. They found it caused obstruction because it
was in a good viewing position and spectators liked to stand against it in num bers thereby blocking access by
others further into the pens. The police also suggested it m ight ham per effective evacuation through the tunnel
especially in an emergency. D r Eastwood considered the pros and cons o f this proposal and accepted the police
view. The O fficer Working Party approved the proposal at a meeting on 7 August 1986 on site. Authority was
given then and there by M r Bownes on behalf o f the Sheffield City Council which had taken over responsibility
for the Safety Certificate from South Yorkshire County Council on 1 April 1986. Two spans o f the barrier were
therefore removed, leaving only one span in pen 4 as shown on Appendix 4.

Effects of the Layout
   134. The result o f these changes was to divide the terrace into a num ber o f small areas w ithout providing
any com puterised o r m echanical means o f lim iting entry numerically into any one area if all areas were open
for choice. Before the fences and pens had divided the terrace, the overall figure o f 10,100 could be m onitored
via the turnstiles and in theory the crowd could even itself out laterally. Even then, it was not possible strictly to
ensure com pliance with Schedule 3 Part 1 o f the Safety Certificate which prescribed a m axim um o f 2,900 for
the north-west terrace and 7,200 for the west terrace. Paragraph 3 o f Schedule 2 o f the Safety Certificate
provides:

  “The num ber o f spectators adm itted to the Stadium and to the several areas o f spectator accom m odation
  within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures specified in Part 1 o f Schedule 3” .

  The Club had to rely upon visual m onitoring.

  135. The situation became worse however w ith the division o f the west terrace into pens. N ot only were
there m ore and sm aller discrete areas but some were likely to attract m ore than their appropriate share o f the
10,100 total. It is well recognised th at the area behind the goal is very popular. Moreover, the position o f the
tunnel vis-a-vis the turnstiles A to G, its labelling and the absence o f signposts advertising the wing pens would
draw to it those w ith terrace tickets. It was therefore highly likely that pens 3 and 4 would fill to capacity and
indeed exceed it unless preventive steps were taken. H ad D r Eastwood’s plan for separate turnstile access to
separate sections with separate toilet and refreshm ent facilities been im plem ented, total com puterised control
could have been kept.




                                                         23
                                                   C H A PTER 8

                              LACK OF FIXED CAPACITIES FOR THE PENS

  136. In 1981, when the terrace was divided into three areas, D r Eastwood gave the Club the figure o f 2,200
capacity for the centre pen. H e based this on the Green Guide, m aking such allowances as he thought right. No
doubt the num bers could have been counted in via the turnstiles if only that pen was in use or if such pens as
were in use were filled sequentially, b ut not otherwise.

   137. After the 1985 changes, D r Eastwood did not him self give any figures for the new pens 3 and 4.
Someone on his staffhowever split the figure 2,200 into 1,200 for pen 3 and 1,000 for pen 4. Those figures did
not even take account o f the fact that pen 5 had been carved out o f pen 4 which was bound to have a reducing
effect on capacity. Nevertheless, the figures o f 1,200 and 1,000 were put on a drawing em anating from
Eastwood and Partners and the figures have been notionally regarded since as applicable by the Club and the
police. They are in fact too high.

  138. D r Nicholson, at the Research and Laboratory Services D ivision o f the Health and Safety Executive,
has calculated th at the figures for pens 3 and 4 respectively would be 1,015 and 1,036 if the strength and
spacing o f the crush barriers had com plied with the G reen Guide. But they did not.
Departures from the Green Guide
   139. In pen 3, four out o f five gaps in the lines o f crush barriers do not conform with paragraph 115 o f the
G reen G uide (1986). In pen 4, nine out o f ten do not conform. In particular, the spans taken out o f the barriers
in pen 3 in 198 5 left gaps well in excess o f the m axim um o f 1.4 m etres prescribed. O ne gap was 57% w ider than
the G reen G uide m aximum. Moreover, th at gap was in direct diagonal line from the m outh o f the tunnel to the
barrier which collapsed. D r Eastwood justified these larger gaps by the absence o f gangways. Fans had to be
able to get in and out and standard gaps tended to get blocked up. The effect o f his reasoning was that the
absence o f gangways, recognised as having a safety function, led to the sacrifice o f a second safety feature,
namely gaps o f strictly lim ited width.                                                              ,^

  140. Again, the removal o f barrier 144 was bound, as D r Eastwood conceded, to affect capacity. In fact it
did m ore, as I shall indicate later.

   141. Capacity should also have taken account o f two further departures from the G reen Guide. If, as was
the case, the perim eter gates were not regarded as exits, some 40% o f those in pens 3 and 4 were m ore than 12
m etres from an exit (and there was no gangway) contrary to the aim o f paragraph 96. Four out o f five o f the
crush barriers in pen 3 and six out o f nine in pen 4 were below the height prescribed in paragraph 110. These
were the old barriers which had been repaired and plated where their bases had corroded and fresh concrete
had been applied, raising the level o f the steps. The point is not academ ic since, in the event, m any fans were
bent painfully over barriers under great pressure.

  142. D r Nicholson calculated that when all relevant factors regarding the configuration and the G reen
G uide are taken into account, the m axim um capacity for pen 3 should have been 822 and for pen 4,871.
Safety Certificate
   143. W hatever should have been the m axim um capacities for pens 3 and 4, the fact is th at no figures at all in
respect o f them were put into the Safety Certificate. Despite all the changes in layout o f the fences and barriers,
the two figures, 2,900 for the north-west terrace and 7,200 for the west terrace, have rem ained as the only
m axim a with which the Club has to comply.

  144. Section 2(1) of the Safety o f Sports G rounds Act 197 5 provides (so far as is relevant):

  “A Safety Certificate shall contain such term s and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
  expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in u s e . . . ”
  Section 2(2) provided (so far as is relevant):

  “W ithout prejudice to sub-section (1) above, a Safety C ertificate-
  (a) shall specify the m axim um num ber o f spectators to be adm itted to the stadium ;
  (b) may specify the m axim um num ber to be adm itted to different parts o f it;
  (c) shall include term s and conditions-
  ... (iii) as to the num ber, strength and situation of any crush barriers.”


                                                         24
Section 2(2) was repealed by the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987, section 19, which
gave power to the Secretary o f State to lay down, by order, term s and conditions. No order has yet been
m ade and guidance from the H om e Office has recom m ended local authorities to approach their
function under section 2(1) in accordance with the criteria in the repealed section 2(2). (See Hom e
Office C ircular 71/1987 dated 25 N ovem ber 1987, Annex A, paragraph 6.)

  145. It is clear that when the certificate was first issued the South Yorkshire County Council went
further than simply to fix the m axim um num bers for the whole Stadium . They prescribed figures for
each part o f the ground not merely by the four points o f the compass b u t by specified sections.

   146. Section 8(1) o f the 1975 Act requires the holder o f the certificate before carrying out any
proposals to alter or extend the stadium or any o f its installations while a Safety Certificate is in
operation to give notice o f those proposals to the local authority. T hat obligation is specifically
repeated in Sheffield Wednesday’s certificate at Schedule 2 Paragraph 5(2). The Club com plied with
the requirem ent. Having received notice o f the alterations to the pens and the barriers, the local
authority ought, in my view, to have am ended the Safety Certificate accordingly. They did not do so.

W hy was the Safety Certificate not Amended?
   147. Although D r Eastwood acknowledged th at the various changes to the layout would have had
an effect on capacity, he did not take active steps to see that appropriate am endm ents were made. He
says he m entioned from tim e to tim e that the alterations would have an effect on capacity and th at he
did not realise the Safety Certificate was not regularly updated. However, I find two m em oranda in
early 1987 highly significant. D r Eastwood’sassistant M r Strange was concerned with queries from
the FA as to Hillsborough’s capacity for a semi-final. M r Strange recorded these questions in a
m em orandum :-

  “Has any account been taken for alterations done on Leppings Lane over the last few seasons? Is the 10,200
  or so figure still correct? I said that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better do it now than later.”

  148. M r Strange’s next m emo (a few days later) records as follows:-

  “D r Eastwood says leave the capacity at Leppings Lane end as it is, providing police have gates under West
  stand open so th at people can distribute throughout the terrace evenly.”

Although he says the last nine words do not report him accurately, D r Eastwood accepts the rest of that
message.

   149. In my view the provisions as to capacity in the Safety Certificate ought to have been reviewed and
altered. The unhappy situation is th at the police believed even the overall figure o f 10,100 to be too high as far
back as 1981. T hat was reported to the Club but apparently not to D r Eastwood. Meanwhile, that global figure
had been rendered academ ic by the sub-division o f the terrace which was not reflected in the Safety Certificate
at all. If proper m axim um figures had been inserted in the certificate for each o f the pens, the Club and the
police m ight well have been prom pted to find som e m eans o f lim iting the num bers entering those pens other
than by visual m onitoring. This could have been done by im plem enting one o f D r Eastwood’s plans for totally
separate sections, turnstile to viewing area. It could have been done by insisting on sequential filling o f pens at
all matches; alternatively, by counting fans into each viewing area.

The City Council
   150. T hat the Safety Certificate was not am ended and individual capacities not reviewed cannot be laid
solely at D r Eastwood’s door. H e was, after all, consultant engineer to the Club and responsibility for the
certificate was th at o f the local authority. W hen the South Yorkshire County Council handed over to the
Sheffield City Council, the latter delegated all its powers and duties under the 1975 Act to its General Purposes
Panel. Apparently, therefore, the decision-making body on behalf o f the Council was that Panel, although two
specific functions were delegated to the H ead o f A dm inistration and Legal D epartm ent - the power to issue a
prohibition under section 10 o f the 1975 Act and the power o f entry and search under section 11 o f the Act.

   151. In practice, M r Bownes, the Council’s C hief Licensing Officer in the A dm inistration and Legal
D epartm ent, bore the brun t o f the Council’s duties under the Act.



                                                        25
   152. The Officer Working Party was superseded by a Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory G roup, but
apart from the change o f the nam e the system continued as before. M r Bownes attended the inspections
and meetings o f the Advisory G roup together with the representatives o f the police, the fire service, the
departm ent o f health and consum er services, and the building engineer’s division o f the Council. The
latter was an engineer and ought therefore to have been alive to the same issues as D r Eastwood.

  153. The Advisory G roup seems to have worked in a very inform al manner. A short passage from M r
Bownes’ evidence gives the flavour o f it:-

    “Q     Who was taking the lead in the working party as you understood it?

      A    T hat is a good question, sir. Leads were coming from several different directions really.

      Q    Who chaired it, if anyone?

      A    Nobody as such, sir. It was an inspection rather than a meeting as I understand it.

      Q    Who decided w hat should be inspected?

     A     Effectively the group itself, sir, it seemed to me. There was also some input from the Club
           representative as to, if you like, an element o f direction as to what should be looked at.

      Q    A part from the inspections the working party met, presumably, or did they only m eet on
           inspections?

     A     No, sir, I have referred to three previous meetings.

      Q    Who took the chair when it met?                                                        4

     A     I suppose it could be said that I did, to some extent.

     Q     There is no point in having inspections unless you form conclusions as a result o f that inspection, is
           there?

     A     T hat is correct.

     Q     There m ust presumably have been some meeting following the inspection at which you all sat down
           together and decided what, if anything, should be done.

     A     There was not, to my recollection, no.

      Q    How did you decide w hat should be done, if anything needed to be done?

      A     There were discussions on the site, particularly in relation to barrier 144, which took place at the
            time.

      Q    N othing m ore than th at and no record anywhere o f any decisions th at were made?

      A    No, sir.”

The decision to remove barrier 144 was assented to on behalf o f the City Council by M r Bownes. It was not
referred to the G eneral Purposes Panel. W hether M r Bownes strictly had any power to assent to it is to say the
least very doubtful. But he him self adm its that he was ill-equipped to do so. He knew very little about football
grounds. He had read the file passed on from South Yorkshire County Council and assum ed all had been run
satisfactorily by them .

  154. It was recorded, however, in a report which M r Bownes drafted th at “the conditions (in the Safety
Certificate) give some cause for concern as they appear to be inadequate o r inappropriate in some areas”. The
report to the G eneral Purposes Panel suggested th at new Safety Certificate conditions should be drafted.

   155. The task o f revising the Safety Certificate was begun in June 1986.InJuly 1987, a draft was sent to the
fire service to which they replied in August. In Septem ber 1987, the Panel was inform ed that the redrafting was


                                                        26
“progressing steadily” and should be subm itted to the Panel in October. The final draft was not circulated until
30 M arch 1989,16 days before this disaster.

   156. Meanwhile, the Safety Certificate has rem ained unam ended since 1979. The enlargement o f the Kop
in 1986 increased its capacity to 21,000. Although this was known and agreed by the Council it had not been
the subject o f any change in the certificate which still showed the capacity o f the Kop as 16,8 50. M r Mackrell,
Sheffield W ednesday’s Secretary, raised the question o f am endm ents to the Safety Certificate and in particular
with regard to the Kop in April 1987 with Eastwood and Partners but nothing resulted.

  157. Sheffield U nited Football Club was designated under the 1975 Act on 3 July 1984. A Safety Certificate
was about to be issued by South Yorkshire C ounty Council at the tim e it handed over to the Sheffield City
Council on 1 April 1986. N o certificate has yet been issued to Sheffield U nited.

   158. The explanation given for these delays was pressure o f work. M r Bownes as C hief Licensing Officer
was responsible for 32 other licensing systems when this one was added to his burden. He had a staff o f only
five. I fully accept th at the addition o f further statutory responsibilities to the already heavy workload o f a local
authority with curbs on its expenditure creates problem s. But it is clear that the attention given to this
im portant licensing function was woefully inadequate.

Summary
   159. The Safety Certificate contained no m axim um figures for individual pens. There was therefore no
sanction or provision focussing attention as to the need to lim it entry to the pens by num bers. The layout at
Leppings Lane as it evolved m ade electronic or mechanical control over num bers entering individual pens
im practicable if all pens were to be available. G iven an im portant m atch and a capacity attendance, fans were
likely to crowd into popular sections like pens 3 and 4. Those pens were likely to becom e overfull well before
warning came from the turnstiles that num bers were approaching the terrace m axim um o f 10,100. Control
over num bers and the avoidance o f overcrowding therefore depended entirely on visual m onitoring o f the
crowd.




                                                          27
                                                  CH A PTER 9

                       LACK OF EFFECTIVE MONITORING OF THE TERRACES

  160. M onitoring the spectators on the terraces so as to avoid overcrowding involves observing the num bers
and their distribution in each area, m aking decisions as to when an area is “full”, taking steps to close it off
and moving spectators from one area to another, if necessary. It is a function beset by three problems. 1) Who
should carry it out? 2) W hen is an area “full”? 3) Fear o f hooliganism.

Who should Monitor the Terraces?
   161. Should it be the host club via its stewards? Should it be the police? Should it be both? O r should it be by
arrangem ent, depending upon the ground or section o f the ground in question?

   162. In principle, a football club which invites the public to a m atch on its premises for reward is
responsible for securing safety at th at event. T he Green G uide (1986) provides:

       “ 23. The safety o f the public inside the ground is the responsibility of those who stage the event and
             adm inister the ground in which it is held, ie the “m anagem ent”. T his responsibility applies in
             both norm al and emergency situations...

        195. ...there are five basic duties which stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:

              (a)   controlling or directing m em bers o f the public who are entering or leaving the ground, to
                    help achieve an even flow o f people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal o f spectators on
                    the terraces or viewing slopes;

              (b)   patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies, eg raising alarm s or extinguishing


              (c)   m anning entrances, exits and other strategic points, especially exit doors and gates which
                    are continuously open whilst the ground is in use;

              (d)   assisting police as appropriate or as requested with crowd control; and

              (e)   undertaking specific duties in an emergency.”

The Interim Popplewell Report
   163. There was considerable controversy in the course o f the public inquiry held by M r Justice Popplewell
in 1985 as to the responsibility o f the club and the police. In paragraph 3.6 o f his interim report, M r Justice
Popplewell quoted from a report produced for the M inister o f Housing and Local Governm ent in 1969 as
follows:-

  “The responsibility for controlling crowd behaviour is divided between the police and the club operating the
  ground. The broad line o f division being th at police are responsible for m ovem ent o f spectators in public
  thoroughfares and from public thoroughfares into the ground, while the club is responsible for the control o f
  spectators once they are on the club’s premises . . . ”

M r Justice Popplewell said he did not quarrel with that view and went on to observe that in practice the police
have to take charge and be responsible for controlling crowd behaviour. H e then said (paragraph 3.8):

  “It follows, therefore, that as a m atter o f practice, while the physical safety o f the building and the
  m aintenance and good housekeeping o f the ground m ust always be the responsibility o f the club, the police
  have to take the de facto responsibility o f organising the crowd, with all th at entails, during the game . . . ”

M r Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation o f the ground as a procedure in which only the police
could bear the responsibility o f supervising the organisation o f the crowd.

The Final Popplewell Report
  164. He harked back to this subject in chapter 4 o f his Final Report. There, he came down m ore firmly in
favour o f holding the club responsible for crowd safety. At paragraph 4.13 he said “Because, as a m atter of


                                                         28
practice, police officers have regularly attended in large num bers at football grounds, it has somehow been
assum ed by the clubs that the responsibility for control o f what goes on inside the ground has passed from
them to the police. A police presence is there to assist in the enforcement o f law and order. Those responsible
for organising a private function, however, have the prim ary and continuing obligation and responsibility to
ensure reasonable safety for those who are invited on to their prem ises.” M r Justice Popplewell ended that
section as follows: “It cannot be too strongly em phasised that it is upon the club, o r the occupier o f the ground
who is putting on the function, th at the prim ary and continuing obligation rests.”

    165. There rem ains, however, the question w hether there are some grounds or parts o f grounds where the
club may need to rely upon the police (whom they pay to attend) to control filling o f pens and m onitoring them
for overcrowding. In other words, whilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests upon the club, they may need,
and by agreem ent be entitled, to employ the police to act as their agents in certain circumstances. This very
difficult and grey area as to club and police responsibility will need to be reviewed in greater depth at stage two
o f this Inquiry.

Arrangements at Hillsborough
  166. W hat is clear, however, is th at de facto the police at Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for
control o f the pens at the Leppings Lane end. The evidence o f the senior officers who had been concerned with
policing at Hillsborough over the years was all one way on this point. Only M r Duckenfield, who had not
policed at Hillsborough for some 10 years prior to 15 April, took a different view.

   167. M r Lock is now security officer at Sheffield W ednesday and was formerly a police Superintendent at
Hillsborough m atches occupying M r M urray’s role. He claimed there h ad been a formal although unwritten
agreem ent between the Club and the police in about 1982, whereby the police agreed to steward the Leppings
Lane end o f the ground. Such a formal agreem ent is denied by other senior officers and I do not accept that any
formal agreem ent was reached. Nevertheless, a practice or arrangem ent did develop which was known and
accepted by both Club and police. Its effect was th at throughout the ground the stewards were responsible for
m anning exits and entrances, for controlling entry into the stands, for assisting spectators to their seats in the
stands and for helping to control the exits after the match. They were also responsible at the Kop end on the
terraces for keeping gangways clear and helping to control the crowd which usually consisted o f home
supporters. At the Leppings Lane end, however, there were no gangways on the terraces and the crowd
consisted usually (and always since 1987) o f away supporters. M r Mole and other senior officers accepted that
it would have been unreal and unreasonable to expect stewards to go onto those Leppings Lane terraces. They
would not have been effective there; moreover, they could well have been in some danger from hostile away
supporters. The police accepted, therefore, th at the proper filling o f the pens and m onitoring them for
overcrowding could and would not be carried out by stewards. M any stewards have tended to be either
extremely young or somewhat elderly. They are paid only a m odest sum (£9 at Hillsborough) and they are not
suitable either by physique or by training to cope on a crowded terrace with no gangways.

Case for the South Yorkshire Police
  168. N otw ithstanding the overwhelming evidence from senior police as already m entioned and from the
Club, Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police continued throughout the hearing to contend that the Club and
not the police were responsible for filling and m onitoring the pens and th at this was well known to both parties.
He m aintained th at the police were there essentially to secure and preserve law and order. Q uite apart from the
police evidence to the contrary at this Inquiry, the official stance o f the South Yorkshire Police has not always
been to th at effect.

Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited
   169. In M arch 1986, the South Yorkshire Police A uthority obtained a judgem ent against Sheffield U nited
Football Club for money due for police services provided at Sheffield U nited ’s matches. The defence had been,
inter alia, that the police were not providing “special police services”. They were doing no m ore than
perform ing their norm al police duties o f securing and preserving law and order am ongst a crowd. The police
argum ent was th at they had additional duties. In his judgem ent, Boreham J sum m arised the instructions for
policing as providing for:-

 “(a) the m aintenance o f enforcem ent o f law and order;

  (b) the enforcem ent o f the Club’s ground regulations, many o f which are concerned with law and order;

  (c) the safety and comfort o f the spectators, officials and players.”


                                                        29
He referred to the argum ent o f Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police as follows:-

  “Thirdly, here the police were not discharging their own duty to the public; they were in fact discharging the
  C lub’s duties to the spectators whom the Club invited to the ground. The Club chose to invite large num bers
  to their private premises; it was the Club’s duty to provide for their safety, health and comfort. They could
  have employed a security firm as banks and others have to do to protect their interests; they chose to request
  the police to perform those duties knowing that the police expected paym ent. Fourthly, the police w ithin the
  ground provided services which it was not w ithin the scope o f their public duty to perform . For instance,
  they assisted in crowd m anagem ent and in the enforcement o f such ground regulations as refused entry to
  those who tried to enter w ithout paying or prohibited spectators encroaching on parts o f the ground which
  their entry fee did not entitle them to enter. It may be, subm its M r Bentley, that the m aintenance o f law and
  order was the predom inant aim b u t there were other services perform ed.”

The learned Judge found:-

  “In addition to w hat may be called their law and order role the police were expected and did take p art in
  crowd m anagem ent, ensuring the safety o f spectators, the enforcem ent o f the Club’s regulations and to be on
  hand to assist in the event o f some emergencies such as fire or accidental injury.”

Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End
   170. At League m atches at Hillsborough, the police practice was to decide in advance how m any and which
pens would be used. If a m odest crowd was anticipated only one or two pens m ight be needed. It was better to
confine the fans to lim ited spaces (a) to prevent them running about and (b) to reduce the num ber o f police
required. The practice was then to fill the pens one by one. This involved making a judgem ent as to when a pen
was full. There would then be a police decision to close th at pen and fill another. It was regarded as im practical
and unsafe for police officers Oust like stewards) to go onto the Leppings Lane terraces with away supporters.
This m eant that m onitoring the num bers in any pen had to be done from vantage points outside it. Here, the
police were m uch better placed than the stewards. There was a good view from the control to e and the
television screens there. There were officers on the perim eter track. No stewards were placed there becausc
having both police and stewards interfered with the viewing. There were also police in the west stand who
could look down on the pens. Intelligence from all these sources could give the police a good appreciation o f
the state o f the terraces. W hen it was necessary to shut off access to the pens officers on the concourse could be
inform ed by radio and could take the necessary steps.

“Find Their Own Level”
   171. At Cup semi-finals, a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened from the start and the
policy was “to let the fans find their own level”. This phrase was repeated again and again by police officers at
the Inquiry. W hat it m eant was th at no specific direction was given to fans entering through the turnstiles.
They were free to go wherever they wished on the terraces. If they became uncom fortable or wished for any
other reason to move their position, then theoretically they could move elsewhere. In this way it was hoped that
the fans on the terraces would level themselves out and th at distribution would be achieved w ithout police
intervention. On these occasions, the gates at the top o f the radial fences were locked in the open position. It
was sought to argue, therefore, th at there was freedom o f m ovem ent from one pen to another enabling fans to
“find their level”.

   172. This argum ent was bad both in theory and in practice. In theory, the whole object o f the radial fences
had been to achieve even distribution by directing fans into desired positions. To say then th at they could move
freely from one pen to another would defeat the object and enable fans to go from a less popular to a more
popular area w ithout inhibition. In practice this did not happen because the position and size o f the gates was
such that once a substantial num ber o f spectators were in, the gates were unnoticeable and inaccessible
especially to those towards the front who might have m ost need o f them .

  173. The same argum ent was deployed to suggest that individual m axim um capacities for individual pens
need not be assessed since the presence o f the open radial gates still m eant th at the terrace was one area. In
practice this simply was not so. The photograph at A ppendix 5 taken from the north stand at 2.59 pm shows
very clearly the congestion in pens 3 and 4 contrasted with the sparseness in pen 6. This gives the lie to the
suggestion that the fans could, if uncomfortable, “find their own level”.

  174. The effect o f this policy was that whereas at League m atches the police had to make a positive decision
when to close one pen and open another, at semi-finals, where overcrowding was m uch m ore likely, the police


                                                         30
left it to the fans themselves to “find their own level”. Effectively, they were left to m onitor their own comfort
and safety so as to avoid overcrowding. The police would only intervene when there was some overt sign that an
area was “full”.

W hen is an Area “Full”?
    175. Over the years, spectators on terraces have com e to accept conditions which are often very
uncom fortable and not infrequently downright dangerous. They are subjected to buffeting and squeezing to
get in and o ut o f the terraces. They are packed tightly and exposed to surging and swaying during the m atch.
They put up with these conditions because they are devoted to the game and because there is little they can do
about them . They believe the discom fort will pass and nothing very untoward will happen. Usually th at is the
case and they are reassured by it. M ost clubs have not, until very recently, consulted their supporters as to their
grievances or suggestions. The practice has been to pack them in on the assum ption that if they are prepared to
p u t up with it the conditions m ust be tolerable. Although crowd figures at football grounds have been reduced
in recent years, this has been due principally to the increased proportion o f seating as against standing
accom m odation. Terraces have still been packed.

   176. It is said that m any fans enjoy these features o f terrace viewing. Clearly close proximity, shared
discomfort, weathering sways and surges together and chanting the same songs and slogans en m asse do evoke
good hum our and have produced a spirit or cult o f the terraces which m any enjoy. Equally there are m any who
simply endure these things for the football, for a cheap ticket or indeed for the chance o f getting in a t all. And
before H illsborough m ost fans on the terraces, even if they enjoy the hurly-burly, had not realised the narrow
margin o f safety between an uncom fortable crush and a fatal one.

    177. The Green G uide sought to im prove safety and com fort by laying down criteria for m axim um
capacity, ie defining w hat is “full”. The standard set was 54 persons per 10 square metres in favourable
conditions b u t fewer, down to 27, in less favourable conditions. The tendency may have been to aim off too
little from the higher figure for shortcom ings in the layout. Certainly the figures considered appropriate in
pens 3 and 4 at Hillsborough were too high, as already indicated.

   178. Even taking the highest figure suggested in the Green Guide, the problem rem ained th at those
supposed to be m onitoring pens visually had and have little idea o f w hat 54 persons per 10 square m etres look
like. M r D uckenfield’s opinion was th at when a pen was full to capacity, the spectators would be “shoulder to
shoulder and chest to back”. T hat view may derive from seeing the sort o f density crowds regularly endure
w ithout injury resulting. But it is m uch m ore dense than the Green G uide maximum.

    179. The South Yorkshire Fire Brigade provided the Inquiry with photographs o f people standing in an area
o f 10 square m etres at various densities o f packing. Together w ith my Assessors and others, I took part in a
sim ilar experim ent at the H ealth and Safety Executive’s Sheffield laboratory. We stood in a room o f m easured
area at densities o f 54, 80 and 100 per 10 square metres. It was clear from the photographs and from our
experim ent that the m axim um density set out in the Green G uide left considerably more room than those
m onitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area “full”.

   180. The tendency has been to allow the pens to fill until the fans com plain o r show signs o f discom fort. If
the density at the front appeared less than at the back, the Tannoy would invite the fans to move forward to
make room for more. The evidence before the Inquiry and many anecdotal letters I have received clearly show
there have been frequent occasions when the packing on terraces, not only at Hillsborough, has caused
discom fort and sometimes, for b rief periods, fear. Usually the surge recedes, the sway returns, the pressure
eases and the incident passes unrecorded.

  181. After the crushing at the 1981 semi-final, Hillsborough was not chosen again by the FA until 1987.
There was evidence th at the central pens were uncom fortably overcrowded on that occasion and again at the
1988 Cup semi-final, although entry to the tunnel was blocked off by police shortly before kick-off in 1988
because the pens were deem ed to be “full”.

Fear of Hooliganism
   182. Over the last few years, hooliganism at and associated with football m atches has strongly influenced
the strategy o f the police. In their plans and m anagem ent they have concentrated on averting or containing
threats to public order. This is understandable and indeed com m endable. But it has led to an im balance
between the need to quell a m inority o f troublem akers and the need to secure the safety and com fort o f the
majority. In the police O perational Order, the emphasis was upon prevention o f disorder and in particular
prevention o f access to the field o f play. There was no express requirem ent that officers on the perim eter track


                                                         31
or in the west stand should keep watch for any possible overcrowding on the terraces. Indeed, the view was
expressed in evidence th at packing fans close together on the terraces assisted in controlling the unruly since
the less room they had the less scope there was for misbehaviour.

Summary
   183. Although the police had accepted de facto responsibility for m onitoring the pens, their policy on the
day was to leave fans to “find their own level” and to concentrate their own attention on possible disorder.
W hilst in theory, the police would intervene if a pen became “full”, in practice they perm itted the test of
fullness to be what the fans would tolerate.

  184. By 2.52 pm when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over-full even by this test. Many were
uncom fortable. To allow any m ore into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream was
courting disaster.




                                                       32
                                                   C H A PTER 10

                                    THE BUILD-UP AT THE TURNSTILES

   185. The decision to open gate C, and subsequently gates A and B too, was forced on to the police by the
crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. The crush was so severe that injuries were being
suffered and deaths were feared unless the pressure could be swiftly relieved. Why the crowd pressure had built
to such intensity was one o f the principal issues during the hearing. The suggested causes m ust be considered in
turn.

The Physical Layout
   186. I have already described and illustrated the approach to the turnstiles (Appendices 1 and 2). At
Penistone R oad and at m any other grounds, turnstiles are in a straight line, adequately spaced and with a
sufficient waiting area for queues to form. N ot so at Leppings Lane. The building line, the bridge over the Don
and the bend in the road, left a wedge-shaped approach to perim eter gates set in an arc, and across a short
forecourt, to turnstiles also set in an arc. The pairs o f turnstiles were close together and the forecourt, especially
as divided by the metal fence, provided little space for a waiting crowd.

The Number of Turnstiles
   187. The decision to fill the whole o f the north stand from the Leppings Lane end required the 23 turnstiles
there to adm it 24,256 spectators. O f those, the seven turnstiles (A to G) serving the terraces had to adm it
10,100, ie an average o f ju st under 1,450 through each turnstile. At the Penistone Road end, 29,800 were
served by 60 turnstiles, or ju st under 500 per turnstile.

   188. The G reen G uide recognises (paragraph 47) th at the rate at which spectators can pass through
turnstiles depends on a variety o f local circum stances b u t states “in general based on observation and
experience, it is unlikely th at the m axim um notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 per hour”. Since the
semi-final was an all ticket m atch requiring no cash transactions, the Club considered that a higher rate of
about 1,000 per h our per turnstile could be expected. Even at this higher rate, which assumes the turnstiles
working at m axim um efficiency non-stop, it would have taken nearly 1'A hours to adm it all those with terrace
tickets. At 750 per hour, it would have taken nearly two hours.

  189. The G reen G uide provides (paragraph 44):-

  “Tum stiles should be o f such num bers as to adm it spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are
  kept waiting for adm ission

   190. The O fficer Working Party had discussed in 1985 the need, and D r Eastwood’s various schemes, for
im provem ent o f the turnstile arrangements. The m athem atics are elementary. Both the police and the Club
should have realised that the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the waiting area outside them would be under strain
to adm it all the Liverpool supporters in time. Success depended on the spectators arriving at a steady rate from
an early hour and upon the m axim um turnstile rate being m aintained. In fact neither o f these requirements,
which are inter-linked, was fulfilled. T hat they m ight not be so was in my view foreseeable.

The “Late” arrival of Liverpool Fans
  191. Between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm the crowd waiting for the turnstiles swelled to over 5,000 and became
unmanageable. The case m ade for the police was th at large num bers o f Liverpool supporters arrived late; a
high proportion o f them were drunk and unco-operative; a high proportion had no tickets; all o f them were
hell-bent on getting in on tim e. They say this was unforeseeable and explains why they lost control.

   192. W hether those who arrived between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm were “late” was m uch debated. The ticket
simply requested its holder “to take up [his] position 15 m inutes before kick-off’. T hat m ay have been
intended to persuade those with stand tickets to take th eir seats, b ut it would not be unreasonable for a
standing spectator to arrive at the turnstiles between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm. W hether they were “late” or not,
however, there was certainly a large concentration o f Liverpool fans arriving at about 2.30 pm and after.

Traffic Delays
  193. It is unlikely th at traffic conditions had any significant effect on this. True, there were delays on the
Liverpool traffic routes. There were roadworks on the M 62 which was the recom m ended route. At various
points the carriageway was reduced from four lanes o r three lanes to two, but no serious delays were reported.


                                                          33
O n the M 63 there were longer delays due to a contraflow and at its junction w ith the A560 there w as heavy
congestion due to volume o f traffic. However, the Liverpool routes were clear by 2.20 pm and those witnesses
who com plained o f delays en route had nevertheless m anaged to be in range o f the ground in am ple time.

Fine Weather and Drinking
   194 The likeliest explanations for the sparse Liverpool attendance in the ground belFore2.30 1pmi were four­
fold - the warm weather, drinking, disinclination to enter the ground early and prolong the standing, and a
tendency o f Liverpool supporters to cut it fine.

   195 The police em phasised th at at the 1988 semi-final there was no com parable build-up o f ‘late” arrivals.
They claim therefore, that they had no reason to foresee it in 1989. However, in 1988, although the weather
was fine, it was 11 °F cooler than in 1989. 15 April was the sort o f fine spring day which tem pted fans to sit_or
stand about in the sun with a drink. If you had a ticket it would seem m ore pleasant and sensible to relax m th at
way than to enter the ground early and stand on the terrace for an extra hour. Pre-m atch entertainm ent in t
ground h ad been advertised b u t did not take place. Even if it had, it may not have been an encouragemen
m any fans to enter so early.
Was Drunkenness a Major Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?
   196 O f those who arrived at 2.30 pm or after, very m any had been drinking at public houses or had
brought drink from hom e or an off-licence. I am satisfied on the evidence, however, th at the great m ajority
w °re n H r n n k nor even the worse for drink. The police witnesses varied on this Some described a high
proportion as drunk, as “lager-louts” or even as “anim als” . O thers described a generally norm al crowd with an
unco-operative m inority who had drunk too much. In my view some officers, seeking to rationalise their loss
o f control overestimated the drunken elem ent in the crowd. There certainly was such an element. There were
youngsters influenced by drink and bravado pushing im patiently at the rear o f the crowd thereby exacerbating
the crush. But the m ore convincing police witnesses, including especially Detective Superintendent McKay
and C hief Inspector C reaser as well as a num ber o f responsible civilian witnesses, were in my yg^w rig
t o c r i i S S e m e n . as a minority. Those witnesses attributed the crush to the sheer num bers o f t a s all
anxious to gain entry. There was no criticism o f the crowd by any o f the witnesses in the period up to 2.30 p
or even 2 35 pm. W hat happened then was not a sudden deterioration in the m ood or sobriety o f t o
assembled there No doubt those coming behind would have had more to d n n k and would have included the
unruly minority. But the crisis developed because this very large crowd became packed into a confined
 turnstile area and its very density ham pered its passage through the turnstiles.

    197 Superintendent M arshall and other officers criticised the crowd as unco-operative because police
 exhortations to stop pushing and to ease back were not heeded. How could they be? In that crush m ost people
 had no control over th eir movements at all. Two incidents involving police horses illustrate the Point_ One
 horse was found afterwards to have cigarette bum s on its rum p. Clearly that was the despicable work o f a
 hooligan whether in drink or not. However, there were also eyewitness accounts o f a horse ^ eing ^ ysica1^
 lifted off its feet by the crowd. T hat occurred, as the police accepted, w ithout malice o r intent b u t as an
 involuntary consequence o f crowd pressure which those by the horse’s flanks could not resist any m ore than the
  horse itself.

  Reduced Efficiency of the Turnstiles
     198 The labelling o f the turnstiles in the order A, C, B was confusing. A fan with a B ticket who went by
  m istake to the wrong side o f the m etal fence would have had the greatest difficulty in getting back and round to
  the correct side. The colour coding was inefficient because the coloured wooden panels were affixed to the
  turnstile walls so low th at they were not easily visible through a crowd. The inform ation on the ticket printed by
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was misleading and its layout unhelpful, as M r Mackrell frankly conceded.

    199.      The result was th at in the early stages, police officers were pestered by fans for help as t° w h e re th e y
  should go Later as the crowd becam e m ore dense, fans were presenting th eir tickets at the wrong turnstiles
  There were also Liverpool supporters who had acquired tickets for the Kop end
  Lane They caused delays in the turnstile operation when entry was refused and after a while the police
  instructed the operators to let them through. There was further delay because the crush m ade it difficult for
  fans to get into the turnstile entrances. Once there, the pressure from behind was such as, on occasions, to ja
  them in the doorway or against the paddle o f the turnstile. Finally, there were fans w ithout tickets who sought
   o enter b , oifcring payrfent, by s£ k in g to go oyer o r under the paddle or by
  holder All o f these activities slowed down the turnstile rate which at the worst period was only about 600 per
  hour per turnstile. The waiting crowd therefore expanded and as the m inutes passed frustration grew. Visitors


                                                             34
who had paid for tickets and travelled from afar realised they were m aking little forward progress. Frustration
increased pressure and induced panic at the front. D eterm ination to get into the m atch was intensified by
determ ination to get out o f the crush.

Were Fans Without Tickets a Major Factor in the Build-Up?
  200. It has become a fact o f football life th at fans do tu rn up at all-ticket m atches w ithout tickets. It is not
possible to give an accurate figure o r even a reliable estim ate o f the num ber without tickets on 15 April. Police
estim ates varied from about 200 to about 2,000. There were certainly frequent requests for tickets or “spares”
during the hours before the build-up. M any o f those warned o ff by the police were seen to return to the area.
Some were hanging about on the bridge. Again, however, the police witnesses who m ost im pressed me did not
consider the num ber o f ticketless fans to be inordinately large. This accords with two other sources o f
evidence.

   201. First, there was a wide range o f witnesses who observed inside the ground that the Liverpool end was at
a late stage well below capacity save for pens 3 and 4. The north stand still had many em pty seats and the wing
pens were sparse. The m atch being a sell-out, there were clearly many ticket holders to come and they could
account for the large crowd still outside the turnstiles. H ad the Liverpool accom m odation been full by 2.40
pm, one could have inferred that m ost o r m uch o f the large crowd outside lacked tickets.

  202. Secondly, such figures as are available from the Club’s electronic m onitoring system and from analyses
by the HSE suggest th at no great num ber entered w ithout tickets. They show that the num ber who passed
through turnstiles A to G plus those who entered through gate C roughly equalled the terrace capacity figure o f
10,100 for which tickets had been sold. The Club’s record showed 7,038 passed through turnstiles A to G.
However, the counting m echanism on turnstile G was defective, so the HSE did a study using the video film
and projecting figures from the other turnstiles. This gave an assessm ent o f 7,494, with a m axim um o f 7,644
passing through A to G. Again, using the video, the HSE assessed the num ber who entered the ground whilst
gate C was open at 2,240 with a m axim um o f 2,480. Accordingly, the HSE’s best estim ate o f the total entering
through gate C and turnstiles A to G was 9,734 with a m axim um o f 10,124.1 recognise that these can only be
rough checks because, for example, some with terrace tickets were allowed through turnstiles 1 to 16 and there
would be other sim ilar factors which have not form ed part o f the assessment. Nevertheless, the figures do
suggest th at there was not a very significant body o f ticketless fans in the crowd which built up.

The “Conspiracy” Theory
  203. On beh alf o f South Yorkshire police, the theory was advanced that the “late” arrival o f so many
Liverpool supporters was planned to buck the system. T he suggestion was th at fans w ithout tickets conspired
to arrive late and create such trouble as would force the police to adm it them to the match. The slender
evidence upon which this theory rested came from two sources: overheard conversations in public houses and
the antecedent history o f Liverpool supporters at away m atches.

  204. One witness said he heard three Liverpool supporters saying, in effect, th at they would m anage to get
in w ithout tickets by causing trouble so th at police would open a gate, and that they had done this before.
A nother witness heard two o f a group o f Liverpool supporters say they h ad no tickets, th at they would go to the
ground ju st before kick-off, th at no-one would stop them getting in and that they had not been stopped yet.
Statem ents were put in relating to two other small groups talking in sim ilar terms.

Liverpool Supporters at Away Matches
   205. The South Yorkshire police prepared a dossier o f reports on the behaviour o f Liverpool fans at away
m atches with the obj ect o f showing a pattern o f troublesom e behaviour by large num bers either w ithout tickets
o r with forged tickets. W ithout setting out the whole history, it can be sum m arised as follows.

  206. On three occasions Liverpool fans w ithout tickets were allowed into all-ticket matches upon paym ent.
(At W atford on 13 February 1988, 1,500 were adm itted; at Southam pton on 24 Septem ber 1988, 150 were
adm itted; at Southam pton again on 12 Decem ber 1988, 750 were adm itted.) At Norwich on 1 April 1989,
Liverpool supporters arrived w ithout tickets b u t 1,272 tickets had been returned and fans from both Liverpool
and Norwich were allowed to buy them for cash. A sim ilar situation occurred at W im bledon on 13 May 1989.
There were six other occasions from 1986 to date, including the Cup finals o f 1986 and 1989, when num bers o f
Liverpool supporters turned up w ithout tickets or otherwise behaved badly.

   207. Four points m ust be noted, however. On none o f the occasions when ticketless fans were adm itted for
 paym ent was the m atch a sell-out. T here was therefore room in the ground on each occasion. At a sell-out fans


                                                           35
might not expect to be allowed in, even for paym ent. Secondly, no trouble o f the kind alleged was encountered
at the 1988 semi-final when Liverpool visited Hillsborough. Thirdly, Liverpool visited Hillsborough again in
January 1989 w ithout any trouble. Finally, no forged tickets were in use on 15 April apart from three crude
photocopies.

No Conspiracy
   208. I have already found that there was not an abnorm ally large num ber o f fans w ithout tickets on this
occasion. W ith one or two exceptions, the police witnesses themselves did not subscribe to the “conspiracy”
theory. I am satisfied th at the large concentration at Leppings Lane from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm did n ot arrive
as a result o f any concerted plan. There were, I accept, small groups w ithout tickets who were willing to exploit
any adventitious chance o f getting into the ground. They, together with the m inority who had drunk too much,
certainly aggravated the problem faced by the police. But th at m ain problem was simply one o f large num bers
packed into the small area outside the turnstiles.

The Police Operation at Leppings Lane
  209. The O perational O rder for 15 April followed closely that laid down for the 1988 semi-final. The
emphasis was on m aintaining law and order. Side roads were to be blocked o ff to prevent damage in residential
areas. Pairs o f officers were to patrol streets to prevent “clash o f rival supporters”. Officers were to watch public
houses, shops and superm arkets “where looting could take place”. Outside the turnstiles, officers were to ensure
supporters entering did not have banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol.

  210. Unfortunately, hooligan behaviour has m ade all these steps necessary. But the only w ritten provision
aim ed at effecting controlled entry to the turnstiles was one enjoining officers “to ensure orderly queues are
form ed”. There was no provision for controlling the entry o f the crowd into the turnstile area.

  211. As long ago as 1924, the D epartm ental C om m ittee on Crowds stated:-
  «                                  *                                  '
  “The control o f crowds should begin at a point some considerable distance from the entrance to the ground.
  The advantages o f an arrangem ent o f this kind a r e ... in preventing congestion at the entrances to grounds.”

This was particularly im portant at Leppings Lane where the turnstile area was so small and awkwardly laid
out. If a large crowd was perm itted uncontrolled entry through the perim eter gates, the forming o f queues at the
turnstiles and control by officers, whether on foot o r m ounted, would become im practicable. Those waiting at
the turnstiles would becom e a single growing mass. Once th at happened, it would be difficult to retrieve the
situation.

  212. W hether steps were taken and w hat steps to avoid this happening was left to oral briefing and ad hoc
instructions on the day.

Previous Experience
  213. The senior police officers said it had never happened before so there was no reason to foresee it. In fact,
the only two previous occasions when the Leppings Lane terraces had been used to fill the whole o f the north
and west sides o f the ground were at the two semi-finals, in 1987 and 1988. In 1987, the m atch was on a Sunday,
scheduled for 12 noon, and kick-off was postponed for a quarter o f an hour because o f late arrivals.

Policing in 1988
  214. As to 1988, there was a very large and consistent body o f evidence that, on the day, the police in
Leppings Lane conducted an efficient filtering exercise designed to keep away those w ithout tickets and
control the flow o f fans towards the ground. I do not believe th at so many witnesses w ithout either opportunity
or reason to put their heads together could be m istaken about what they experienced on th at occasion. Yet, the
police m aintain th at no filtering exercise other than on a random basis was conducted in 1988 and th at their
policy and practice then were no different from those o f 1989.

  215. The answer to this conflict must, I think, be th at whilst the policy may have been no different, in
practice the policing in 1988 was more efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a year later. There
was not so large a swell in num bers approaching the ground from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm as in 1989.
Nevertheless, there had been warning signs in 1988. Detective Superintendent M cKay gave the following
evidence:



                                                          36
    “Q Were you aware o f a build-up o f num bers last year towards the latter stages at the turnstiles?

    A   Yes. . There was a huge build-up around 10 m inutes to 3 when many, many Liverpool supporters

         bMt-up - S e ” blequeue                  drinki”8' 'he ° ° CS                 ‘ “ w a"d lhen! Was qui,e a sizeable crash
   Q     Queue or crush?

   A     S T ^ d ,qUf Ue’ bullt' up in the area by the turnstiles which I believe are m arked A to G. T hat crowd
         reached back alm ost to the gates. It never got any bigger than th at and the turnstiles operated relatively
         freely and they dealt with that crowd. Fans were still arriving at about 10 past 3 b u t by then t h e . . .

   Q    This crowd that you have described o f the late arrivals at about 10 to - was it an orderly crowd?


   A    mixed a m o i ^ s f t h m ^ p e o p l e w e r e ' in>a"d                  ^             " " n0' “                                        °b™ “S,y
   Q    O f course, b u t taking it generally?

   A           and large they had taken a lot o f drink on board and they were in such num bers th at excluding
        them from the ground was completely out o f the question.

   Q    Were they standing in an orderly queue or was there some pushing and shoving?

   A    There was a lot o f pushing and shoving. There was an urgency to get into the ground.

   Q    But fortunately it does not appear to have been in nearly such num bers as this year.
  A     It wasn’t.”

Police Intelligence in Advance
. . I 6: APart from th at experience in 1988, the tendency o f Liverpool supporters to arrive late was not
          ^          said.th at thf y Set through the turnstiles at their hom e ground, Anfield, quite quickly and
S h e f f ie H r ilv r iaI ! T ? n Indeed-’ I gCneral reCent tendency to Postpone arrival was noted by the
Sheffield City Council Advisory Group, w ith police present, on 23 M arch 1988. The m inute reads:-

                           questi° n WaS concerned’a Pattem has developed o f people arriving some 15 m inutes
  before the start o f the game hoping to gain adm ission. This trend may be due to the banning o f alcohol at
  sports grounds which could lead to people going elsewhere for refreshm ent prior to the football m atch As
  the available turnstiles operated quite effectively for the m ajority o f the tim e, and that the late arrival
  problem could perhaps only be dealt with by education o f the spectators” (sic).

  217. In so for as Liverpool supporters’ behaviour at away m atches may have been indicative o f what police
              v arl Sh°n p ^.p n l’m ° st o f the facts should have been available at the planning stage. As in other
forces, South Yorkshire Police had a liaison officer whose job was to seek, receive and collate relevant

                                                    A s s o c i a ,i o n o f '“       1P o lic e 0 f r , c e R ’ G u i d e * ° P o l i c i " 8

  r l l ? ™ POI!tan“ hat the officer responsible for policing the m atch determ ines the pre-m atch planning in the
  light o f the intelligence at hand. W hilst that intelligence can be obtained from a variety o f sources, the prim e
  source for football intelligence is the Police N ational Intelligence System which is based on the network o f
  police liaison officers. Summ aries com pleted by police officers o f the hom e club force are forwarded to the
  visitm g club s liaison officer making available intelligence about fans’ behaviour at both hom e and away
  fixtures. T his inform ation will be collated and m ade available for future m atches involving th at club”.


t h e a w a y c l u l T w h k h S r o t S ™ 0ra"dl,m                                   ^           ^

  “ It is the responsibility o f the away club to advise the hom e club o f the recent behaviour o f their supporters
 A s s ^ a t ^ n o r not” reSPeCtlVe     hether the behaviour has resulted in disciplinary action by the Football

 219.    It does not seem that inform ation o f this kind was passed to the Sheffield Wednesday Club or played


                                                               37
any part in the South Yorkshire Police plans. Had the latter been inform ed o f the history contained in the
dossier and sum m arised above it may well have influenced police strategy in Leppings Lane.

  220. There is presently a proposal that a national com puter-based police football intelligence system should
be set up to make the necessary inform ation readily available.

Police Intelligence on the Day
   221. The unfilled space in the Liverpool areas inside the ground, the figures for entry available from the
C lub’s com puter and observations on the video screen should have enabled those in the control room to
m onitor the num bers arriving and still to arrive at Leppings Lane. R adio contact with mobile (Tango) patrols
detailed to m onitor licensed premises in the district could have indicated the numbers still to come. But at 2.30
pm when M r M urray told M r Duckenfield they would “get them all in by 3 o’clock” he seems not to have
appreciated that in addition to those visible at the turnstiles there were many more still to come. Certainly, M r
M arshall outside the turnstiles was not told and could not otherwise have known that there were still many
Liverpool ticket holders to arrive.

Mr Marshall and Mr Greenwood
  222. The division o f com m and between these two officers did not help. M r M arshall was in charge o f the
serials outside the perim eter gates in the Leppings Lane area and in the roads beyond. In practice he operated
inside and just outside the turnstile area. M r Greenwood’s area as G round Com m ander extended from the
pitch to the perim eter gates. He in fact stationed him self near the players’ tunnel. He was wholly unaware o f the
growing problems at the turnstiles and was in no position to exercise control over his officers who were under
pressure there. No-one in the control room thought to tell him.

Control Lost
  223. In the result, the large concentration o f arrivals from 2.30 pm to 2.40 pm pressed unrestrained into
the turnstile area through the perim eter gates which were fully open. When th at area was full, laterarrivals
swelled the crowd out to the forecourt and even into the road. As already recounted, the foot officers at the
turnstiles became trapped and endangered and retired through the turnstiles. The m ounted officers could not
operate am idst such a dense crowd in a confined space. They came out o f the turnstile area. There were then
the belated attem pts to close the perim eter gates and prevent m ore fans joining the m ass until it had a chance to
dim inish through the turnstiles; still later the attem pt to put a cordon o f horses across the entrance.

  224. Despite knowledge o f the difficult layout, the very large num ber o f fans to be got through so few
turnstiles and the tendency o f fans to arrive in the last h alf hour, no contingency plans were m ade to avoid a
crush such as occurred. Even on the day, the need to close Leppings Lane to traffic before 2.30 pm and the
other available intelligence already sum m arised, should have prom pted those in com m and to take precautions
against such a crush. If some o f the perim eter gates had been closed and cordons o f m ounted and foot officers
had been placed a little distance from those gates, the flow o f fans into the turnstile area could have been
controlled before th at area becam e engulfed. It was the crush itself which produced the frustration and the
panic and brought out the worst in those who had drunk too much. Earlier control o f entry would have
prevented the crush and m aintained the good m ood which had prevailed until 2.30 pm.

  225. It should moreover have been obvious by 2.40 pm, if not earlier, that a large part o f the crowd could
not be adm itted until well after 3 pm. H ad a decision to postpone kick-off been m ade and announced m uch o f
the frustration and with it the im petus crushing the crowd would have been reduced. A com bination o f
controlled filtering and a postponed kick-off would probably have obviated the need to open the gates.

Postponement of Kick-off
   226. At various stages in his evidence, M r Duckenfield gave three accounts o f why he thought it too late to
postpone kick-off. Once it was that one o f the team s had already come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group
o f photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the team s were coming out. Finally, he did not
know why he thought the team s were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until 2.54 pm, two
m inutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked for a postponem ent o f kick-off before
gate C was opened. It should not, however, have needed a police Constable in the thick o f the crowd (and there
were others o f like m ind) to think o f postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the control
room.

  227. The truth was th at M r Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed with M r Murray.
Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some m ajor cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the


                                                         38
motorway or fog. I accept th at the thinking behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is
postponed whenever a proportion o f fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off tim es would become meaningless. But, a com m ander m ust deal with the problem o f the day. Faced
with a situation which was becom ing dangerous, crowd safety should have been his param ount consideration.
Kick-off should have been delayed.

Summary
   228.     The layout o f the turnstiles and the num ber they were required to serve left no margin o f safety against
an uneven flow o f fans. Because police strategy in advance and on the day d id not cater for it, the arrival o f a
large num ber o f supporters between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm created an unmanageable crush. The presence o f
a substantial m inority o f fans who had drunk too much aggravated th at problem. Having lost control and
rejected the option o f postponing kick-off, the police were faced with a serious danger o f deaths or injuries.
They were left therefore with no alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall was right at that
stage to ask for it and M r Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects o f so dram atic a step required
other action.




                                                        39
                                                  C H A PTER 11

                                T H E BLUNDER O N O PE N IN G T H E GATES

  229. The decision to order the opening o f the gates was not accom panied or followed by any other order to
deal with the consequences. When gate C was opened, a steady stream o f about 2,000 fans poured through it
over some five m inutes. Clearly they were going to go into the ground somewhere and unless they were diverted
their likeliest route was through the tunnel for reasons already given. No warning was issued from the control
room that the gate was to be opened. Serials on the concourse were not alerted. N either the Club control room
nor the C hief Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. N ot even M r Greenwood, the G round
Com mander, was inform ed. From 2.47 pm when M r M arshall m ade his first request until 2.52 pm when M r
Duckenfield acceded to it, there were five m inutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx
was to be absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, M r Duckenfield began by saying that no officer m ade any
wrong decision b u t he later conceded he had erred in this regard. He said he did not consider where the people
would go when the gate opened. Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screen, no
order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. M r Duckenfield said it did not cross his m ind to detail
officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those officers could not have known from their position how
full pens 3 and 4 were. T hat was a m atter for the control room to m onitor from its own observations and using
intelligence from around the ground.

  230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed off whether gate C was to
be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988. All th at was necessary was
for a few officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not figure in the
debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the planning for 1989.

  231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where there was a view o f the
pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles th at the tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been given t a th a t effect
when gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to the em pty areas o f the wings and this# disaster
could still have been avoided. Failure to give th at order was a blunder o f the first m agnitude.

  232. Significantly, when perm ission was given to open gate A, M r Duckenfield did order serials to go to that
part o f the concourse to m onitor the influx towards the north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans
went to the north stand w ithout tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no perim eter fences at the
north side, they m ight invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with avoiding pitch invasion
as against safety and the risks o f overcrowding. Because those entering through gate C could not get onto the
pitch, it was n ot thought necessary to alert officers to m onitor them. The possibility o f overcrowding simply
was not considered.




                                                          40
                                                    CH A PTER 12

                                            THE BARRIERS IN PEN 3
Barrier 144
   233. The removal o f barrier 144 in 1986 should have reduced the notional capacity o f pen 3 as already
m entioned. But it did more. In the absence o f barrier 144, the influx o f fans after 2.52 pm m et no retarding
structure as it came into pen 3. The pressure created was free to push fans straight down by the radial fence to
the lowest line o f barriers. The pressure diagonally from the tunnel m outh down to barrier num ber 124a which
collapsed was unbroken by any intervening barrier. 124a was also vulnerable to pressure straight down the pen
through the gap in the barrier above it created in 1985.

  234. Inspector Bullas, positioned in the west stand, described w hat he saw looking down on the pens
around 3 pm.

      I saw from the direction o f the tunnel a kind o f m ovem ent down the terracing... the type o f thing that you
  see on the nature program m es, the molten lead flowing down the side o f the m ountainside, the m olten lav a...
  a “river o f people” ... going directly towards the pitch b u t there again spreading... out.”

   235. D r Eastwood conceded in evidence that the removal o f barrier 144 was likely to have contributed to
the collapse o f 124a. Later, he sought to resile from that answer, b u t I think his earlier adm ission was correct. It
was argued th at if barrier 144 had rem ained, the influx from gate C would have built up further back and the
tragedy might have occurred in the tunnel or m ight have broken barrier 144 itself. This is speculative and I
think unlikely. W hat rem ained o f barrier 144 in pen 4 did not cause a build-up; nor did it collapse. But its
rem aining in position m ay well have accounted for no b arrier further down pen 4 collapsing and for the lesser
carnage in th at pen.

When did Barrier 124a Fail?
  236. Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police sought to argue that this barrier collapsed or may have
collapsed at about 2.47 pm . His purpose was to suggest th at the opening o f gate C was not causally linked with
the crushing and fatalities resulting from th at collapse. I have already found that whilst the evidence does not
perm it the tim e o f collapse to be fixed with certainty, it was after 2.52 pm. I now give my reasons:

  (a) I have several tim es watched the BBC video tape on which Counsel relied. I do not find the incident he
      identifies at 2.47 pm suggestive o f a collapse at th at time;

  (b) the evidence o f fans who were near or at the barrier was overwhelmingly to the effect th at the collapse
      occurred at or after 3 pm;

  (c) the biggest group o f witnesses was that which related the collapse to the surge following Beardsley’s
      “near-miss” at the Kop end at 3.04 pm;

  (d) the appearance on video and photographs o f fans in the area o f barrier 124a after the incident at 2.47 pm
      and before the final crush is not consistent with it having collapsed so early;

  (e) it is highly unlikely that if so catastrophic an event had occurred as early as 2.47 pm , the police on the
      track and elsewhere would have taken until nearly 3 o’clock to realise som ething was seriously wrong.
      Indeed, if Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police were correct in his tim ing of the collapse, the failure of
      the police to respond for so long would expose them to even graver criticism than th at m ade in this
      Report.

Dr Eastwood’s Testing of the Barriers
  237. Two sections o f barrier 124a in pen 3 collapsed as a result o f the overcrowding. T hat collapse caused a
num ber o f deaths. D r Eastwood and his staff had undertaken the periodical testing o f crush barriers required
by the Green G uide and by the Safety Certificate. B arrier 124a had been tested in July 1988 and passed.

  238. The test had been carried out in accordance with D r Eastwood’s interpretation o f Annex C to the
Green Guide. T h at requires an evenly distributed force o f 6.0kN /m etre width to be applied for 3 five m inute



                                                          41
periods, the interval between applications to be as short as possible. A record has to be kept o f the am ount o f
deform ation during each loading and o f the percentage o f recovery. If the recovery is less than 50% after the
third application o f force, the barrier has failed the test. If recovery is between 50% and 75%, there m ust be a
re-test. The question is: 50% or 75% o f what? Is the recovery to be in relation to the position o f the barrier
before the first application o f force or before the third? If the former, a span o f 124a recorded 53% at the 1988
test and should have been re-tested. If the latter, it recorded 100% and passed. U nfortunately the Green G uide
is unclear as to the correct interpretation. D r Eastwood took the latter view and so passed the barrier. He
justified his interpretation in evidence. He said failure to recover to the original position could be due to a
“shake-down” effect related to some giving in the ashes under the concrete or to some other extraneous factor
rather than to any defect in the m aterial o f the barrier itself.

  239. I think, after consulting Professor M aunder, th at safety ought to have dictated recovery should be by
reference to the position o f the b arrier before the first application o f force. I accept, however, th at the Green
G uide is am biguous and D r Eastwood’s interpretation is tenable. It has some support from the British
Standards tests on steel structures. Clearly, however, for the future, the Green G uide should be clarified on this
point.

Corrosion
  240. Inspection o f barrier 124a, and indeed other barriers at Hillsborough, by the HSE showed
considerable corrosion o f the metal at vulnerable points where water could accumulate. D r Eastwood agreed
that if a significant degree o f corrosion was observed on visual inspection, a barrier should be condem ned.

  241. The G reen G uide does not specifically refer to corrosion. Paragraph 39 provides, inter alia:

  “Crush barriers and balustrades should be exam ined for deform ation or any other overt signs o f weakness”.

Paragraph 6 o f Annex C provides:

  “If during any test, even though the b a rrie r... satisfies the above loading requirem ents, doubt should $M e
  for any reason (including such m atters as cracking o f the terracing or distortion o f connections) as to the
  safety o f the b a rrie r... a detailed investigation should be carried out. Unless the results o f this investigation
  remove the doubt as to safety o f the b a rrie r... (it) should be deem ed to have failed the test” .

  242. Since corrosion is a likely cause o f deterioration, a revision o f the Green G uide should m ake specific
reference to it.

Causation
  243. Tests done by the HSE suggest that although barrier 124a passed the loading test in 1988 and probably
would have been able to sustain a force which did not exceed the test load, it was unable to resist the load
im posed upon it by reason o f the num bers in pen 3, the excessive gap in the barrier higher up the pen and the
absence o f b arrier 144. Corrosion probably played a part, b u t the effective cause o f the collapse was the
excessive and unanticipated pressure to which the barrier was exposed.




                                                          42
                                                  C H A PTER 13

                                    THE CRUSHING NOT RECOGNISED

Observation from Control Room
   244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control room could be expected
to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct view o f them from an elevated position through their
window. Although they had no field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by
then working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly excessive air traffic
on channel 25, attem pts could have been m ade to alert officers on the perim eter track to watch for
overcrowding and report their observations. In the event, pens 3 and 4 became m ore and m ore crowded, surges
took place, fans were showing and signalling distress. N one o f this was seen or recognised in the control room.

Officers on the Track
  245. The 20 officers detailed to the perim eter track were distributed round the pitch so that some five
officers were at the west end. T heir w ritten instructions m ade no reference to the avoidance or detection of
overcrowding. The same applied to the officers in the west stand. M r Greenwood adm itted th at his oral
briefings also contained no m ention o f m onitoring the pens for overcrowding.

   246. The Operational O rder for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone “access to the track from the
terraces w ithout the consent o f a senior officer (except to receive medical attention)”. At the end o f the 1988
semi-final, there was a m inor pitch invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was em phasised in the 1989
Operational O rder by being put into capital letters. The com bination o f no instructions as to overcrowding and
a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to m ake police recognition o f crushing slow and their
response reluctant. Small w onder th at the growing pressure and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm
went unheeded or certainly unrem edied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem , the rule required
consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

  247. “Senior officer” m eant an officer o f Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in charge o f the 20 officers
on the track was M r Darling. He stationed him self by the players’ tunnel, the m ost central position for
supervising his men. In evidence he said:

  “I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans were in danger. I’d then
  inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed to the back o f the stand.”

  T hat underlines the inhibition against opening perim eter gates. So did the evidence o f one Constable who
said it had been so drum m ed into officers not to open the gates that when he saw distress in pen 4, he “debated”
with him self before opening the gate, thinking: “If I’m wrong, I’m going to get a right bollocking for this.”
Naturally, one would hope th at com m on sense and hum anity would make some officers cut through the rules
and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

   248. This is w hat happened, b u t n ot until officers recognised the distress and even then not immediately.
Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again before they were finally opened and at first those
seeking to climb out over the fence were pushed back. This reaction o f the police did not go on for as long as
some witnesses believed. They probably m isinterpreted the hand movements from M r Greenwood and others
aim ed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the pressure as attem pts to stop those climbing out at the
front.

  249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the problem and the inhibition
against tackling it caused vital tim e to be lost.




                                                       43
                                                   CH A PTER 15

                               THE PERIMETER GATES WERE TOO SMALL

  258. The perim eter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were intended to afford access by the
police to cope with any local disorder or with an emergency. The kind o f emergency contem plated was not
massive crushing but, for example, the collapse or illness o f an individual. Emergency evacuation o f the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was m inim al since the terraces, west
stand and tunnel were o f concrete construction, the fire brigade were the principal arbiters o f evacuation
procedure. They aim ed to be able to em pty the pens in six m inutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the
tunnel. If for any reason that option becam e im practicable, eg due to a bom b threat, then the alternative route
would be along the back o f the terraces, through the gates in the radial fences and round the sides o f the west
stand. The fire brigade were satisfied that each o f these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less
than six m inutes, w ithout relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be available, b u t their use
was excluded from the calculation o f evacuation time.

  259. The need to provide for speedy and large scale evacuation from the front o f the pens to the pitch was
not anticipated. T he Green G uide (1986) provides as follows:

  “209. Access to the pitch m ust be m ade as difficult as possible in norm al circumstances while at the same
  tim e ensuring th at the police have effective access to the terraces for the purpose o f crowd control and
  enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the event o f serious em ergency. . .

  214. . . . at some m ajor soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd m ovem ent forms a necessary p art o f the
  safety measures, it may be necessary to have a fence which prevents access to the pitch in norm al
  circum stances . . . b ut allows for access in emergency.

  215. For m ost m ajor stadia, w hether used for association football or other sports, the pitch perim eter fence
  will be required either to prevent access to the pitch as m entioned above, o r at least to discourage attem pts
  by spectators to enter the playing area. G ates or other access points (m inim um w idth 1.1 metres) should
  nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency . . . Provision o f such gates or access points is particularly
  im portant to allow full access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a place o f safety in
  an emergency.         Such gates o r access points should be properly stewarded and                          clearly
  m arked so th at im m ediate access to the playing area or perim eter track can be ensured”.

  260. G ate 3 was .82 metres in w idth; gate 4 was .79 metres in width. T here were therefore clear departures
from the G reen G uide standard.

  261. The Safety Certificate provided (by Schedule 2 Paragraph 24) as follows:

  The (club) shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified C hartered Engi neer. . . at
  least once each period o f 12 m onths . . . a n d . . . shall as soon as possible after each inspection supply to
  the . . . Council a Certificate by the said C hartered Engineer as to the current compliance or non-compliance
  with . . . the appropriate provisions and recom m endations o f the (Green) G uide o f all structural parts o f the
  Stadium . . .

  262. It was argued that there was no breach o f the Safety Certificate since the G reen G uide specifically
provides for flexibility. However, in my view the Safety Certificate cannot and certainly should not be
interpreted so liberally as in effect to leave such basic requirem ents as the size o f exit gates to the total
discretion o f the club and its advisers. One o f the m atters for consideration at stage two o f this inquiry will be
whether, and in what respects, the G reen G uide needs to be clarified and toughened.

   263. D r Eastwood explained the small w idth o f the gates by reference to the dilem m a facing the police. They
wanted a gate sufficient for its intended purpose ie police access and small scale emergencies. O n the other
hand, they did not want a flood gate o f such size as to endanger the prim e principle o f preventing pitch
invasions. In the light o f Hillsborough, this is perhaps the m ost poignant example o f the difficulty o f achieving
a balance between stopping hooliganism and ensuring crowd safety.

  264. Even if the width o f gates 3 and 4 h ad com plied with the present G reen G uide standard, they would
have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the
G reen G uide says nothing about the num ber o f gates required for a pen o f given size. W hilst the Club,


                                                          45
                                                    CH A PTER 14

                                       THE RESPONSE OF THE POLICE

The Officers in Command
   250. Even when realisation o f the problem came to officers on the track, it was some m inutes before it
reached the control room. W hen spectators first appeared on the track, the im m ediate assum ption in the
control room was th at a pitch invasion was threatened. This was unlikely at the beginning o f a m atch. It
becam e still less likely when those on the track m ade no move towards the pitch. M r M otson, the BBC
com m entator, recognised and said, well before the m atch was stopped, that the trouble seemed to be
overcrowding and not m isbehaviour. Still, the assum ption to the contrary persisted in the control room . U ntil
M r M urray radioed for a fleet o f am bulances, about 3.06 pm , M r Duckenfield continued to treat the incident
as a threat to the pitch and to public order. The message calling up all available officers m entioned a pitch
invasion. O peration Support was initiated and dog handlers were requested.
   251. U ntil C hief Superintendent N esbit arrived, there was no effective leadership either from control o r on
the pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. N o orders were given for officers to enter the tunnel and relieve
pressure. Some officers did this on their own initiative. A part from the Tannoy request to clear the pitch, no
attem pt was m ade to clear and m ark o ff a casualty area where first-aid could be given w ithout hindrance by
fans and photographers m illing about between the bodies. There was no co-ordination o f the early provision o f
first-aid or o f stretcher parties or o f the rescue effort through gates 3 and 4. N o request for help was broadcast to
doctors and nurses in the crowd until about 3.29 pm when it was too late. Probably, there was little th at could
have been achieved in m ost cases however soon doctors had been sum m oned, but there were m arginal cases
where earlier attention m ight have m ade a difference.
   252. The plight o f those behind the fencing and the existence o f injuries were known to officers at the scene
from 3 pm. But the M ajor D isaster Plan was not started until 3.06 pm at earliest when the am bulance service
was called. N o request for cutting gear or for the fire brigade was m ade until 3.13 p.m. Again, it is unlikely that
these services could have saved lives if they had been called promptly, b u t it is possible.
Police on the Pitch                                                                                       '®
    253. Despite the initial lack o f leadership, many officers did all they hum anly could to rescue and revive the
victim s. M any supporters who gave evidence paid tribute to these efforts. It is also fair to say th at the num ber
o f officers who could at first be usefully involved at the two open gates was necessarily limited.
   254. C hief Superintendent N esbit’s action in deploying a line o f officers across the m iddle o f the pitch has
already been m entioned. I can well understand the resentm ent it caused. However, the police assertion th at a
rush by some fans towards the Kop end raised fears o f conflict are well borne out by the video tape. In my
judgem ent, C hief Superintendent N esbit was well justified in using some o f the many officers called up
pursuant to O peration Support to prevent possible violence. To have had open fighting in a ground where
some 90 spectators already lay dead would have been an unthinkable and obscene development.
Fans on the Pitch
   255. M any fans who escaped onto the pitch alive were in a state o f collapse or close to it. M ost o f those who
retained their strength strove m agnificently to assist the victim s. They helped pull them clear; they helped with
first-aid; they helped carry the im provised stretchers.
  256. There were fans, however, who were distraught, angry, drunk, or all three. T heir conduct in abusing,
assaulting and spitting at the police was disgraceful, the m ore so since earlier police failures had little to do
with those officers now doing their best for the injured. In addition, there were abuse and assaults on
am bulance m en and firem en in the course o f their rescue work. This was probably because th eir sim ilar
uniform s caused them to be m istaken for police. However, although the abuse was widespread, the num ber o f
assaults and spittings was on the evidence comparatively small. In deploring them , one m ust recognise the
uniquely horrifying experience which those responsible had ju st suffered and were still suffering.
False Reports
   257. Before this Inquiry began, there were stories reported in the press, and said to have em anated from
police officers present at the m atch, o f “mass drunkenness”. It was said that drunken fans urinated on the
police while they were pulling the dead and injured out, th at others had even urinated on the bodies o f the dead
and stolen their belongings. N ot a single witness was called before the Inquiry to support any o f those
allegations although every opportunity was afforded for any o f the represented parties to have any witness
called whom they wished. As soon as the allegations I have m entioned were m ade in the press, M r Peter
Wright, C hief Constable o f South Yorkshire, made a dignified statem ent dissociating him self from such grave
and em otive calumnies. Those who m ade them , and those who dissem inated them , would have done better to
hold their peace.

                                                          44
D r Eastwood, the Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to conform
to the G uide, the real failure was com m on to all those who have been responsible for considering safety on the
terraces. T he anxiety to protect the sanctity o f the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk
o f a crush due to overcrowding. C ertain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4 were
wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.
                                    PART III - CONCLUSIONS
                                                CHAPTER 16

                                      BRIEF SUMMARY OF CAUSES

  265. The im m ediate cause o f the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the failure, when gate C was
opened, to cut o ff access to the central pens which were already overfull.

  266. They were already overfull because no safe m axim um capacities had been laid down, no attem pt was
m ade to control entry to individual pens num erically and there was no effective visual m onitoring o f crowd
density.

   267. W hen the influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout o f the barriers there afforded less protection
than it should and a barrier collapsed. Again, the lack o f vigilant m onitoring caused a sluggish reaction and
response when the crush occurred. The small size and num ber o f gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So,
in the initial stages, did lack o f leadership.

  268. The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. T hat occurred because, as
both Club and police should have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with the large num bers
dem anded o f it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The Operational O rder and police tactics on
the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival o f large num bers should th at occur in a short
period. T hat it m ight so occur was foreseeable and it did. The presence o f an unruly m inority who had drunk
too much aggravated the problem . So did the Club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.




                                                       47
                                                  C H A PTER 17

                                       T H E FA’s C H O IC E O F G R OUND

    269. The FA were strongly criticised by the Football Supporters’ Association and others for having
im posed the Hillsborough venue on Liverpool for a second year running. The Liverpool supporters had to
travel m uch further to Sheffield than their N ottingham rivals. The police required th at if the m atch was to be at
Hillsborough at all, Liverpool would have to have the west and north side accom m odation. The disadvantages
o f that and the disparate num bers o f home supporters o f the two clubs have already been set out. Liverpool had
had to knuckle under to the arrangem ent in 1988. They resented having it im posed in 1989. To hold the match
at Old Trafford would have been a perfectly good and acceptable alternative. Indeed, the FA nom inated Old
Trafford as the venue for the replay should there be a draw at Hillsborough.

   270. M r Kelly, the FA’s C hief Executive, sought to give reasons for preferring Hillsborough, b ut the only one
which seemed to have any validity was that the 1988 m atch had been considered a successfully m anaged event.
He adm itted that a telephone call from the C hief Executive o f the Liverpool Club protesting and putting
Liverpool’s case had not been m entioned to the FA com m ittee which finally decided the venue. M r Kelly
frankly conceded that “there was an element o f unfairness” to Liverpool in choosing Hillsborough for a second
tim e. I think the decision was ill-considered. N o doubt in future the FA will be m ore sensitive and responsive
to reasonable representations.

  271. However, it was not suggested that the choice o f venue was causative o f this disaster. The only basis on
which th at could be said would be that, because o f its layout, the Leppings Lane end was incapable o f being
successfully policed for this semi-final. I do not believe th at to be so.
                                                 C H A PTER 18

                                                    POLICE

Choice of Ends by the Police
   272. There was m uch bitterness am ongst Liverpool supporters that they had to m ake do again for the
second year with the Leppings Lane end. But, cogent as their complaints were, they am ounted to reasons for
choosing a different ground altogether. G iven Hillsborough as the venue, I think the police were right to
allocate the sections o f the ground as they did. The direction o f arrival and the need for segregation m ade it
sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangements would have made for confusion. As with choice o f venue, I do
not consider choice o f ends was causative o f the disaster. H ad it been reversed, the disaster could well have
occurred in a sim ilar m anner but to N ottingham supporters.

Police Planning
  273. T he O perational O rder for 1989 left much unsaid. Apart from the lack o f any provision for late or
congested arrivals, or any provision for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces, there was a num ber o f
other omissions. For example, there was no specific deploym ent o f officers to m an the perim eter gates. The
O rder did not detail the duties o f the m ounted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, who included
Liverpool officers to assist in marshalling their own fans. The duties o f Superintendents (especially M r
Greenwood and M r Marshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
provision requiring m obile (Tango) patrols to assist the emergency services was om itted from the text.

  274. The 1988 O rder was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the num ber o f officers deployed in
shopping areas and to emphasise in capital letters the embargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
with the 1988 event led to complacency. T hat some thought the pens overfull in 1988 and th at the tunnel was
closed o ff on th at occasion did not figure in or influence the plan for 1989.

  275. M r Duckenfield was prom oted and pu t in charge o f F Division only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress under M r Mole who had been in com m and both in 1987 and in 1988. It
might have been wiser to have left M r Mole in charge o f this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
understandable th at M r Duckenfield should have been expected to take com m and o f events in his Division
from the date o f his prom otion. In view o f his lack o f experience at Hillsborough and o f a semi-final match,
however, it was im perative that he be fully briefed and th at he should also b rief himself.

   276. H e was not inform ed o f the crushing incident in 1981 nor did he m ake inquiries which would have
revealed it. He did not know the arrangem ent as between Club and police for m onitoring the Leppings Lane
terraces. He did not visit and tour the ground before approving the Operational Order. Although he attended a
match on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present and he left control o f the game to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
  277. One o f the regrettable features o f the football scene as it has developed is the enorm ous expenditure o f
money, tim e and effort in employing large num bers o f police all over the country to guard against the sort o f
disorder and m isbehaviour which have become endemic. Police m anagem ent o f a game o f football has become
a m ilitary operation. The problems faced and the responses received m ust be disheartening and m ay have
tended to harden police attitudes to supporters in general.

  278. It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
public. They have handled crowd problem s sensitively and successfully at a large num ber o f football games
including m ajor matches, during strikes in the coal industry and the steel industry, and in other contexts.
Unfortunately, th eir policing on 15 April broke down in the ways already described and, although there were
other causes, the m ain reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control.

   279. In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I m ust report that for the most
part the quality o f their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank. There were m any young Constables
who as witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. O n the day, they and m any others strove heroically in ghastly
circumstances aggravated by hostility to rescue and succour victims. They inspired confidence and hope.

  280. By contrast, w ith some notable exceptions, the senior officers in com m and were defensive and evasive
witnesses. T heir feelings o f grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine. N o doubt those feelings were
intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their m anagement. But, neither their
handling o f problem s on the day nor their account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be
expected o f their rank.


                                                        49
   281. M r Duckenfield leant heavily on M r M urray’s experience. Between them they misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received M r M arshall’s request to open the gate. They did not,
for example, check the turnstile figures available from Club control or check with Tango units as to the
num bers still to come. They did not alert M r Greenwood to the situation at the fringe o f his area o f com m and.
They gave no instructions as to the m anagem ent o f the crowd at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined to
postpone kick-off.

  282. W hen M r M arshall’s request came, M r Duckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and give orders
seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the opening o f the gates, he failed to give necessary
consequential orders o r to exert any control when the disaster occurred. He m isinterpreted the emergence o f
fans from pens 3 and 4. W hen he was unsure o f the problem, he sent others down to “assess the situation”
rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no inform ation to the crowd.

   283. M ost surprisingly, he gave M r Kelly and others to think that there had been an inrush due to Liverpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was not only untruthful. It set off a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence and distress. It revived against football fans, and especially those from
Liverpool, accusations o f hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationwide but from Europe too. I can
only assume th at M r Duckenfield’s lack o f candour on this occasion was out o f character. He said his reason for
not telling the truth was th at if the crowd becam e aware o f it there might be a very hostile reaction and this
might im pede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell M r Kelly the truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant C hief Constable Jackson was at hand, M r Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to him
until m uch later.

  284. The likeliest explanation o f M r Duckenfield’s conduct is that he simply could not face the enorm ity of
the decision to open the gates and all that flowed therefrom. T hat would explain what he said to M r Kelly, what
he did not say to M r Jackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control o f the
disaster situation. He froze.

The Police Case at the Inquiry
  285. It is a m atter o f regret th at at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in w hat occurred. M r Duckenfield, under pressure o f
cross-exam ination, apologised for blam ing the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But, that apart, the police
case was to blam e the fans for being late and drunk, and to blam e the Club for failing to m onitor the pens. It was
argued th at the fatal crush was not caused by the influx through gate C bu t was due to barrier 124a being
defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would
have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.




                                                         50
                                                 C H A PTER 19

                        THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE

   286. The perform ance by the City Council o f its duties in regard to the Safety Certificate was inefficient and
dilatory. The failure to revise or am end the certificate over the period o f three years preceding this disaster,
despite im portant changes in the layout o f the ground, was a serious breach o f duty. There were, as a result, no
fixed capacities for the pens. The certificate took no account o f the 1981 and 1985 alterations to the ground.

  287. A num ber o f breaches o f Green Guide standards were perm itted and persisted eg the spacing o f the
crush barriers, the w idth o f perim eter gates and the gradient in the tunnel (1 in 6 as against the Green Guide
m axim um o f 1 in 10).

  288. The Advisory G roup lacked a proper structure; its procedure was casual and unbusinesslike. Its
accountability to the General Purposes Panel was ill-defined. Decisions were taken informally and too much
was left to M r Bownes. In particular, the decision to remove barrier 144 was not referred to the Panel and ought
not to have been made.




                                                         51
                                                   CH A PTER 20

                                       T H E CLUB AND D R EASTW OOD

    289. It should be recorded that in general the Club has over the years adopted a responsible and
 conscientious approach to its responsibilities. It retained the services o f D r Eastwood as consultant engineer
 and abided by his advice. For his part, D r Eastwood is skilled and experienced in this field, as already
 T k n u ’?         sought I have no doubt to act efficiently and professionally in his advice and practical work
 I he Club also retained M r Lock who had acquired great experience and knowledge o f Hillsborough during his
 police service. A num ber o f witnesses described Hillsborough as a very good ground, “one o f the best in the
 country . The police agreed th at relations between them and the Club were good. Over the last four years the
 Club had spent some £ 1'h m illion on ground improvements.

    290. Nevertheless, there are a num ber o f respects in which failure by the Club contributed to this disaster.
 I hey were responsible as occupiers and invitors for the layout and structure o f the ground. The Leppings Lane
end was unsatisfactory and ill-suited to adm it the num bers invited, for reasons already spelt out. The Club was
aware of these problem s and discussed solving them in various ways between 1981 and 1986. In the result
there rem ained the same num ber o f turnstiles, and the same problems outside and inside them. The plan for
this semi-final, involving as it did the loss o f 12 turnstiles for the north stand and large num bers to be fed in
from Leppings Lane, was one agreed between the Club and the police. The Club knew best w hat rate o f
swamped*1       turnst^ es cou^ manage and ought to have alerted the police to the risks o f the turnstiles being
                                                                                                                        §
   291. The alterations inside the turnstiles and on the terraces clearly affected capacity, but no specific
allowance was m ade for them . In that respect, both D r Eastwood and the Club should have taken a more
positive approach. Either a scheme such as one o f those D r Eastwood put forward should have been adopted
giving m ore turnstiles and total separation o f areas or at the very least the capacity o f the new pens and o f the
terraces as a whole should have been treated more cautiously. The police view in 1981 that 10,100 was too high
a figure was known to the Club (although D r Eastwood says not to him). Yet, despite th at and the sub-divisitfH
into pens, the figure remained.

  • I 9 1 Alt]h ° ug^ , tl?e police had assumed responsibility for m onitoring the pens, the Club had a duty to its
visitors and the Club’s officials ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution o f fans on the
terraces The Club operated and read the closed circuit television and the com puter totaliser. Liaison between
C ub and police on the day failed to alert the latter to the num ber o f Liverpool supporters still to come The
onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.

  293 The removal o f barrier 144 was the responsibility o f the Club although it clearly acted on the advice o f
D r tastw o o d and the Advisory G roup which in this instance was misguided.

rem ediedlkeW1Se’ ^    breacheS o f the Green G uide were m atters which the Club should have appreciated and


   295.     Lastly, as already indicated, the poor signposting on the concourse tended to produce under-filling o f
the wing pens and over-filling o f pens 3 and 4. Poor signposting outside the turnstiles and the unhelpful form at
ot the tickets also led to confusion aggravating the build-up in the turnstile area




                                                        52
                                                 C H A PTER 21

                                FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY SERVICES

No Fault by the Emergency Services
   296. I say at the outset o f this chapter th at no valid criticism can be m ade o f the response by the St John
Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any
criticism o f them . The only attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or w ith sufficient equipm ent and th at there was a lack o f triage. H e was proved to be
wrong in all three respects. U nfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April when he said more
lives could have been saved if staff and equipm ent had arrived earlier. A part from being proved wrong in fact
as to the tim es o f arrival o f ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say whether lives
could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor com plained o f the
absence o f defibrillators. I am satisfied on overwhelming evidence that to attem pt to use a defibrillator on the
pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk o f injury from the electric
charge.

  297. I find th at all three o f the emergency services nam ed above responded prom ptly when alerted, that
they brought appropriate equipm ent and th at their personnel operated efficiently.

  298. It would be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium , medical facilities capable o f dealing with a
m ajor disaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, other
equipm ent and medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100 casualties is not practicable.

  299. W hat is required is a basic level o f provision for first aid, for professional medical attention and for
ambulance attendance, together with a system o f co-ordination with the emergency services which will bring
them to the scene swiftly in whatever num bers are required. W hat will am ount to an appropriate basic
provision for the future eg the equipm ent in a first aid room, requires expert evaluation and advice.

   300. On the day, there was no clear understanding between the Club and D r Purcell as to his role. He
believed he was prim arily there to attend to the players. The Club regarded him also as the “physician available
to attend at the first aid room if required”, as laid down in the Safety Certificate.

  301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the emergency services. It is clear
that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been called earlier than they were. However, in view o f the nature
and extent o f the crushing, the tim e when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for which those
unable to breathe could survive, it is im probable th at quicker recourse to the emergency services would have
saved more lives.

   302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at the north-east corner
o f the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that at the top o f the ram p leading to the pitch the
access for am bulances was inadequate. There was also evidence th at the pre-m atch arrangement for
ambulances to use the two gates from Penistone R oad at the north-east end o f the ground as in and out routes
was frustrated by the presence o f vehicles just inside the ground. In the event, none o f these m atters affected
operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down. The difficult access to the ram p was negotiated and
am bulances used one entrance satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.




                                                        53
                                                C H A PTER 22

                                           C O M M U N IC A TIO N S

f -- P ; ° ne Problem which im peded police control and the gathering o f intelligence was the interm ittent
m I nf  ° ^ om m unicatlon by radio. There was the period o f two or three minutes when the control room was
            t° C0Il                 th at was rem edied>^ was only by using a hand set in the control room This
               t i f C° * i n o t.override any other messages. No effective radio com m unication seems to have
reached control from the perim eter track at the relevant time. M r Greenwood’s request for the m atch to be
stopped andI various messages from Constables reporting the distress in the pens did not register Likewise
           “ Ii,011     Leppings Lane to control was unreliable. Undoubtedly these breakdowns m ade it more
difficult for those in com m and to make proper assessments and exercise effective com m and




                                                   54
                        PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
                                      CHAPTER 23 - INTRODUCTION

Limited Objectives
  304. It is im portant to stress the lim ited objectives o f the interim recom m endations I can make in this
Report. My purpose is to propose instant measures capable o f being im plem ented forthw ith and where
possible before the com m encem ent o f the 1989/1990 season. They are designed to prevent overcrowding and
crushing on terraces in the short term and to improve safety procedures. They do not and cannot m eet all the
problem s or address all the issues o f post-Hillsborough football. W ider issues such as m em bership schemes,
identity cards, all-seater stadia, super-stadia and long term recom m endations fall to be considered in my Final
Report. So do a num ber o f other specific m atters such as a com prehensive review o f the Green Guide, the
problem of excessive pre-m atch drinking, fans w ithout tickets and ticket touts. I m ention these m atters lest it
be thought I have decided no recom m endations need be m ade concerning them. I have not. But before
deciding w hat if any recom m endations to make about these and other m atters, more evidence and study is
required.

  305. Accordingly, the m ain thrust o f these interim recom m endations, as a holding exercise, is to reduce
num bers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and to achieve a proper balance in crowd control between
prevention o f disorder and m aintenance o f safety.


Perimeter Fences
   306. It would be im practical and unwise to recom m end works o f construction or radical structural changes
now, before completing the extensive study and consultation which will form stage two o f this Inquiry. Hasty
interim recom m endations o f th at kind might well prove to be ill-judged after further study and require to be
changed in a m atter o f m onths.

   307. In particular, I do not at this stage make any recom m endation as to removing perim eter fences or
replacing them with structures o f different design. Understandably, there was a wave of popular feeling against
such fences in the im m ediate afterm ath o f Hillsborough. The horrifying spectacle o f people being crushed
against the fencing focussed blam e for the disaster on the fences themselves. There were pleas to dism antle
them and emotive references to the fans being treated like “ caged anim als” . Some clubs removed their fencing
straightaway. It was therefore very tem pting to consider at an early stage making a recom m endation that the
fences should be removed. I confess to being so tempted.

  308. Regrettably, only a m onth after Hillsborough, there were incidents which showed that violence and
hooliganism are still liable to erupt at football grounds. On 13 May at Selhurst Park, Birm ingham City
supporters invaded the pitch and fought with supporters o f the hom e club, Crystal Palace. Five police officers
and 16 supporters were injured and required treatm ent at a local hospital. O n the same day at a m atch between
Bristol City and Sheffield U nited, spectators spilt onto the pitch and there was fighting on the terraces. At the
Cup Final between Liverpool and Everton on 20 May, there was a pitch invasion, albeit a comparatively
benign one.

  309. Even the Football Supporters’ Association (FSA) felt it necessary to say in their final submission,

       “ W ith some reservations, the FSA accept th at perim eter fences are necessary for crowd control.”

   310. Bearing in m ind those m atters, and the need to consider further expert evidence, I have decided that it
would be unwise and prem ature for me to make any recom m endations now either to remove or to preserve or
to alter the structure o f perim eter fences. I shall make recom m endations about them in my Final Report.

  311. For the present, I would em phasise that, although the fencing prevented escape, the real cause o f the
Hillsborough disaster was overcrowding and it is against that danger that my interim recom m endations are
prim arily directed. W hilst declining to recom m end the removal o f the fences, I do consider th at the gates to the
pitch should be kept open whilst the terraces are occupied. This will have, I hope, three beneficial effects.
Obviously, an open gate is a m ore ready escape route than one which has to be locked. Secondly, the sight of
open gates will be reassuring to spectators on the terraces. Thirdly, the existence o f gaps in the fencing by
reason o f the open gates will concentrate the m inds o f police officers or stewards on the track to the need for
careful m onitoring o f those on the terraces.


                                                         55
  312. It will o f course be necessary to have a police presence sufficient to prevent pitch invasion for im proper
reasons through the open gates. However, I am encouraged to think that this is not an insuperable problem by
the fact that, for example at Anfield, Liverpool’s ground, there were no gates in the perim eter fencing before it
was taken down. There were instead gaps or “ access points” as they are called in the Green G uide (paragraph
215). T heir existence did not, so far as I am aware, prevent the authorities from m aintaining order. Also, the
gates were open throughout the replay o f this ill-fated semi-final at Old Trafford on 7 May 1989.


Reduced Numbers
   313. In the assessment o f figures for capacity, the criteria in C hapter 16 o f the G reen G uide were not at
Hillsborough, and may not elsewhere, have been applied with sufficient rigour. Therefore, in addition to
reminding and enjoining local authorities and clubs to make all necessary deductions when assessing the
figure for m axim um capacity in accordance with the Green Guide, I recom m end reducing th at figure by a
further 15% as an interim measure.


Safety Certificate
  314. The Safety Certificate procedure should, if it is properly adm inistered and enforced, go far towards
achieving crowd safety. W hether it succeeds depends upon the vigilance and com m itm ent o f the local
authority issuing the Certificate. I do not know whether the poor perform ance o f the local authority at
Hillsborough was typical. Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for some national oversight or
inspection o f local authority certification procedures. This raises complex issues which I shall want to consider
further at stage two o f the Inquiry. For the present, I make recom m endations as to the content o f Safety
Certificates and arrangements for issuing, m onitoring, enforcing, reviewing, am ending and renewing them.




                                                        56
                                      C H A PTER 24 - T H E RECO M M EN D A TIO N S

      315. The recom m endations which follow are the m inim um necessary to ensure that existing football
    grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
    inform ation I have received. They com plem ent the recom m endations which M r Justice Popplewell set out
    after his inquiry at Bradford.

      316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
    started forthw ith and completed as soon as possible.

    Maximum Capacities for Terraces
    ★        1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
           should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

           A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
           another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

    ★       2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
           Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

           (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
|              which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
               in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

           (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
               margin.

    ★        3. Arrangements should be made:-

           (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
               figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
               ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

           (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


    Filling and Monitoring Terraces
    ★        4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
           responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
           other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
           variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

    ★        5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
           area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
           sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
           period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
           or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
           below, and by radio to the control room.


    Fences and Gates
             6.     All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
           duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
           crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
           demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
           different crowd densities.

    -A -     7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
           different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit”.


                                                                57
★    8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
    when spectators are on the terrace.

★     9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
    a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
    The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
    stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
    either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★    10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
    are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
    necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
    brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
    nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★      11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
    to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★      12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
    complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the
    maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
    reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
      13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
    which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
    ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
    object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
    substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
    recommendations in this report.

      14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
    which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

      15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
    Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


       16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
    amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
    accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
    effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
    with the local authority’s rules.

       17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
    of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
    the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group’s terms of
    reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
    ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
    and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
    written reports for consideration by the local authority.


Duties of each Football Club
★     18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
    inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
    anticipated.


                                                        58
      19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
    as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
    turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
    accordingly.

      20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
    reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
    operators for this purpose.

      21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
    concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

      22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
    reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
    and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
    area.

      23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
    the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
    should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

      24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
    by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
    admitting spectators to the ground.

      25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
    entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
★     26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
    should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
    concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

★     27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
    officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any
    is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

★     28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
    any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
    sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

★    29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
    Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

       30.    There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
    monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
    at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
    in the interpretation and use of these data.


Communications
      31.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
    received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
    priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
    used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
    sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                        59
      32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
    announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
    match.

      34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.

Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★      35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

★     36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
    ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emergency services.

★     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.

★     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans
    the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
    they are required.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
★      39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

      40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

★     41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
    contactable.

★     42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

      43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                        60
APPENDICES




    61
                                                                                                                         -             w                                       A p p en d ix              1:

                                                                                                                                   '           \ '
                                                                                                                                                                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                                                                                                                               Hillsborough Ground.
                                                                                                                         O             'x ' ^ ' ' \ -
                                                                                                                             \V             ''< £
                                                                                                                             \ \             \V ^
                                                                                                                                              % <& :
                                                                                                                                        >       \ \




                                                                                                                                                      '\% 'V > '



                                                                                        Gymnasium




                                                                                                                                                                xo & \
                                 Lighting
                                                                                                                                                               & #
                                                                                                                                                        Lighting
                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                 Tower                                                                        Room

                                                                      NORTH STAND
           Gate A




                                                                                                                                                                                                   \   ' V


           Gate C
                                                                                                                                                                                  |\ \\        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ' 0' 3V   >



                                                                                                Players
                                                                                                Tunnel




                    Lighting W   s     Police
                    Tower                                      CCTV                            CCTV
                                       Control
                                                                                           STAND
                                                   00 tH nn                                                          nn rm
                                                   — 23-28 —    rl                                                   30-32                  3V-36
                                                                h—         q— '                                                                                          embanKmeot

                                                           Official
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \

150 feet                                         1 V   E       R      ■' ::         ■      D     O                                                          '
                                                                       .   • - «v   ,v *              •   •




                                                                                                                                                                         ■ ■•:’ ; -   '   ,■
A p p e n d i x 2:

Leppings Lane: the perimeter gates and turnstiles.




                                                     :? M 3
Ml I I I I   I -1 I --*• I "I ■ 1 / i M M t -I ••*'•**1.» • l ^ a L l * ' * '
.,|   | I I Li t kI                                      1 * * jT ikl * * 1
         si« jt.                      '4 ~ il i *   t   « i • f ,l7 i k   * *                        4 |"r€ «..* * < * «-*-|±A,
                                                                                                      ' ^ n g t n r e f s C u i ' t n g T ools




                                                                                                                                                 rrittr




                                A p p en d ix               3:            The west stand and terraces.


                                                                                                 ♦
                                                                                           BARRIER No.144                ••
                                                                                              r* --




                                                                     BARRIER No.124a
                                                                      F ■!•••• I - > ■                                   • ••




SOUTH STAND                                                                                                                                                               NORTH STAND




                    Barriers... Pre 1979                               1981 - 2 radial fences       • • • • 1985 - Removal of some   " " " " 1986 - Removal of Barrier
                                                                                                                   posts and rails                  No. 144 and some on
                    1979....Additional barriers —                      1985 -2 more radial fences                                                   S West Terrace



              Arrangement of Barriers at West Terrace
              P re p a re d b y T h e H ealth & S afety E xecutive
A p p e n d i x 5:   The west terraces at 2.59 p.m.
                                                   A PPEN D IX 6

                                             SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

Mr Hicks’ Evidence
   1. M r and Mrs Hicks’ two daughters died in the disaster. They had arrived early en famille but had tickets
for different sections. The two daughters had standing tickets; they went into pen 3. Mrs Hicks had a seat in the
north stand. M r Hicks took up a standing position in pen 1just below and to the west of the police box at about
2.15 pm From there, he had a view of the centre pens. He kept an eye on them as they filled up since he knew his
daughters to be there.

  2. His evidence was that by 2.50 pm he could see people were in distress. At about 2.55 pm he and others
called to a senior police officer at the top o f the steps to the control box to draw his attention to the crushing. M r
Hicks was only about 10 feet from the officer. He described him as wearing a flat cap with gold or silver braid
and a light coloured anorak. M r Hicks believed he was the officer who stopped the match. M r Greenwood, who
did stop the match, was certainly not wearing a light coloured anorak, as can clearly be seen on the video.

  3. M r Hicks says that he and others shouted several times to this officer in attem pts to alert him to the
distress in the pens. There was no reaction although M r Hicks believes the officer m ust have been in earshot.

   4. T hat officer descended from the steps and two cam eram en whom M r Hicks believed were from
television came and appeared to direct their cameras towards the pens. A nother senior officer appeared two
steps down from the platform. He was a stocky figure; he also wore a flat cap but with black braid. M r Hicks
says that he and two or three others tried several times to capture this officer’s attention without success. Then
M r Hicks says he shouted “For Christ’s sake! Can’t you see what’s going on? We can, and you have cam eras”. The
officer is said to have replied dismissively “Shut your fucking prattle” .

  5. W hen the disaster occurred the two Hicks girls were crushed. Victoria was put in an ambulance and Mr
Hicks accom panied her to hospital where she was found to be dead. Sarah died at the ground.

   6. M r Hicks was an impressive witness and, despite his grievous loss, remarkably stoical. He gave his
evidence clearly and w ithout rancour. He was certainly m istaken about M r Greenwood being one o f those on
the steps and it has not been possible to identify either officer from M r Hicks’ descriptions. He may well also
have been imprecise as to timings. Nevertheless, I see no reason to doubt that what he described did occur in
relation to two officers. As M r Hicks generously said himself, the dismissive abuse from the second officer
(although reprehensible) may have been due to his being preoccupied with trying to see what was happening at
pens 3 and 4 around kick-off time.

The Goalkeeper and Gate 4
  7. M r Barnbrock, a Liverpool supporter, said he went through the tunnel. He would have liked to have
turned back when he saw how crowded the pens were. He went with his father and 13 year old brother Stephen
towards the front o f pen 4. He saw the team s come onto the pitch. C onditions at the front were, he said, alright
until about 2 m inutes to 3. Then the pressure in the pen increased and he and his father became separated. His
feet came off the ground. He shouted to police officers through the fence to get them out and help them. The
police did not react. The Liverpool goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, spoke to a policeman on the track. The gate
was then opened by a blonde policewoman and about 25 to 30 people went through it. They included the
witness’s father and his brother Stephen who had a broken arm. A police Constable shut the gate. It was then
reopened by the same policewoman, the witness thought, and he got out.

  8. M r Eccleston, a male nurse and an impressive witness, was sitting in the north stand. He noticed pens 3
and 4 were full and realised something was wrong when fans started coming over the perim eter fence but did
not invade the pitch. He said the Liverpool goalkeeper appeared to notice this too.

  9. M r G robbelaar was out o f the country during the Inquiry and was therefore not called. However, he
m ade a statem ent which was put in as his evidence. In the course o f it he said:-

   “ Kick-off happened and we got into our stride pretty quickly - we forced a corner pretty early on and the ball
   came down to my end - I rolled it out to the full back once and play went on until Peter Beardsley hit the
   crossbar o f the N ottingham Forest goal from a corner and came back into play. I remember just after that
   there were shouts and screams from the crowd just behind me, it was different; not the ordinary crowd noise
   and I turned around to look. W hat am azed me first was the concentration and squash of fans in the centre


                                                           63
section, the end areas still had plenty o f space. It was only then I became conscious that the crowd was
squashing forward and wasn’t able to go sideways and that’s when I noticed the fencing alongside them
holding them in. I saw fans being pulled up into the stand above the terraces, I saw fans climbing over into the
empty areas at the side and I saw fans climbing out over the front onto the pitch which was particularly
difficult because o f the spikes on the top o f the fencing but they were getting out.
   “Play was still going on and I was in a terrible position trying to concentrate on play and having my
attention taken by what was happening behind me. The ball came down to our end and N ottingham Forest
won a corner, it was taken and we cleared our box area and as play was going forward over the centre line I
heard a shout, ‘Bruce - please help’ - a desperate shout from a fan squashed up against the fencing to the
right o f my goal as I looked at Leppings Lane terraces. He screamed, ‘Please get the fucking gate open - Help,
help’. All the people who could speak were pleading for help. There were two policemen near the gate right
alongside the fan who had shouted to me and so I shouted to them , ‘G et the gate open’. I was still trying to
concentrate on play and was still having my attention taken by what was happening behind me - there were
lots of fans on the pitch behind the goal area by them too. I called again to the policemen, ‘Open the fucking
gate’ and one just turned away from me and looked back at the crowd but the other went to the gate and
opened it and it was like taking the top off a shaken coke bottle - people were everywhere on the play area
around my goal. Play was still going on and it came down towards me again for the left hand corner. It was
a N ottingham Forest throw-in, away to my left, the ball was out o f play and a fan came up to me on the
pitch and said, ‘Bruce, they’re killing us’. I said ‘W ho’s killing you?’, and he said ‘They’re crushing us-our
fans’. I said ‘G o and get some help’, and then a policem an came on and spoke to this fan. I don’t know
who the fan was, and then he led him off. It was about this tim e I saw a policeman running onto the pitch
from my right across my box and to the referee who blew up, recovered the ball and told all players to clear
the pitch.”
   10. It is clear from the video that M r G robbelaar’s recollection of the sequence o f events, even with regard
to the game, is inaccurate in a num ber o f respects. For example, the two N ottingham Forest corner kicks
occurred m inutes before Beardsley struck the bar. Further, it seems highly probable from other evidence that
gates 3 and 4 were open continuously well before M r G robbelaar says the fan asked him to get the gate open. It
seems surprising too that with all the noise M r G robbelaar would hear the precise words o f an individual fan,
let alone respond twice to them, whilst the game was in progress.
   11. As to M r Barnbrock’s account, the evidence o f PC Fiona Richardson was that she was the only
policewoman on the track in the early stages although others came from the seated area as the incident
developed. PC Richardson began at gate 1 and, although she did go and help people out through gate 3, she
did not go to gate 4, and did not open it twice or even once. The two officers who spoke o f opening gate 4 were
both male.
  12. I think M r G robbelaar did become conscious of distress in the crowd behind him and did speak to a
police officer at some stage, probably earlier than he now thinks. Not to reach that broad conclusion would
involve attributing his whole account to invention or fantasy and I see no grounds for doing so. However, his
detailed account was not tested in cross-exam ination and its inconsistencies and errors when com pared with
other incontrovertible evidence would make it unsafe to derive more than the broad conclusion stated above.
The incident shows how honest witnesses can become confused and their evidence flawed when recollecting
events experienced under tension or emotion.
   13. As to the opening o f gate 4 there was an apparent conflict o f evidence. PC Illingworth said that about
five m inutes to 3 he opened it and guided fans emerging through it to gate 5. PC Hooson said that it was he
who opened gate 4 just before kick-off. I am satisfied from the evidence of a num ber o f fans that, like gate 3,
gate 4 was opened more than once. The probability is, therefore, that whilst PC Illingworth was shepherding
fans to gate 5, gate 4 had been closed again until it was re-opened by PC Hooson two or three m inutes later.
Oxygen
   14. It was alleged by a doctor that an oxygen cylinder provided to him on the pitch was empty. D r Phillips, a
Liverpool supporter, had been in pen 3 with his brother and others. He came under pressure and clim bed into
pen 2. W hen the disaster occurred and gate 2 was opened, he went through it, injuring his head as he did so. He
came onto the pitch sometime after 3.10 pm and started resuscitation procedures. He was given an oxygen
cylinder. He believes this was from St John Ambulance. It was, he thought, too early to be the fire service. The
cylinder was switched on but D r Phillips says it gave no oxygen since it was empty. There was one oxygen
cylinder on the St John’s am bulance which came to the scene. M r Wells, the Divisional Superintendent of St
John, took that cylinder onto the pitch. He said it was effective. In particular, he recalls going to a patient being
treated by D r Phillips and says that oxygen was flowing into that patient. Moreover, M r Wells tested the
cylinder afterwards and found it was still half full. It has a capacity that will last for 5 hours 40 m inutes on a
high setting.


                                                         64
   15. There was evidence from Assistant C hief Fire Officer Hornsby that a M axaman resuscitator had failed
to work properly. It was delivering an oxygen flow appropriate to a “child” setting rather than a full “adult”
flow. On exam ination, it was found that a retaining nut in the control knob had worked loose, possibly due to
vibration in transit, and this had affected the flow of oxygen. The device had last been tested on 10 April 1989.
  16. I accept the evidence of M r Wells that the St John Ambulance cylinder was charged with oxygen and
working properly. In my view, D r Phillips may have been m istaken as to the cylinder of which he complains
being empty. He agreed he was under great pressure, in an awkward situation; his head was injured and he
becam e very angry at what he regarded then as wholly the fault of the police. He conceded that if the cylinder
was not em pty there was a possible alternative - that the m aster tank top valve was shut. It seems unlikely that
he could have been referring to the fire service resuscitator as he was clear that the bottle he received was a
simple piece o f equipm ent not designed to breathe for the patient but merely to supply oxygen.
  17. I conclude that on a balance o f probabilities the evidence does not justify a finding that an empty
cylinder was brought to the scene.
Calling the Fire Service
   18. PC Bichard’s call to police H eadquarters at 3.13 pm for the fire service to bring hydraulic cutting
equipm ent to cut metal fences (see paragraph 101 supra) was heard by C hief Inspector Edm undson. He went
into the adjacent operations room to give instructions for the message to be passed to the fire service. There, a
tem porary control room assistant was already speaking to the fire service about a house fire. M r Edm undson
interrupted the call and asked the assistant to tell the fire service that cutting equipm ent was wanted at
Hillsborough. There followed a conversation between the assistant and Miss Davies at the fire service in the
following terms;
  Police           Can we have cutting gear for Hillsborough, please - straight away?
   Fire Control    Just a minute. Right - what’s the address?
  Police           Cutting equipm ent for Hillsborough football ground - straight away.
   Fire Control    Hillsborough football ground?
   Police          Yes, Hillsborough football ground.
   Fire Control    W hat road is that on? Do you know?
   Police          There has been a m ajor accident, all the am bulances are up there.
   Fire C ontrol   W hat road is it on?
   Police          I have no idea; Hillsborough football ground.
   Fire Control    W hat road is it on? D o you know?
   Police          “Hillsborough football ground - what road is it on?” (this was said to someone in Police
                   Force Control) - “Penistone R oad” (to Fire Control).
   Fire Control    Penistone Road.
   Police          Penistone Road, OK.
   Fire Control    Penistone Road, ju st a m inute - what’s exactly involved?
   Police          It’s football, a big match, Liverpool v N otts Forest.
   Fire Control    Yes, but why do you want us; you said it was an RTA [Road Traffic Accident].
   Police          No, no, no; m ajor incident inside the ground.
   Fire Control    M ajor incident inside - do you know exactly what it is?
   Police          No, I don’t; they w ant all the cutting gear.
   Fire Control    For what - do you know?
   Police          Hang on a sec.
   At that point C hief Inspector Edm undson intervened and spoke for the police. The conversation
 concluded:-
   Police          (Male voice) - Hello!


                                                           65
  Fire Control    Hello! Now you wnt some cutting gear - what exactly is it for?

  Police          There has been a m ajor accident at Hillsborough football ground where the semi-final
                  the crowds have forced their way in, they have broken fences and gates down. I don’t ki
                  exactly what it is bu t there are people trapped.

  Fire Control    Right! OK - leave it with us.

  T hat conversation took 1 m inute 13 seconds. It was published in a num ber o f newspapers with str~
critical com m ent mostly against the fire service. The thrust o f the criticism was that valuable tim e was wail
by the fire service asking unnecessary questions as to where and why cutting equipm ent was required.

   19. There was a meeting of the emergency services in August 1988 to discuss procedure in the event
m ajor disaster at Sheffield Wednesday’s ground. It was pointed out and m inuted that “It was imperative t
the Police Control give the exact location o f any fire or incident and as much detail as possible. No senior
officer is on duty at the match. . . Fire service will attend via Penistone Road or Leppings Lane as directed i
the police.”
                                                                                                            ■   ■   •

   20. The message from PC Bichard contained all the necessary inform ation - Leppings Lane end, hydra"
cutting equipm ent, to cut metal fences. Regrettably, it was not passed on by Headquarters in those terms. ]
Davies had rightly been trained to require a precise location and needed to know the problem which would fa
the fire service so that the appropriate response could be made. In fact, there are several football grounds in 1
Hillsborough district although clearly Sheffield Wednesday’s ground is the principal one. In the resi
although C hief Inspector Edm undson clarified, to an extent, the nature o f the problem, the locus wh
emerged in the course o f the conversation (Penistone Road) was not that contained in the original mess
from ground control (ie “Leppings Lane end.”) W hilst on the face o f the conversation the fire service may se
to have been slow in the uptake or perhaps pedantic, in my view the police ought to have been more specific.
They had the necessary inform ation to be so.

  21. I am satisfied, however, that the delay o f 1 m inute 13 seconds over the call, and even the dela.,
occasioned by the cutting equipm ent going to Penistone Road rather than Leppings Lane, did not affect the
outcome. Even had those with cutting equipm ent gone directly after a briefer ’phone call they would not have
arrived at a stage early enough to make cutting the fencing a helpful exercise.
                                                                                                                        ■ •'
Mr Kenny Dalglish
  22. W hen the Liverpool manager went to the control room and agreed to make the announcem ent
broadcast at 3.56 pm , he says in a statem ent that he could not get the Tannoy to work. Spectators could see
him trying to address them and indicated to him manually that nothing could be heard. An officer pressed
buttons on the machine and M r Dalglish says he tried again with sim ilar lack o f success. He was then taken
under the police box to the room used by the disc jockey to broadcast pre-m atch music. There, the microphone
worked and he broadcast his message.

   23.    M r Dalglish was not called. There was no other evidence about this incident. I accept it occurred as he
described. Why the Tannoy could not at that tim e be successfully operated from the police box is, however,
strange and unexplained. Unlike the radio, it had operated satisfactorily from the police box at the critical
tim es save that its messages may not always have been heard above the prevailing noise. It had worked at about
3.30 pm when it called for medical staff. I can see no grounds for criticising the police in regard to this incident
and certain it is that the brief delay in relaying M r Dalglish’s message can have had no significant effect.
                                                                                                                         ■''
                                              A PPEN D IX 7

                          LIST O F PARTIES AND TH EIR REPRESENTATION

1.   M r Andrew Collins QC, M r Alan Goldsack and M r Bernard Phillips of Counsel, instructed by the
     Treasury Solicitor, appeared on behalf o f the Inquiry.

2.   M r Benet H ytner QC and M r Tim othy King o f Counsel, instructed by the Hillsborough Steering
     Com m ittee, appeared on behalf o f the bereaved and injured.

3.   M r John Jackson o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Hill Dickinson, appeared on behalf o f the Football
     Supporters’ Association.

4.   M r John Dyson QC and M r D avid Gibson-W att o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Freshfields, appeared
     on behalf o f the Football Association.

5.   M r R ichard Maxwell QC and M r Michael M urphy o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Keeble Hawsons,
     appeared on behalf o f Sheffield City Council.

6.   M r Edwin Glasgow QC and M r Stuart Catchpole o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper,
     appeared on behalf o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

7.   M r William Woodward QC and M r Patrick Limb o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs H am m ond Suddards,
     appeared on behalf o f the South Yorkshire Police.

8.   M r Franz Muller QC and M r Andrew Robertson o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Crutes, appeared on
     behalf o f the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

9.   M r Michel Kallipetis QC, instructed by Messrs Dibb Lupton Broomhead, appeared on behalf o f Trent
     Regional Health Authority.

10. M r Roger Toulson QC, instructed by Messrs Reynolds Porter Cham berlain, appeared on behalf o f D r W.
    Eastwood.
                              A PPEN D IX 8

LIST OF THOSE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                         Stephen M artin FOSTER
                         Michael Joseph BRADLEY
                         Peter William JACKSON
                         Alison Jane BENNETT
                         Daniel Joseph HENNESSEY
                         Keith GOLD IN G
                         Ian John CLARKE
                         David PERRY
                         David Anthony CRUICE
                         Patrick C U N N IN G H A M
                         Keith LEONARD
                         Wayne D avid W INDEVER
                         Gary GAINS
                         Mark Ian HUGHES
                         David H UGHES
                         Anthony BARNBROCK
                         David CUNNINGHAM
                         Peter DARCY
                         Ian Kenneth DEVINE
                         Peter Joseph GARRETT
                         David Peter LOWE
                         Geoffrey Nigel MOODY
                         C hristopher MORAN
                         Roy PARRY
                         John Stewart PHIM ESTER
                         David POSTLETHWAITE
                         Thom as Kenneth HILTON
                         Nicholas BELL
                         Stephen M ark W ESTERGREEN
                         Trevor HICKS
                         Ian William BURKE
                         William H am ilton COM ERFORD
                         D iane Susan CONNOLLY
                         Peter Jeffrey GARRETT
                         David HARTLEY
                         Thom as Bentley MATTHEWS
                         David Thom asJO N E S
                         Paul M cC a f f r e y
                         David Stephen M OORE
                         Maxwell ROSS
                         Anthony C hristopher SM ITH
                         Steven ALLEN
                         P. MAHER
                         Michael G errard HILL
                         Neil FITZM A U RICE
                         Angela H OCKEN HULL
                         Lee Edward OXLEY
                         Constance SWEET
                         Janet Ann ELLIS
                         Frederick Jam es ECCLESTON
                         Adam Jam es PEM BERTON
                         John R andolph Tom BARTHOLOMEW
                         Judith WATSON
                         Duncan STURRO CK
                         Susan DAWES
                         Albert LINDLEY
                         PC Ian BROWN


                                   68
                                A PPEN D IX 8

LIST OF THOSE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                          Chief Superintendent Brian Leonard MOLE
                          C hief Superintendent D avid Godfrey DUCKENFIELD
                          Assistant Chief Constable Walter JACKSON
                          Superintendent Roger MARSHALL
                          Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY
                          Superintendent Roger GREENW OOD
                          Bruce David GROBBELAAR*
                          C hief Superintendent John A rthur NESBIT
                          Superintendent John H arris BROUGHAM
                          Detective Superintendent G raham McKAY
                          Inspector Paul HAND-DAVIS
                          C hief Inspector Robert Wallace CREASER
                          Inspector Peter Colin DARLING
                          Inspector David BULLAS
                          Inspector G ordon SYKES
                          Inspector Robert PURDY
                          Inspector Stephen ELLIS
                          Inspector John Joseph BENNETT
                          Sergeant Stephen John PAYNE
                          PC G raham D U FFY
                          P C D . EVANS
                          PC Andrew BEST
                          PC Brian Robert HUCKSTEPP
                          PC Alistair John TAYLOR
                          Sergeant John MORGAN
                          WPC Alison TAGG
                          Sergeant Lionel PROCTOR
                          WPC Jane Borthwick BURNLEES
                          Sergeant Philip Sidney SMITH
                          PC Stephen Frank FRY
                          PC F. N. G R U N N ILL
                          W PC Elizabeth Jayne WILSON
                          Sergeant William Cam eron CRAWFORD
                          PC Paul BRANSTON
                          W PC Jacqueline BURTON
                          Sergeant Robert BURNS
                          W PC Helen Kay PEARSON
                          PC Alexander AITKIN
                          Sergeant Paul BURM AN
                          PC Stephen Andrew SHEARWOOD
                          Sergeant Edward H IG G IN S
                          Sergeant Peter CHAPMAN
                          PC Peter Edward SM ITH
                          PC G errard St Clare FINNEGAN
                          PC D avid Alfred ILLINGW ORTH
                          W PC Fiona RICHARDSON
                           PC Jam es Oscar PACKER
                           PC Michael BUXTON
                          Detective Sergeant Paul MORTON
                          Detective Sergeant D avid GUTCHER
                           PC Michael Vincent RYAN
                           Sergeant Michael GODDARD
                           Peter WELLS
                           PC Trevor BICHARD
                           John Edm und TOW LER
                           Frank GODLEY
                           Philip M artin SAXTON
 PC Harold GUEST
 Inspector Ian TU R N ER
 C hief Inspector McROBBIE
 PC Kenneth ROOK
 FC OP Susan Elizabeth DAVIES
 Station Officer J SWAIN
 Station Officer FLETCHER
 A.C.O. A. D. HORNSBY
 Leading Fireman HOUSLEY
 George LLOYD
 Raym ond John LLOYD
 Brian SAYLES
 R andolph SAYNOR
 Stephen Michael COPELAND
 Albert RHODES
 Steven Charles RHODES
 Wayne Austin HALL
 Allan John HASKINS
 Stuart Roland TH O R PE
 Kenneth CASTLEY
John Philip CASTLEY
Albert Ronald MARSH
Robert William COBB
 Brian RIDGE
 R ichard William BEADSLEY
 Malcolm BAIN
Stephen Craig CARDWELL
Gary VAUX
Alan Keith SEAMAN
Frederick MADDOX
D r William PURCELL
Station Officer Patrick HIG GINS
Station Officer Paul Anthony Jam es EASON
C ontrol Superintendent Raym ond CLARKE
Deputy Chief M etropolitan Ambulance Officer Alan HOPKINS
C hief M etropolitan Ambulance Officer Albert PAGE
Lawrence YOXALL
D avid John WALKER
Maurice KAY QC
D r Andrew Jolyon BYRNE
G raham KELLY
D r John ASHTON
D r Naderassen Carpoosamy C U R PEN
Kenneth EVANS
Glen KIRTON
D r Wilfred EASTWOOD
D rG ly n PHILLIPS
Ferenc MORATH
Andrew SANDERSON
PC Philip HOOSON
PC Gary CAMMOCK
D avid BOWNES
Inspector Clive William CALVERT
G raham Henry MACKRELL
Inspector Steven Robert SEWELL
Douglas John LOCK
G arry TAYLOR
David George Lawrence WATTS
Superintendent Terence Willis STUART
PC Brian WAUGH



           70
  In addition, statements of evidence from many others were admitted to the Inquiry. Some 80 letters were
received from M embers of the House of Commons and three from M embers of the House of Lords. Some
1,470 letters from the general public were received. Organisations who have submitted evidence addressed to
Part II of the Inquiry will be specifically listed in the Final Report.

* Statement read to the Inquiry




                                                                 71




                                  Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
                                       Dd 0503228 8/89 €5 0 O/No. 8406270 (3840) ' 4450
HMSO
BOOKS
HMSO publications are available from:

H M S O Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 01-873 9090
General enquiries 01-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)

H M S O Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (Counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B 1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181

H M S O ’s Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)

And through good booksellers




ISBN 0 10 1076525
