                                            |W , . W'XM
                                                                   >
 A

     THE DEPARTMENT
     OF TRANSPORT

     F R O M T i l l : M I \ I S I F R FOR Ft B F K F R. WSFOR I       2 M A R S H A M S TR E E T L O N D ( ) \ SV\
                                                                       T E L E P H O N E 01-276 300(!

The Rt Hon The Earl Ferrers
Minister of State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON      A* , aA       f U
SW1H 9AT    PAv          . V'J




WEMBLEY STADIUM

I recently had a meeting with Mr Brian Wolfson, Chairman of
Wembley pic, owners of the Stadium and Arena in the London Borough
of Brent.   He is looking for financial support for a scheme to
improve pedestrian access and safety along Olympic Way between the
Stadium and Wembley Park Underground Station.   He does not think
that Brent, Wembley pic and the Football Trust, who are all
willing to contribute, could meet the full cost of the scheme.
The Stadium Complex has events on between 250 and 300 days a year.
Crowds of 60,000 and more a time are attracted to concerts and
sporting occasions.    The total number of people visiting the
Stadium is expected to reach 10 million a year in a few years'
time. Parking can only be provided for 6,000 cars, so that public
transport, particularly by underground, is essential. Over 40,000
residents are directly affected by traffic and pedestrian
movements connected with events.
Current access to Wembley Park Station is by two narrow pedestrian
tunnels owned largely by Wembley pic.   They cannot cope with the
large numbers of people leaving events and scarcely with the
smaller numbers from Wembley Arena and the Conference Centre.
Dispersal arrangements are therefore dangerously complex and, in
particular, involve managing crowds crossing the road often in the
dark.  They have given rise to a number of personal injuries over
the past few years and there is cause for concern that a major
incident could occur in the future.
The proposed improvement scheme (total estimate £5 million) would
open out these tunnels and create a large pedestrian piazza. This
would provide a safe and convenient access to the underground and
completely segregate pedestrians and road vehicles.   It would also
involve  changing   the existing    road  junction   opposite   the
Underground Station.    Brent have asked for support for their
involvement as highway authority (£3 million) in their annual bid
on their road programme.    It would, however, have only a very
tenuous claim for consideration under the Transport Supplementary
Grant (TSG) system - TSG the only positive means we have here for
giving financial support. TSG is, of course, primarily intended to
help relieve road congestion.    Even if we could be persuaded to
stretch a point, I cannot realistically see it being given
sufficient priority under the TSG arrangements to qualify for
support.    Resources available for it each year are severely
limited and there are many worthwhile candidates.
I am, however, very concerned at the public safety aspects raised
here, especially post-Hillsborough.  Our attention has been drawn
to the possibility of another sports-related tragedy.       I am
^ns cious also that Wembley is a sport and leisure venue of
^Pternational importance.
I am writing to see whether you can suggest a way the Government
might help.   I hope that between us we might find a positive way
forward.   I am sending a copy of this letter to David Hunt and
Colin Moynihan.



                                     "Yfr-t—    e^e_y



                                   MICHAEL PORTILLO
       o> CT>
       CO


IsfL   ss

\n
