                          fu              cc   Mr Malone-Lee
                                  / k          Miss Edwards
                                               Mr Boys Smith
                            'FI                Mr Sandiford


                                    l|V

Mr Addison

HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
I see that from today's press that South Yorkshire Police propose
to pay compensation, possibly amounting to some £50 million, to
surviving victims and relatives of deceased victims. The reports
implied that the payments would be out of insurance monies. I
hope this is correct, although a letter from South Yorkshire
Police Authority on 10 August referred to their having total
insurance cover of £8.5 million. If it is not insurance monies,
I do not see where the money is to be found from. I cannot see
that compensation payments should qualify as expenditure on which
police grant is payable and I imagine that FD1 would see no
reason (other than political) for the Home Office to make a
contribution to the costs under the heading of a special payment
out of a cash limited vote.
Although FD2 were provided with a copy of a letter of 10 August
from the Police Authority in which it warned that it might have
to make provision in closing its account for the year for damage
in excess of insurance cover, we have not been consulted since
by Police Department, nor were we forewarned of the present
announcement. As far as I know, the only mention to Ministers
of the possibility of South Yorkshire having to pay compensation
out of its own funds due to under-insurance was contained in a
minute which you sent to Mr Walters of 29 September.           No
suggestion was made about how <much the Home office would respond
to a request for funding in such circumstances.
I do not know whether FD1 have been approached since then. But
I should welcome any clarification which Police Department can
provide about the source of the proposed compensation.




                                    N A NAGLER




FINANCE DIVISION 2
1 December 1989
