s                                                       <SS
, E.R.
                                               cc.   Miss Nicholson
                                                     Ms Rex
                                                     Mr Yates
                                                     Mr Moriarty
                                                     Mr Chilcot
                                                     HMCIC
                                                     HMCIFS
                                                     Mr Boys Smith
                                                     jlr Whnl 1ry*
                                                     Mr Bolton
                                                         Goddard
                                                                      *<-<ǥ
                                                     Mr Lidington



     Mr Turnev


     HILLSBOROUGH: HOME SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                             4 AUGUST 1989


     You were present when the Home Secretary had a brief meeting
     with Lord Justice Taylor to thank him for his interim report,
     on the morning before publication. Mr Whalley was also
     present.  I set out below those points which arose which seem
     to be worth recording:

          (i)    Lord Justice Taylor said that he had received
                 tremendous support from Home Office staff and from
                 counsel to the Inquiry;

         (ii )   he was sorry the report came down heavily on the
                 police, but unfortunately that was the way the
                 evidence fell. However, he could let the Home
                 Secretary know informally that there were a number
                 of aspects related to crowd behaviour which he could
                 not deal.with in his interim report, which he would
                 return to in his final report, such as drinking
                 before the match, people turning up without tickets
                 and ticket touting. This might make the interim
                 report seem somewhat unbalanced. The Home Secretary
                 commented that some critics would be likely to
                 continue to see the hooligan football fan as the key
                 to the disaster and that part of the response to
                 this might be to say that the intention was to .deal
                 with crowd behaviour in the final report. He also



                                                     /commented that
                  commented that the Home Office had drawn the
                  attention of the magistrates and police to the
                  powers they had to prevent drinking in pubs before
                  football matches, although they did not seem to use
                  them very much;

       (i i i )   the Home Secretary said that the football clubs were
                  likely to begin to complain soon about the costs of
                  the recommendations, particularly the loss of
t                 revenue caused by the reduction in numbers in the
                  terraces. Lord Justice Taylor commented that apart
                  from that, the interim recommendations did not call
                  for a great deal of expenditure in his view, though
                  the final recommendations might well;

        (iv)      he commented that the interim report had clearly
                  been a judicial task, but the final report might
                  stray into political areas in which it would be
                  difficult for him to express a strong view. He
                  might need to come back to the Home Secretary and
                  explain that he could only go so far. The Home
                  Secretary said that it might well be proper to draw
                  a line under his consideration of sorneissues and to
                  say that he had takenltw*. as far as he could in his
                  judicial capacity;

                  Lord Justice Taylor said that there would be a lot
                  to do to prepare the final report. He would wish to
                  visit a number of football grounds throughout the
                  country and possibly abroad. He therefore said that
                  he hoped to have the final report ready by the turn
                  of the year.




    Private Office                              MISS C J BANNISTER
    7 August 1989                               Private Secretary
s/3>o
 - 8 MG 89
