             •tu\e
                               -




Our ref: BC/LMH/SP
                                                                                               Hr-     lUvj   »'Aa . u   u



                                          LONDON DISTRICT
                                       SURVEYORS ASSOCIATION
R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
Secretary to the Inquiry into the
  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SWlH 9AT

                                                                               27th November, 1989

Dear Mr. Whalley,

Hillsborough Disaster - Interim Report

The Association's Sub-Committee with responsibility for sports grounds
matters has been reviewing the application of the recommendations of the
above report to designated grounds within the London area.

There are several items that have caused some difficulty in interpreta­
tion and implementation which, it is respectfully suggested, require
additional explanation and clarification to ensure that the true
intention of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations can be met.   The
following observations are, therefore, offered together, where approp­
riate, with my Sub -Committee's opinion of the meaning of the
recommendation:

Recommendations 7. 8 and 9

The recommendations require certain steps to be taken with regard to
perimeter fences.  It is felt that the term "perimeter fence" requires
precise definition, as continuous barriers bounding the pitch but only
intended to restrict crowd pressure should not be regarded as perimeter
fences, especially if of insufficient height to deter scaling.

Recommendation 15 - Safety Certificates

It is accepted that under Section 4 of the 1975 Act a local authority may
replace or amend a safety certificate (not necessarily at the behest of
the holder), but this does not equate with other Licensing legislation
which generally allows certification to last only for limited periods
before renewal.  It is requested Lord Justice Taylor gives consideration
to recommending appropriate revision to the current provision of the
relevant Acts (Section 4 of the 1975 Act and Section 29 of the 1987 Act
as it relates to 'regulated stands').

Recommendation 17 - Advisory Group

Difficulty has been experienced in reconciling the role of an Advisory
Group with that of the local authorities' "Safety Teams". Safety Teams
are a feature of many London authorities and are composed of officials
directly concerned with crowd safety at the ground.  The membership of a
typical Safety Team would comprise Building Surveyors, Structural




         President:- K.J. Mullins. P.P.I.A.S., F.I.A.S..      PO Box 52, Civic Centre, Enfield, EN1 3XD
      Hon. Secretary:- GJ. Sansom, F.I.A.S., M.I.B.C., 11 King William Walk, Greenwich, London, SE10 9JH
27th November, 1989                                                 Page 2


Engineers, Mechanical and Electrical Engineers, Safety Officer, Environ­
mental Health Officer, legal adviser, with Police, Fire and Ambulance
Service representation.   Clubs and supporters' organisations are not full
members of this executive body, but it is usual for their views to be
sought where appropriate.

Most of the Association's Sub-Committee members felt that an Advisory
Group is now recommended in addition to the Safety Teams and clarifica­
tion is requested as to the relationship between these two.

There are a minority of grounds in London which are of "international"
status and are not associated with any particular club, nor do they have
any recognised supporters' associations, e.g., Twickenham, Wimbledon
L.T.A. and Wembley.  Given the comments in the preceding paragraphs, it
is difficult to see how an Advisory Group would serve to improve the
existing situation.  Is it intended that an Advisory Group is required
only for "club" soccer grounds?

Recommendation 32 - Telephone Links

My Sub-Committee members expressed divided views over this recommen­
dation.  Emergency telephones were considered as requiring "a protected
system of wiring and capable of working in all conditions".  It was felt
that clarification was needed as to the exact purpose of the telephone
links - how separate and protected should they be, and the term "key
points" needs definition.

Recommendation 33 - Public Address System

A strict literal interpretation of the recommendation would allow com­
pliance to be achieved in one of three ways.  Thus a P.A. system with
blanket coverage and without the ability to address particular parts of
the ground would be acceptable. My Sub-Committee members were united in
the opinion that it is essential for a P.A. system to be able to communi­
cate with the whole ground or, if necessary, with individual areas.

Recommendation 41 - Medical Practitioner

It was felt that it should be made clear the medical practitioner deals
solely with spectators. He should not be the team doctor - especially at
a designated ground. A definition of the words "advanced first aid"
requires to be clarified and whether the term pre-supposes the ability to
use a defibrillator.  Generally, the application of recommendations 40
and 42 has given rise to most speculation as to their interpretation,
particularly when considered with the statements in Chapter 21, Clause
298 of the Report.

Please be assured that my purpose is to seek assistance and to offer
constructive comments. No doubt you have many other representations to
consider and whilst a direct response to this letter is not requested,
perhaps the above issues could be addressed in the Final Report.

If there is any way in which my Association can be of help please do not
hesitate to let me know.




G/fSANSOM,
yecretarv.
