                          From. T   he   P rivate S e c r e t a r y
                                                                                            &f                   6)
                                                                                H o m e O f fic e
            cc~ «\s • Craj^A
                                                                              Q U EEN ANNE'S GATE
                (fts> (2-e-x.
                                                                                                          rM
                                                                               L O N D O N SW IH 9A T
                f(\v

                fl(V. O v C U o t
                HV' i Y l o r v d ^                                       18 September 1989
                 HV-13>or\js S«uxHv.                                  HmciFs
                 HfY\CIC                                              HN\ClF.S> •
                 NV-TvAjnrNj^                                         rnr-bo\tc^
                                                                      rnrC|oddoL/tx
                                          [fii
                                           tor- CUx^Kr'v
                                           fflr - m o u ld L
                                           fAr- LcdU.i^.q^o<V                                          v^> «.
    The Home Secretary has asked me to reply to your-'letter                                        ,r' 7tfc *
of 24 August with which you enclosed an extract from "The
Times" and a copy of an article written by you on safety of
football grounds.

    In your letter to the Home Secretary and to The Times
newspaper you suggested that the Home Office has been guilty
of dereliction of duty by failing to issue regulations or give
guidance as to the terms and conditions to put into safety
certificates for sports grounds.

    Since 1975, Home Office guidance to local authorities has
been that in imposing conditions they should follow the
principles set out in the Guide to Safety in Sports Grounds
(the Green Guide) by which the safety criteria should be
determined in the light of the circumstances in particular
grounds. The main instrument of control however is the
certificate itself.

    The Home Office has also issued statutory guidance on what
to look for in safety inspections.  But the general principle
of the legislation is that the precise terms and conditions of
a safety certificate are for the determination of the local
authority, who are required to consult the police and, as
appropriate, either the fire authority or the building
authority before issuing or amending a certificate.  Each
certificate needs to be drafted so as to relate to the
situation and conditions in the sports ground to which it
applies.

    The circular letter also took the opportunity to remind
local authorities of their powers under section 10 of the 1975
Act for use if there is judged to be a serious risk to
spectators in any part of the ground.


                                                                          /Recommendation


Roy Edey, Esq
Lower Flat, Field House North
West Street, Harrow
Middlesex, HA1 3ER
        Recommendation 14 of the Interim Report urged local
    authorities to ensure forthwith that all designated grounds
    within their area should be issued with a safety certificate.
    We have asked those involved in the certificate process to
    take urgent action on this, as with all other recommendations.
    The responsibility for ensuring that such grounds have a
    safety certificate rests with local authorities under section
    2 of the 1975 Act.  The Act does not empower any central
    authority to supervise the way in which local authorities
    carry out these responsibilities. Lord Justice Taylor has
    indicated that he will consider whether there should be some
    national oversight or inspection of local authority
    responsibilities in relation to safety in sports grounds in
    stage 2 of his Inquiry. The Government has already amended
    its Football Spectators' Bill so that, if it is considered
    appropriate, this supervisory role could be given to the

•   proposed Football Licensing Authority in respect of grounds to
    which that Bill applies. Whether further measures are
    necessary to secure improvements in public safety at sports
    grounds will be a matter for decision when Lord Justice Taylor
    has published his final report.




                                            MISS C J BANNISTER
