              REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

The Green Guide

1.   The Technical Working Party recognises the valuable
contributions of successive editions of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds, commonly known as the Green Guide. Its scope and
status are described in its introduction as follows:        "This
booklet provides guidance to ground management, local authorities
and technical specialists such as engineers on measures for
improving spectator safety at existing sports grounds.    It is a
voluntary guide and has no legal force".
2.   In view of the variability of existing sports grounds in
function and in scale, there are serious difficulties in
establishing comprehensive and general regulations, backed    by
legal force, to cover all the     complex details of design and
construction.    Adherence to the standards set by Building
Regulations should provide a measure of uniformity in respect of
new work at sports grounds. Nevertheless, the Technical Working
Party is strongly of the opinion that a much higher degree of
standardisation   than presently prevails should be sought    in
practice.

3.   It considers that a revised issue of the Green Guide should
form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is certified
by the certifying authority, and recommends that any departures
from its guidance on technical provisions that may arise from
local circumstances should be fully defined and should be subject
to approval in writing by the certifying authority.
A Centre of Expertise

4.   The Green Guide covers a wide range of material, much of
which concerns the physical characteristics of grounds.       Its
successive issues have been published in response to a number of
serious accidents at football grounds. This process has led to
incremental advances in the Guide as experience has grown, but
the Technical Working Party does not believe that such a process,
although essential, is by itself sufficient to cope with present-
day requirements.
5.   Many British football grounds were first constructed a long
time ago, and improvements have been introduced largely on an
individual basis. A central body of knowledge applicable to the
complex design of such grounds has                           been
conspicuously absent^. As a result, progress has been piecemeal.
                       e     V\$v r>iy*
6.   The Technical Working Party considers that this is a serious
defect.   A continuous and expanding body of public knowledge,
drawn from the relevant professional fields, is required to
provide a basis for good individual designs at modern standards.
At a time when substantial improvements are under consideration,
including a higher proportion of seated accommodation, it is
imperative to establish and to disseminate rigorous standards of
design if expectations are to be fulfilled.         The work of
organisations in other countries, including the Comitato Olimpico
   on oviM«w- d<*.fan  m\($ p^Kc^*/ t^tM t -k             mHfk |f
   tyjfty, ( H ^ r   ft\A.
                   Wwi     CoM4. v                '                   *£•
Nazionale Italiano (CONI), can provide a valuable reference. The \
Technical Working Party recognises, too, the important work V
undertaken in, this country by the Sports Council.        Its recent      \
guide to the planning, design and management of indoor arenas is          |
a noteworthy attempt to draw together a considerable body of               j
research and practical experience.         Similarly, other work on        /
outdoor stadia has taken place and is currently proceeding under J
the Council's aegis.        Exper ience--siigge©t-s-/~-—      —-
                                                               fc-hat- ^ ,

7.   The Technical Working Party therefore recommends the
formation of a central body, under a title such as The Advisory
Council for Sports Grounds, to provide an authoritative source of
knowledge for all those involved in the design and construction
of outdoor stadia. A detailed specification of its structure and
funding is not proposed at this stage but, as envisaged, its
members would be drawn from the relevant professional fields and
would commission specialist advice when necessary.    It would be
independent of any Inspectorate. The relationship of such a body
to other organisations is a matter for further discussion, but it
is suggested that the Football Association and the Sports Council
might wish to play leading roles.
Seating and Standing
8.   The Technical Working Party notes that FIFA has agreed
regulations on seating for certain classes of football matches,
and that the regulations are to be imposed within a short time-
scale. It also recognises that the British tradition of standing
on terraces runs counter to these international requirements.
9.   It is clear that if British Clubs are to continue within the
international community, they will be obliged to close their
standing accommodation for matches that fall within the FIFA
definition.    For other matches, the Technical Working Party
recognises    that,  whilst standing accommodation is not
intrinsically unsafe, the benefits to spectator comfort and crowd
control brought about by all-seater stadia are likely to
accelerate the move towards such venues.    The Technical Working
Party accepts, however, that although the introduction of all-
seater stadia for leading, well-supported football clubs may be
both beneficial and practical, clubs in the lower divisions may
find it less so and the removal of all standing accommodation at
these grounds may affect their viability. Alterations to seating
from standing arrangements at existing grounds may have both
design and cost implications through the impact on such matters
as spectator sight-lines and crowd density.
10. In addition, it must be recognised that there are many
sports (horse, greyhound, motor racing and car rallying for
example) where the nature of the sport favours the mobility of
large sections of the crowd and where viewing from standing areas
is an essential element. Any recommendations towards all-seater
stadia must therefore be carefully worded.
ramps and of the principles behind the provisions.
Inspections and Tests

40. Inspection and tests of all equipment and structures at
grounds are vital features of good operation.     Their range is
wide, extending from visual inspection before and after each
event to regular testing of structural components.       It is a
matter of serious concern that the interpretation of requirements
by those responsible is unacceptably variable.      The Technical
Working Party considers that action should be taken to ensure
that common high standards of inspection and test are realised,
and makes the following recommendations.

     (i)    The Green Guide should include a comprehensive
     tabulation of inspections and tests covering the essential
     technical features of grounds.    It should prescribe the
     minimum frequencies at which the inspections and tests
     should be conducted.
     (ii)   The required levels of competence of those carrying
     out the inspections and tests should be defined.
     (iii)   Records of the results of inspections and tests,
     including the identification of defects and the remedies
     adopted, should be certified by those carrying out the work.
     (iv)    A national Inspectorate should be established to
     oversee the adoption of common standards of inspection and
     test. Its terms of reference should include the compilation
     and maintenance of a national register of organisations
     employed to carry out inspections and tests;         central
     recording of the extent and type of the inspections and
     tests adopted at individual grounds;    and the provision of
     advice on inspection and test for those responsible for
     carrying out the work and for certifying authorities.     It
     would be in the interest of common standards if an
     Inspectorate of this kind dealt with the grounds of all
     relevant sports, and consideration should be given to its
     formation through an association of their governing bodies.
Fire Safety

41. There is general recognition amongst Technical Working Party
members that the current Chapter on Fire Safety (Chapter 11) is
well-defined. It contains much useful advice on egress and means
of escape, application of which is not restricted to fire risks
and which would bear repetition in other Chapters.
42. The Technical Working Party considers that it is essential
to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and communication;
independent input from individual bodies is to be avoided. With
that in mind, its members believe that consultation on all safety
matters should be directly with the certifying authority who, in
turn, would consult with the fire, police, and other authorities.
Emergency/Auxiliary Power
43. The Technical Working Party considers that the current Green
Guide contains insufficient information on auxiliary power.    It
recommends a separate chapter on the topic with a requirement
that emergency power should be sufficient to maintain an adequate
level of lighting, and public address system and to operate any
electronic gates, alarms etc for a period of three hours from the
time of failure of the normal supply.
Communications
44. The Technical Working Party considers that too little weight
has in the past been attached to the need for a comprehensive
communications    system, capable of reaching both inside and
outside the ground.
45. Chapter 12 of the Green Guide therefore requires substantial
amendment to reflect the importance of effective communications
systems, the need to make use of high-technology equipment, and
the value ofcloser co-operation between        club and police
personnel. The Technical Working Party considers that Interim
Recommendations 31-34 should be retained permanently and
incorporated into the Green Guide.
Disabled Spectators
46. The current Green Guide fails to address the specific
problems encountered by disabled spectators and the Technical
Working Party recommends the introduction of a Chapter to cover
these aspects.    It should deal in particular with Ingress and
Egress and with  the provision ofself-contained viewing areas.
