From: M J Addison                              cc     Ms Adams
      FI Division                                     Mr Yates
      Extn 3743
      28 April 1989                                   HMCIC
                                                      Mr Boys Smith
                                                      Mr Malone-Lee
                                                      Mr Sandiford
                                                      Mr Nagler
                                                      Mr Whalley
                                                      Mr Waghorn



Mr Storr


HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


1.   As you know, the Home Secretary has now given Mr Beaumont-
Dark a guarantee that the additional costs of the West Midlands
police inquiries will not fall on the West Midlands police
authority.   We^ have, however, a letter from the Clerk to the
authority to which we need to reply, as well as a letter from the
Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

Letter from South Yorkshire

2.   The letter    from   the   Clerk   to   the   South   Yorkshire   Police
Authority

     a.    refers to the establishment of the independent inquiry
            under Lord Justice Taylor;

     b.    claims that the Home Secretary has made it clear that
            the Chief Constable of the West Midlands will report
            directly to Lord Justice Taylor;

     c.    argues that South Yorkshire cannot meet the costs of
            the police inquiries without putting at risk the
            operational efficiency of the force; and

     d.    seeks    confirmation   that  the   full  costs  of the
            "Tribunal" including the inquiry by the Chief Constable
            of the West Midlands police will be borne by central
            government.

3.   We have discussed this approach at official level with the
Treasury.  We do not think it will do.   We can of course confirm
that the Government will defray the direct costs of the Taylor
inquiry itself, but the costs of the West Midlands police enquiry
are another matter.  The West Midlands police were invited in by
the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.     It is true that they
are now reporting to Sir Peter Taylor, though not at the request
of the Home Office but because the Judge so directed and it
seemed too sensible to resist.  But South Yorkshire police issues
(conduct at Hillsborough, possible complaints and discipline
matters, and preparation of material for the Coroner's inquest)
remain at the heart of their investigations.

4.   We do not think therefore that we should concede full
Government funding  on the grounds that the post Hillsborough
proceedings are of national importance only and no longer have
any local interest or content.  There may be room for argument
over

     a.   whether some elements of the police inquiries are
           wholly national and so justify 100% Government funding.
           The only   likely candidate would appear to be the
           collection of witness statements for the inquiry, but
           this would fall to the ground if the same statements
           are, as is likely, needed for the Coroner's inquest or
           for the purpose of reviewing the actions of the South
           Yorkshire  force, including    any likely complaints or
           discipline cases; and

     b.   whether, once one has pinned down South Yorkshire's
           responsibilities, the actual cost to them is so great
           as to threaten the efficiency of the force.     In that
           case we can consider the possibility of a special
           payment on miners' strike lines (ie reimbursement above
           a fixed threshold eg the product of a penny rate).
           This   would  need  Treasury   agreement.    They have
           signalled in advance great reluctance to give it.

5.   Clearly the next step is to get into discussions urgently
with South Yorkshire and the attached draft reply (which I think
should go at official level) would set these up.

West Midlands

6.  The letter   from   the   Clerk   to   the   West   Midlands   Police
Authority

     a.   refers to the secondment of West Midlands Police
          Officers to gather information for the Public Inquiry,
          with Mr Dear working directly to Lord Justice Taylor;

     b.   refers to the expenditure being incurred on additional
           costs of officers, hotel accommodation, travelling,
           subsistence, overtime, vehicle hire, telephones and
           equipment;

     c.   suggests that in view of the national importance of the
           Taylor inquiry and "the fact that the West Midlands
           Force was asked to assist by the Home Office" (this
           canard again), this is clearly a case for special
           payment from central funds; and

     d.   asks for confirmation that the cost of the seconded
           officers and the additional costs incurred by the West
           Midlands will be reimbursed in full.

7.   The confirmation for which the clerk asks at          (d) has been
given as far as additional costs are concerned.              But it is
                          probable that West Midlands want more than that.  Their reference
                          to "the cost of the seconded officers and the additional costs"
                          may well imply that they wish to be paid the basic salary costs
  fu                          the officers concerned.    This should be strongly resisted
                         jjsince basic salary costs would have had to be borne by the West
 cjtu    Z y+voJr        "Midlands Police Authority even if there had been no disaster.
        faM M T Q
               is -      8*    The West Midlands will assume (or pretend to) that the Home
uae                      Secretary's guarantee to Mr Beaumont-Dark implies an instant
L           a r t* * *   payment to them out of central funds.   They will probably object
**   aw’                 to the proposition that they should look to South Yorkshire for
                          reimbursement.    Our line must, however, be that that is the
                          reasonable and established course, and should be followed, albeit
                          in the light of the discussions which we hope to be opening up
                         with South Yorkshire, with the West Midlands no doubt being
                          involved as well in due course.

                         9.   The draft reply attached takes that line and I submit it for
                         the Home Secretary's approval.  Again I recommend that the actual
                         reply goes at official level.

                         10.  I would be grateful to know whether the Home Secretary
                         agrees with this approach and to the draft letters attached.




                                                            M J ADDISON
                                                                           FILE NUMBER

 DRAFT LETTER


^ D R E S S E E 'S REFERENCE


   TO                                           ENCLOSURES                       COPIES TO BE SENT TO
 R C Johnston Esq
 Clerk and Financial Offic sr
 South Yorkshire Police Au :hority
 PO Box 37
 Regent Street
 Barnsley
 South Yorkshire
 S70 2PQ




         (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                                           (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                                                                            MR ADDISON
                        LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y .............................................................
                                                                                       (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                        HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY: TRIBUNAL OF INQUIRY


                        The Home         Secretary has             asked me            to thank          you for your
                        letter of 24 April and to reply to it on his behalf.


                        The immediate costs of the Public Inquiry undertaken by
                        Lord       Justice         Taylor        will       be        met       in     full by           the
                        Government.           The costs of the inquiries being undertaken
                        by   the     West     Midlands         police        are,      however,         a    different
                        matter          since      those        inquiries             were        started at             the
                        initiation of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and
                        are being undertaken for reasons connected with policing
                        in   South       Yorkshire,           although         there       may     well      be     wider
                        implications as well.


                        The best way            forward would seem to be an early meeting
                        between us to discuss                   these       issues       further.           We need I
                        think      to     focus       on    the      purposes         being       served        by       the
                        inquiries being undertaken by the West Midlands Police in




        H.O. EST. 112
S 536
                                                                                                            35688 9.85 XNW
South    Yorkshire;          whether   and   to   what   extent    these
inquiries       could   be    said to be     serving   a purpose   other
than    those    connected with policing          in South    Yorkshire;
and the scale and cost of those inquiries in relation to
South    Yorkshire      Police    Authority's     available    financial
resources.


I hope that you will agree to this course and am asking
my Secretary to get in touch with a view to arranging a
meeting here at the earliest convenient date.
                                                              FILE NUMBER

 DRAFT LETTER


        DRESSEE'S REFERENCE


   TO                                       ENCLOSURES             COPIES TO BE SENT TO
 A V Astling Esq
 Clerk
 West Midlands Police Authority
 Council House
 Dudley
 DY1 1HG




          (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                              (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                                                               MR ADDISON
                         LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY
                                                                          (NAME OF SIGNATORY!

                         PUBLIC INQUIRY - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY


                         The Home     Secretary has       asked me       to   thank   you     for your
                         letter of 25 April and to reply to it on your behalf.


                         As I think you will probably know, the Home Secretary has
                         already accepted, in a letter to Mr Anthony Beaumont-Dark
                         MP,   that   the    additional    costs    of    the   police       inquiries
                         being undertaken in relation to the Hillsborough disaster
                         by West Midlands police officers should not fall on the
                         West Midlands Police Authority.


                         The   p r ecise     arrangements     for        reimbursing        the       West
                         Midlands     Police   Authority     will,       however,     need       further
                         discussion.        I have asked for an urgent meeting with the
                         Clerk to South Yorkshire Police Authority,                   since it was
                         at the request of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
                         that the West Midlands police inquiries were set in hand




         H.O. EST. 112
S 536
                                                                                            36668 9.85 XNW
and    their       inquiries    seem    related    in   large    part    to
questions connected with policing in South Yorkshire.


It    is   time,    as   you point out,    that Mr Dean      is working
directly to Lord Justice Taylor.             But that does not mean
that the work of the West Midlands Police has ceased to
have       any     connection    with     police    issues      in   South
Yorkshire.         For this reason it is necessary to start with
a close examination of that authority's position.


These matters will clearly take some effort to resolve.
I think it must be right for me to take them up with the
Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority initially,
as the force in whose area the tragedy occurred and whose
Chief Constable invited the West Midlands police in.                    But
I will be in touch with you again as soon as I can after
my initial discussions with South Yorkshire.
