                    A
                                  DR. ERNEST JOHN WALLACE GUMPERT Sworn

                                              By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Dr. Gumpert, could you first of all give us your full
                           names, qualifications and appointment? - A. Ernest John
                           Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Mcdicine of the
                    B      University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
                           University of Cambridge.   A Member of the Royal
                           College of Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal College
                           of Physicians of London.   I am consulting clinical
                           neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
                           Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.

                        Q. Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
                           professionally, I dragged you back from Cambridge
                           today? - A. Yes, sir.

                       0. Where I tracked you down!   I very much appreciate the
                          fact you dropped all your other arrangements in order
                          to be here.   Thank you very much.   Dr. Gumpert, you,
                          of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
                    £)   I think you dealt with quite a lot of the injured
                          following Hillsborough and indeed you may well know one
                          or two people I will be referring to later, but this
                          particular case was not one you came across.    You have
                          heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
                          young man.   What I would like you to do now is to give
                          us a short explanation, as you see death, in the first
                          instance and then we will try and relate it to this
                    E    young man and particularly Mr. Bruder's evidence
                          relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when it
                          became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
                          kidney transplantations, it became very important that
                          the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
                          usually in accidents, could be increased because the
                          life of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
                          completely different to the life of a patient who has
                          to have dialysis three times a week.   They can go back
                          to normal life.

                           A hypothesis of brain death was then discussed, agreed
                           and published.     This consisted of certain examinations
                           of the back part of the brain, the part we call the
                           brain stem.    If you imagine the brain as being like a
                           walnut, and it is, it is like having a carrot stuck
                           underneath the walnut, and it is the carrot that
                           matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
                           respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
                           controlled,    Orrce this part of the brain is dead, and
                           this death occurs, as you heard Erom Dr. Slater, in
                           between four and six minutes after deprivation of
                           oxygen, then the person is going to die.     They can be
                H                                -   15   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        kept alive by artificial means and some of you may
                        remember the case in America which was kept alive for
                        thirteen and a half years.

                        Some of us were concerned that the guidelines that were
                        drawn up were not strict enough and that there was no
                        call for them to be repeated after a passage of time.
                        Perhaps unwisely we said this and this resulted in a
                    B   BBC "Panorama" programme one night at ten o'clock when
                        the medical profession for once actually debated it,
                        eight of us.    As a result of that debate the
                        regulations were hardened.    They had to be carried out
                        by senior people who were used to doing it and they had
                        to be repeated.    A satisfactory outcome from my
                        personal point of view, although I don't know whether
                        the anguish was worth it really.

                        As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
                        years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
                        procedure many times.   It was part of my professional
                        duty but still to this day I cannot certify someone
                        dead without being disturbed by it still.

                    D   From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
                        experience of brain death and brain damage.   It seems
                        clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
                        probably dead before he was got out of the area in
                        which he was standing.   I would agree with Dr. Slater.
                        I would think consciousness was lost probably within
                        ten seconds.   I would say loss of pain would be almost
                        instantaneous - not quite, but almost.
                    E
                                  ixplain the Liverpool Police Constable's term
                        I cannot e:
                        "convulsion1
                                  m ’ because to me a convulsion is a maj<
                                                                      major
                        epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
                        not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean.    I
                        think it would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
                        means.   I think we could accept that he does not mean
                        any significant movement.

                        Unfortunately, after people are brain stem dead, they
                        can twitch and very unnerving it is too.   This is
                        really due to a spinal reflex.  What we think happens
                        in anoxia - lack of oxygen - is that the brain stem
                        dies first.   The cortex, that is the thinking part of
                        the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
                        longer and the peripheral nervous system probably quite
                    G   a bit long still and I think that is the explanation of
                        what has been described by the Liverpool officer.

                        I know the Liverpool officer in his supplemental
                        statement when he was discussing the question of a
                        pulse says he may have been mistaken, but let us
                        hypothesise that in fact he wasn't and he had felt a
                H                            -   16   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
                        would that fit in with your understanding...   Is that
                        a possibility? - A. It is a possibility, sir.   I would
                        like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
                        quite difficult in somebody who has got a low blood
                        pressure, as would have been here.   In fact it can be
                        so difficult it is impossible and you have to put an
                        electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
                    B   stopped or not.

                        I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
                        I was very fortunate when I qualified that I became
                        house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
                        Brock at Guy's Hospital.   That was in the days when we
                        did open cardiac massage.   In other words, if somebody
                        died you opened their chest and you massaged their
                        heart between your hands.   A terrifying experience.
                        It was while I was working for him that one day three
                        of us were doing it one morning, that he stopped it,
                        and that was the start of external cardiac massage.
                        Even to somebody like me who has been doing it for
                        twenty-five years, it is still very difficult.    The
                        last time I tried to do it I failed completely.    Even
                    D   to a trained person it is difficult.   Indeed, when
                        junior doctors are examined for this now, as they are,
                        a significant number fail rather than pass.    It is
                        quite difficult and for the lay person it must be
                        incredibly difficult.

                        You heard Dr. Slater's account of death, shall we say.
                        Would you go along with that? - A. I thought it was
                    E   eloquent.   I felt quite nervous!

                        You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
                        loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
                        there.  Can you give me any idea that if a person
                        becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and for how long
                        can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dr.
                        Slater put it very clearly.   You all read in the
                        newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
                        had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
                        able to tell what the doctors were talking about during
                        the operation.   Again I have experienced this at first
                        hand when I was doing heart surgery because then it was
                        often very important not to depress the state of
                        consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
                        anyhow.   When we used to resuscitate the patients we
                    G   used to give them an electric shock.   Lord Brock used
                        to always shout, "Give it two fast ones."   The patient
                        would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
                        were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
                        else?" and they didn't, so it is all very much a
                        question of degree.

                H                            -   17   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          I think slipping from slight unconsciousness to deep
                          unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
                          the compression and two because of the asphyxia and
                          three because as Dr. Slater again explained everything
                          is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
                          moving around, it would have been very quick, almost as
                          quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.
                    B          THE CORONER:       Mr. Fraser?

                               MR. FRASER:      No questions, sir.

                                       Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB :

                        Q. Dr. Gumpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
                           very quick space of time from slight unconsciousness to
                           deep unconsciousness.   Following deep unconsciousness,
                           do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? - A.
                           Either may occur.  There is no particular rule.   The
                           thing we all see on the cinema of the person going to
                           close the dead person's eyes.   I don't think I have
                           had to do that more than two or three times in my life.
                           Most of the people I have seen die have died with their
                    D      eyes shut.

                        Q. Deep unconsciousness is associated with no longer
                           feeling any pain or discomfort.   Is then the face of
                           the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
                           grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing
                           pain or discomfort? - A. Not in my view, sir.

                    E   Q. Is it in fact capable of any facial expression? - A.
                           Not in my view.

                        0. Following profound unconsciousness, is it right that
                           the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
                           of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
                           thereafter brain death?

                                THE CORONER:      Could you repeat that question?

                                MR. LIMB:   I am referring back to the process, or
                           the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, sir.
                           Firstly, unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
                           thereafter again brain death.   The nature of my
                           inquiry was as to whether following profound
                           unconsciousness, although there may be no outward
                    G      expressions there is this change that the face becomes
                           discoloured?

                                THE CORONER:      The greyness you are driving at?

                                MR. LIMB:      Sir,       that is right.

                H                                     -   18   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
