                                 CONFIDENTIAL

 From: C F B on e                                       cc Mr Edmundson
       Hillsborough Scrutiny                               Mr Pyne
       1106 QAG
       8 2512


           24 February 1998


 Mr Pugh. OPPU


 HOUSE LIBRARIES

 We spoke about the material from the Scrutiny required for the House Libraries.
 You gave me a list of twelve items and told me that the Libraries would in addition
 require copies of all contemporary ‘recollections’ or statements about the
 Hillsborough disaster, original and amended, by South Yorkshire Police officers.
 Putting all this together has taken a little time.

2.      I am sending with this note one copy of each o f these thirteen items (except for
8, 9, and part o f 5, which OPPU already have - see below). The note describes the
action which has been and/or now needs to be taken on each o f them. I have
prepared it on the understanding that the House Libraries require six copies of
everything (despite the enormous bulk) and that OPPU will need to keep its own
complete, coherent Home Office set of what is sent to them - which is essential.


Item 1 - Transcripts QfInterviews With those w ho gave evidence to Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith.

3.      Aside from his private interviews with bereaved relatives, Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith held transcribed interviews with the 14 people listed at paragraph 4 of
Appendix 1 of his report. He also held transcribed discussions with Professor
Scraton, Detective Chief Superintendent Foster, and Dr Popper. I attach one copy
of each of these transcripts for the House Libraries.

4.       The only problems with this material are that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was as
I recall reluctant for the record o f his discussion with Dr Popper to be published
(though I am afraid I am not quite clear why that was) and that Mr Bruder’s transcript
has him saying, in effect, that he used to be |                                I thought it
might be worth checking the latter point out with Mr Bruder’s former force,
Merseyside, to see if they are content                                      , (Mr Bruder
has however retired from the police, and he was content for us to send a copy o f his
transcript to Mrs Anne Williams, the mother o f the boy he tried to save).




                               CONFIDENTIAL
A:\LIBRARY.254
                                CONFIDENTIAL
 5.      I have spares of all this stuff for the Home Office record. I suggest OPPU
 copy it 5 times and then ship the 5 copies to the House Libraries with the originals.
 The Home Office can keep the spares I have.

 6.     I also have transcripts of LJS-S’s private meetings with relatives. But you
 told me these were not wanted for the Libraries and I agree that it would be wrong to
 put them there. They are not included in the material with this note.


 Item 2 - O ther records of discussions held bv Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith. w here
 transcripts were not made.

7.      The only two meetings which come into this category are those which the
Judge had with Richard Wells, Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire, and Tim King QC
(Counsel for the families at the Inquest). Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not want
these transcribed. Instead, he asked me to make a note. I did that and OPPU already
have copies (though I attach new ones for convenience).

8.       In my view it would be wrong to place these in the House Libraries without
seeking Mr Wells’ or Mr King’s consent. Mr King in particular (see the confidence
mark on his note and the last paragraph of it) came to speak to the Judge on the
understanding that their discussion would be private. He may also have some
sensitivity about not having written to the Judge as the note has him promising to do
(I might add that at his request I sent Mr King a copy of the note so that he could as he
put it ‘initial’ and return it, but he didn’t). OPPU can write to Mr King at Byrom
Street Chambers, 25 Byrom Street, Manchester M3 4PF.


Item 3 - W ritten evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith bv witnesses.

9.      The witnesses in question are those who are listed at paragraph 4 o f Appendix
1 of the Report. You also told me that written material from the people whom Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith had consulted - paragraph 6 of Appendix 1 - fell under this head
and would need to go into the Libraries.

Witnesses

 10.    We had written evidence from most (but not all) of the people listed at
paragraph 4 - Bruder, Bull, Edwards, Frost, Houldsworth, Debra Martin, McCombie,
Taylor and Walker. The other five (Appleton, Bichard, Denton, Mrs Martin, and
McRobbie) provided us with no written evidence (though contemporary statements by
Bichard and McRobbie can be found among the police statements which I discuss at
the end o f this note, both gave oral evidence to Lord Taylor, and Bichard appeared at
the Inquests too).

11.    The Frost and Houldsworth material can be found reproduced in the Report.
So too can some of the Walker material. The rest of Walker’s written material is
included in the Group submissions - item 5 below.


                              CONFIDENTIAL
A:\LIBRARY.254
                               CONFIDENTIAL

12.     That leaves Binder, Bull, Edwards, Debra Martin, McCombie, and Taylor.
Their material is attached (some o f it is duplicated in Item 5 below). I suggest that it
is copied 6 times for the House Libraries and that the Home Office retain the copies I
attach.

People who were consulted

13.     O f those listed at paragraph 6 of Appendix 1 1 attach material from Collins,
Dorries, Foster, Fraser, Hytner, Metcalf, Parry-Evans, Popper, Slater, Steel,
Wardrope, Peter Wells, Whitehurst and Williams - that is, everybody except King and
Richard Wells. There is no written material from Tim King QC, except for the note
of his discussion with LJS-S which I deal with at item 2 above. Item 2 also covers
the note of Richard Wells’s talk to the Judge. Mr Wells wrote one letter to the Judge,
commenting on a draft of Chapter 5 of the report dealing with South Yorkshire’s
apology. We agreed some of his suggestions and rejected the rest. But I do not
think his letter needs to go to the House Libraries.

14.      As you know I think that releasing any material from those we consulted so
that it can be picked over by aggrieved relatives or people acting on their behalf is a
very dubious proposition. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith certainly does not favour it.
He did not expect this material to be released. OPPU mustat the very least alert both
LJS-S and the originators, and preferably ask for consent (addresses are on the letters).
This is more than just a courtesy. Some of the letters which I attach pose particular
problems of their own.

15.    We did not approach Judge Collins or Judge Steel on a statedly confidential
basis. There is no dynamite in their letters. But they nevertheless write as one Judge
to another and there were implicit guarantees that what they said would not get into
the public domain. Similar considerations apply to Mr Hytner (a very senior QC)
and Mr Whitehurst (Treasury Solicitors).




 17.     The Dorries material omits some routine letters and one which is specifically
 about the case of Kevin Williams. The Metcalf letters (two of them) bite on the
 police statements issue. The second one is his very effective response to what was in
 effect a Salmon (more properly ‘Maxwell’) letter from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I
 can see real sensitivities about releasing it, even though the Judge discusses some of
 what it says in the report (Chapter 4, para 84). The letters from Foster are his robust
 account o f the impact o f the police statements issue on the West Midlands



                                CONFIDENTIAL
 A:\LIBRARY.254
                               CONFIDENTIAL
investigation - which he ran - and thoughts further to his, and WPS Appleton and PS
McCombie’s, meeting with the Judge.

18.      Dr Popper wrote to us from his home address, and it is essential that he be
assured that this will be deleted from any copies o f his letters deposited in the House
Libraries. He should also be told that the transcript o f his meeting with the Judge is
being placed in the Library. I think this will come as a surprise to him and he may
be worried about it - 1 do not think he said anything out of place, but English is not his
first language and what he says can seem a little odd in cold print.

19.


                                                                            1 attach
the only substantive letter we had from Dr W ardrope - he sent us others, but these
covered medical records which should not go into the Libraries (families have access
to them via the hospital if they ask).

20.    I don’t see any problems with the Parry-Evans and Peter Wells material.
But again they should be consulted as a courtesy.




                                 CONFIDENTIAL
 A:\LIBRARY.254
                                CONFIDENTIAL




 Itgm 4 - Other written statements consulted at the request of the families (with
 the exception of these provided by Dr Burns and Dr West)

 26.      The people concerned are those listed at paragraph 5 of Appendix 1 of the
 Report. Their material is attached (apart from Noel Bume’s, which you have already
 had - it falls under item 9 below). Again I suggest that it is copied 6 times for the
 House Libraries and that the Home Office retain the copies I attach.


 Item 5 - Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith hv
 Counsel and others on behalf of the Family Support Group

27.    The oral submissions are contained in the transcript at item 12. The written
submissions are attached. I have not included an ‘interim’ version o f the main
submission, in effect an early draft o f it, which the Group put to LJS-S at the
beginning o f September. This is the same as the main submission only with
important bits missed out. I suggest that this material be copied 6 times and the
Home Office retain the originals, which I attach.

28.    The Group’s main written submission came with 6 volumes o f Annexes.
Much of what is in these duplicates material that is already in the public domain - for
example, Lord Taylor’s report and transcripts of his hearings. We agreed that this
would not need to be placed in the House Libraries. But the rest o f the material in the
Annexes (in fact most of the contents of Volume IV and all o f V and VI) would. As I
understand it that has already been done. I attach the originals of Volumes I, II, III
and IV for retention by the Home Office - Mr Pyne has Volumes V and VI already.


Item 6 - South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989
semi-finals

29.     I suggest that these be copied 6 times for the Libraries, and that the Home
Office retain the copies which I attach.


Itfi.ro 7 - Nineteen statements bv the Police Complaints A uthority

30.     I wonder whether it is not slightly absurd placing these in the House Libraries
given that they are public documents - press releases - and are also completely
uninformative. I attach them for what it is worth. To be copied six times, allowing
the Home Office to retain the copies which I attach.


                              CONFIDENTIAL
A:\LIBRARY.254
                                CONFIDENTIAL


 Item 8 - Report produced bv David Phillips                  ^

 31.    You have already had this and sent copies to the House Libraries. I hope that
 OPPU have retained a copy for the Home Office, as I have no other (but if not you
 could ask South Yorkshire to let you have another one).


 Item 9 - Noel Burne’s report

 32.     Again you have already had this for copying for the House Libraries. I must
 return the copy I gave you to the solicitors, Hammond Suddards, who sent it to us (it
 is unfortunate, though I am sure unavoidable, that it has been broken out o f its original
 binding - I will have to apologise and put it in ring binders instead). But the Home
 Office will need a copy as well if it does not already have one. OPPU should see to
 that before returning the report to me.


Item 10 - Police videotapes T B 1.2 .3 and 4

33.      I attach copies o f these four tapes. If the House Libraries require six copies
of them, I would suggest that OPPU copy TB1 and TB2 - the important ones - from
their originals, which I have here in the Scrutiny office. But the originals will have to
go back to South Yorkshire Police, who own them. It is imperative that the
originals should go back to Sheffield and not be mixed up with copies.

34.     OPPU will also presumably wish to have a Home Office copy of each o f the
four tapes.


Items 11     12 - transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s open meeting on 6
October and meeting with Counsel on 30 Septemher      ,7^ Q,

35.   I have a spare copy o f each transcript for Home Office purposes, so OPPU
may wish to let the Libraries have the attached originals and five copies.


Last item - South Yorkshire Police statements

36.     I have tried to put this huge quantity of documents back into the order they
were in when South Yorkshire Police lent them to us. I find it hard to believe that the
House Libraries will actually want six copies of all this stuff, or that the Home Office
will want to keep a copy o f its own. But assuming these things to be true OPPU
will need to get this material copied seven times.

37.     This will be a huge task. Each document must be unstapled for copying, and
then restapled and put back in its right envelope. All this must happen without any of


                               CONFIDENTIAL
A:\LIBRARY.254
                                CONFIDENTIAL
 the documents being mixed up so that I can send the material back to South Yorkshire
 more or less in the state in which they let us have it.

 38.     Each o f the seven copies o f each document must also be stapled. There will
 also need to be an indexing system o f some kind - the police have relied on a register
 on the contents of each envelope, but this might not be very helpful unless the copies
 are put in corresponding folders.

 39.     Many o f the documents will not make good copies, being copies themselves or
 fading computer prints. Nevertheless they are what we found in South Yorkshire’s
 archive.


 Family Support Group copies

 40.    Mr Pyne tells me that the families (I assume the Family Support Group) have
 asked for their own copies o f all these statements. Strictly speaking this is nothing to
do with me as Scrutiny secretary, but it might help if I say that I think this would be a
decision for South Yorkshire Police to make. The statements belong to them, not to
the Home Secretary or the (vestigial) Scrutiny. I would imagine that South
Yorkshire would be well advised to agree, given that the Support Group will have
access to the statements in the House Libraries anyway (with the funds at their
disposal I expect that they would send a researcher down to Westminster to crawl over
them full time).

41.    Assuming that South Yorkshire agree, the most efficient way forward might
be for OPPU to get the mountain of statements copied eight times rather than seven.
That would give six copies for the House Libraries, one copy for the Family Support
Group, one for the Home Office, and the originals back to South Yorkshire Police.


Reservations

42.     The issue is water under the bridge now, but I have as you know grave
reservations about opening the statements up to the families given the material in
them which is seriously critical of the behaviour o f Liverpool supporters. Some of
this was cut out o f the ‘amended’ versions - the David Frost statement at Appendix 6
of the scrutiny report contains examples, but in my view by no means the worst.

43.     The statements will be o f no use to the families in their continuing search for
‘justice’ (if that is indeed what they are after). But they are going to find things in
these statements which will enrage and distress them. Some of the contents may
provoke real fury among them and on Merseyside generally.

44.     You told me that the statements will not be anonymised. The names o f their
authors - PC’s, Sergeants, Inspectors, many of them still serving South Yorkshire
officers - will appear on them. A lot of these officers were traumatised on the day
and have struggled for years to put the disaster, for which they were in no way to


                               CONFIDENTIAL
A:\UBRARY.254
                               CONFIDENTIAL
blame, behind them. They set down their ‘recollections’ honestly and in good faith.
In many cases adverse comment about Liverpool fans is only there because the
officers were told to write down literally everything they had to say. They would not
have put it into an ordinary Criminal Justice Act statement. Now they will be faced,
years after the event, with vilification by the families and quite possibly in the press.

45.    Some families will trawl through the statements looking for anything that
could be a reference to their relative and then bombard the officers with probably
unanswerable but inevitably distressing questions about them.

46.     Apart from anything else there is an obvious Police Federation angle here.
Little good, but potentially much harm, can come of releasing these statements. I
hope the powers that be know what they are doing.


Further action

47.    Now that the report has been published I must return the scrutiny material to
its owners - South Yorkshire Police, the Coroner, the Public Record Office, TV
companies, and others. I must then shut the scrutiny office down. I will keep you in
touch with progress on that.




C F BONE




                                CONFIDENTIAL
 A:\UBRARY.254
     f<2|?®fK



    (DCvoOA fcpof^         X         CP-    M«)


                    /tpo/k ^ ^       ^ ^ u^>^
^       £ > o ( 2 (,                  C O o ^ ^ )

                                           v y /l   )
     (Q Q (L^r CVr***~eXt*t      I
                    /\ *      "V v
            £ > 0
