The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT


28th December 1997



Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

Thank you for your letters of the 21st November and the 9th December 1997.1 assume you are
aware that I/we have also received responses from the Home Secretary. They have gone some way
to clarify matters relating to your terms of reference and/or timetable and the contents are noted.
Further views or comment from us are not really matters for this document.

This bundle is intended to respond to elements within those letters, furnish you with the documents I
promised (plus several more!) and to comment on matters which I feel should impact on your
deliberations. I will concede immediately that some of the content is not “new material evidence”
but I have included it either under the public interest aspect of your task or “for the record”.

I would emphasise that all the matters and opinions expressed here are mine and/or on behalf of
Jenni Hicks. I am not aware of any conflict with the views or opinions of the group but I feel I
should make that clear, just in case.

May I also take the opportunity to apologise for the late arrival of this material and for any
inconvenience that may cause. Much of the body file material is new to me and has raised nearly as
many questions as it has answered. This has required a tremendous amount of document retrieval,
cross checking, re- reading etc

As a father yourself I trust you will understand that the need to be detached and professional with
material so very personal to my late daughters, my memories and horrors of the day has quite
frankly proved more difficult to handle than even I imagined.

I am also guilty of mis-managing the task on this occasion and with hindsight should have sent
several “parts” rather than striving to put one bundle together - especially when in the wrong frame
o f mind!

To structure this document in a readable form has also proved difficult and I have therefore adopted
the format of a sectionalised “commentary” section to which a single bundle of sequentially
numbered documents have been attached. There is some overlap but I have tried to separate these
and prevent repetition where possible.

 I regret the bulk but felt it would actually be easier for you to fy^ve all the papers in one file. Many
you have seen or had before, the majority you have not.
