                                                                         ROYAL     COURTS     OF JUSTICE

                                                                         STRAND, LONDON,         WC2A 2LL




The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Stuart Smith
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand
London WC2A 2LL



                                                                                             16 January 1998




Thank you for forwarding the extracts from your draft report, the final version of which I look forward
to reading in due course. I am very sorry that your letter of 2 December 1997 did not reach me. I was
on circuit in Stafford and I suppose it must somehow have got lost in the system.

It will be no surprise to you that I have very little recollection of detail. I do, however, recall that I was
aware that self-written statements by SY police officers were being vetted by Hammond Suddards with
a view to deleting opinion, hearsay etc. and correcting errors. Since the system was that statements of
witnesses who were called to give evidence or whose evidence was to be taken into account by the
Inquity were served on the interested parties and on the press, it was hardly surprising that SYP should
want this to be done. In some cases, as David Brummell’s letter confirms, we had copies of both the
unamended and the amended versions. As you rightly point out, we were well aware of the criticisms
which were being raised by junior officers and all were dealt with in the course of the inquiiy. I would
certainly not have felt myself inhibited from investigating any matter with a particular officer on the
ground that he was giving opinion rather than factual evidence.

I did not, of course, see the ACC’s memorandum at Appendix 8, but it accords with what we believed
was happening. We did not think that an officer would sign a statement unless he believed it to be
accurate and it doeyiotseem that any did. The most that can be said, judging by those you detail in
Appendix 7, is thaUmee omissions were made, but they did not lead to any misleading evidence being


It is clear that I saw bothversions of P.C. Huckstepp’s statement. They do perhaps make the point that
there are broadly two sets of opinion. The first, which understandably the SYP wanted deleted,
consisted of criticism of senior officers in what was done or omitted by individuals on the day. The
second, which occurred in P.C. Huckstepp’s case, involved views about possible deficiencies in the
overall planning and arrangements and about whatimprovements might be made for the future. These
views from officers experienced in policing the ground could be valuable in helping to decide why
things had gone wrong and what should be done on subsequent occasions. I think that we had other
statements containing this second type of opinion even though those versions of the statements may not
have been finally put in. But, as I have said and you have correctly confirmed, we were well aware of
all these views and they were explored and in due course commented cn by Peter Taylor.

I have a vague recollection that we did hear that some officers were reluctant to amend their statements
and I think that in some cases there were refusals to do so. It was hardly surprising that some junior
officers felt veiy strongly that they had been let down by their superiors, particularly when they heard
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield seeking to lay blame on the officers inside the gates which were
opened for not taking steps to ensure that fans coming through them were directed away from the
central pens. But it never occurred to me that factual inaccuracies might result:                  It was
because they felt their criticisms should be recorded.                               lu v iri

I entirely agree with your findings and your conclusions.       In particular, I confirm what you say in
 arap"'r)h 88.

 hope uiis helps. Please do not hesitate to contact me if you think I can assist in any other respect.




Mr Justice Collins
