                     h . f
   cr>
   ■V
                                        Q U E E N A N N E'S GATE L O N D O N SVVIH 9 AT

                             Cc m s Cr~cuG~
                                    /s3tCfi/oC&ofV
                                                  £A April            1989
                              rt)r rffor/at^trU         /
                              Mr toujOf1^

                             n ir L Ub&jyCh't
                              V'r
                                        C^cb^o'ts. & k>c*/>
                                                                  y

         U t ( j w

    Following my statement in the House on 17 April about the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, you raised a question about the
effectiveness of the emergency telephone number (col. 37), and
I promised to look into the point.
     May I first say how much I sympathise with those who rang the
■emergency telephone number but were unable to get through. I can
 well understand the distress that this must have caused and the
 anxiety of being unable to find out whether a friend or relative
 was affected.
    Setting up and running a casualty bureau is the operational
responsibility of the Chief Constable concerned. Following the
Zeebrugge tragedy - when the entire Maidstone exchange was
jammed by the volume of incoming calls - the Association of
Police Officers (ACPO) has been addressing the technical problems
involved in ensuring that the flood of calls generated by a major
disaster can be handled effectively.
    ACPO have been working closely with British Telecom and the
Home Office to find a solution. In January a major Home Office
funded exercise (COMTEST 89) was held to test the ability of the
Telephone Marketing Services (TMS) exchange at Bristol to handle
5,000 calls over a four hour period. The exercise needed to test
both the ability of the exchange to receive the calls, and the
effectiveness of using TMS operators as intermediaries between
the public and the police casualty bureau.
    ACPO is now analysing the results of the exercise and I
understand a report is expected shortly. But at the same time
new advanced technological developments are being explored
between ACPO, BT and the Home Office which could allow calls to
be answered in a variety of locations.


                                                  /The question of


George Howarth, Esq, MP
House of Commons
    The question of making the response of a casualty bureau as
effective as possible was explored in the course of a full review
of the response to emergencies carried out by the Home Office in
consultation with the emergency services and others involved. I
hope to be in a position to announce the conclusions of that
review shortly, but I can assure you that we are as concerned as
the public and the police to see the most effective response
possible to casualty enquiries following a major disaster.
1*
                    Iy\)   ■

Mr Mawer                       '           cc   Ms Craig
                                                Miss Nicholson
                                                Mr Yates
                                                Mr Moriarty
                                                Mr Turney
                                                Mr Whalley
                                                Mr Luetchford
                                                Mr Hughes
                                                  (Networks
                                                  Branch)
                                                Mr Sweet
                                                Mr Brandon

HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENT - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE NUMBERS

During Monday's statement, Mr George Howarth MP (at column 37,
attached) raised a query about the use of the emergency telephone
numbers given for public enquiries, saying that the system had
not worked satisfactorily and referring to an exercise recently
held in Bristol.

2.     All police forces have arrangements to set up a casualty
bureau to deal with public enquiries following major civil
emergencies. How the casualty bureau is organised is essentially
an operational decision for individual Chief Constables. But no
matter how well organised the sheer volume of incoming calls may
swamp the local exchange irrespective of the number of lines
available in the casualty bureau. The pressure relates not to
the actual number of casualties, but to the number of people who
might have been involved and whose relatives may make inquiries.

3.     The Association of Chief Police Officers have been
studying the problems closely with British Telecom and Networks
Branch of the Home Office to meet both the technical and
operational requirements imposed by these major incidents. ACPO
organised COMTEST 89 in January (funded by the Home Office) to
test a major facility at Bristol which is normally used for share
flotations and other commercial events generating large numbers
of calls requiring a relatively simple response. A report on the
exercise will be available shortly for ACPO to consider.
4.     In the course of the review of civil emergencies the
problems associated with casualty bureaux were well ventilated
and this is one area we would want the new Civil Emergencies
Adviser to pursue urgently. But ACPO are already exploring with
BT and Networks Branch more advanced systems which have just
become available, including the use of an 0800 number through a
'Linkline' facility, allowing calls to be answered at a variety
of locations.

5.      A draft reply to Mr Howarth is attached, setting out the
position fairly fully.




                                          R KORNICKI
F6 Division
21 April 1989
DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY

                                           hcc   as submission
                                                 + Mr Kornicki

Following my statement in the House on 17 April about the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, you raised a question about the
effectiveness of the emergency telephone number (col. 37), and I
promised to look into the point.

May I first say how much I sympathise with those who rang the
emergency telephone number but were unable to get through. I can
well understand the distress that this must have caused and the
anxiety of being unable to find out whether a friend or relative
was affected.

Setting up and running a casualty bureau is the operational
responsibility of the Chief Constable concerned. Following the
Zeebrugge tragedy - when the entire Maidstone exchange was jammed
by the volume of incoming calls - the Association of Police
Officers (ACPO) has been addressing the technical problems
involved in ensuring that the flood of calls generated by a major
disaster can be handled effectively.

ACPO have been working closely with British Telecom and the Home
Office to find a solution. In January a major Home Office funded
exercise (COMTEST 89) was held to test the ability of the
Telephone Marketing Services (TMS) exchange at Bristol to handle
5,000 calls over a four hour period. The exercise needed to test
both the ability of the exchange to receive the calls, and the
effectiveness of using TMS operators as intermediaries between
the public and the police casualty bureau.

ACPO is now analysing the results of the exercise and I
understand a report is expected shortly. But at the same time
new advanced technological developments are being explored
between ACPO, BT and the Home Office which could allow calls to
be answered in a variety of locations.
The question of making the response of a casualty bureau as
effective as possible was explored in the course of a full review
of the response to emergencies carried out by the Home Office in
consultation with the emergency services and others involved. I
hope to be in a position to announce the conclusions of that
review shortly, but I can assure you that we are as concerned as
the public and the police to see the most effective response
possible to casualty enquiries following a major disaster.
                            Hillsborough Stadium Disaster       17 A P R IL 1989            Hillsborough Stadium Disaster               jo



          Yfr. George Howarth (K n ow sley, N orth): I should like        and another ch ief constable with a high reputation and
          a sso c ia te m yself with the sym pathy that has been          with experience in these matters to d o that jo b o n their
     t0 n ressed. At the invitation o f the M erseyside fire and civil    behalf. I think that that is the right course.
     defence authority, I visited Sheffield yesterday. I was very
                                                                              Mr. Gerald Bermingham (St. H elens, South): As
     to u c h e d indeed by the response o f som e N ottin gh am
                                                                          so m eb ody w ho has constituents w ho are n ow d ead , or are
     Forest supporters, w ho had organised a collection in their
                                                                          relatives o f those w h o are dead as result o f this tragedy,
       iib the previous evening and had com e to the ground to
                                                                          and as som eone w h o lived in Sheffield for 25 years, I have
     p re se n t more than £100 towards the appeal fund. It was           a dual interest in this matter. Will the H o m e Secretary take
     very helpful o f my hon. Friend the M em ber for Sheffield,          one urgent step, which I hope is non-controversial? W ill he
     C entral (Mr. Caborn) to m ake arrangements so that those            arrange that all the film coverage and the pictures that
     0 f us who cam e over were able to find our way around a n d         were taken on Saturday b oth by IT N and the BBC and by
     could go to the appropriate places.                                  amateurs be m ade available to the inquiry? U nless we
        Having spoken to several people w ho cam e over to                m ove quickly, that footage m ay be lost and it contains
     Sheffield yesterday to find ou t what had happened to the)'          evidence that may be o f great value to the inquiry, because
     relatives, I think it is clear that the em ergency telephone !       it will enable the inquiry to see the pressures both inside
     svstem simply did not work satisfactorily o n Saturday, i            and outside the ground, and allow it to draw som e
     spoke to one w om an w ho had tried for eight hours to fin;'         valuable conclusions.
     out what had happened to her son , but had been unable > '
                                                                             Mr. Hurd: I know that there are som etim es difficulties
     get through. I understand from the fire and civil defen.
                                                                          about this material, but that is a valuable suggestion, and




     •
     authority that an exercise w as conducted recently— usit ;
                                                                          1 shall pursue it.
         Bristol exch an ge— aim ed at dealing with precisely such
         Diems, and that that exercise was relatively successf’ii.            Several Hon. Members rose-------
         On this occasion, the provision o f far m ore lines would
                                                                             Mr. Speaker: Order. I will n ow call tw o B ack-B ench
         have enabled the em ergency telephone number to work
                                                                           Members from each side, and then we m ust m o v e on. ...
     more effectively. I understand that that system was uso-1
     for the flotation o f the British G as shares. If it was go od           Sir Anthony Grant (Cam bridgeshire, S ou th -W est): I
     enough for the flotation o f the British G as shares, it wouh         shall not com m ent on the H illsborough g rou nd itself, but
     have been g o o d en ou g h as an emergency system.                   :ny right hon. Friend will be aware that in m any grounds,
                                                                           the facilities are deplorable. W ill he have d iscu ssion s with
        Mr. Hurd: A s the hon. M em ber has indicated, there               his colleagues in the Treasury to see w hether the tax system
     certainly was a problem o f sw am ped lines, at there often is        can be adapted so that there is an incentive to invest in
     on these occasions. I understand absolutely the distress,             im proved stadiums, and a disincentive to spend ludicrous
     anxiety, and worse, caused by that, but I think that it is            sums on transfer fees? I d o not expect m y right h o n . Friend
     rather apart from the terms o f reference o f the inquiry.            to make any decision ab o u t the F o o tb a ll Spectators Bill
     Perhaps I m ay lo ok into the point that the hon. G entlem an         this afternoon, but will he say that the G o v e r n m en t will
     has raised and then get in touch with him.                            reflect on the views that have been expressed in the H ou se
                                                                           this afternoon?
        Mr. John Evans (St. Helens, N orth): In view o f the fact
     that fans from St. H elens died at H illsborough on                      Mr. Hurd: I have noted those views on the Bill. I believe
     Saturday, I w ant to associate m yself with the con d olen ces        that the Bill, which addresses a different problem from the
     that have been expressed.                                             one that caused the tragedy at H illsb orou gh , is soundly
                                                                           based. There will be a pause, as I have said, and there is a
        C an the H o m e Secretary confirm that the trouble
                                                                           case for adding to the Bill and strengthening it. H ow ever,
     started outside the ground because o f the late arrival o f
                                                                           the improvement that we are seeking for fo otb all ca nn ot
     fans and the inability o f the turnstiles to c o p e with them?
                                                                           be total without a provision a lo n g the lines o f a national
     Will he ask Lord Justice T aylor to lo o k into the traffic
                                                                           membership scheme. O n the first matter, m y hon . Friend
     arrangements for visiting fans, bearing in mind the
                                                                           is touching o n a point that is sensitive in the football
     abysmal signposting and the som etim es rather odd
                                                                           industry, but he is right to say that those in it m u st exam ine
     decisions o f traffic police w hen they are directing fans
                                                                           carefully the priorities for spending their not in con sid er­
     towards the ground?
                                                                           able resources.
        S econdly, can the H o m e Secretary inform us that the
     South Y orkshire police will reply directly to the inquiry,               Mr. Richard Caborn (Sheffield, Central): I associate
     and will not allow the W est M idlands police to answer on            m y self with all the remarks m ad e by m y Sheffield
     their behalf?                                                         colleagues on the O p position Benches. I w as at the ground,
                                                                           with my hon. Friend the M em ber for K n o w sle y , N orth
        Mr. Hurd: T he q uestion o f traffic and signposting is            (Mr. Howarth). I ask the H o m e Secretary to take action
     certainly within the terms o f reference o f the inquiry, and         o n perimeter fencing. Y esterday, I sp ok e to som e
     I shall m ake sure that it is noted.                                  experienced engineers, one o f w h o m said that this was an
         On the second point, as I explained earlier, the c h ie f         accident waiting to happen. I call o n the H o m e Secretary
      constable believes— and I think that he is quite right— that         to ensure that no major gam es are played with fans kept
s    since the actions o f som e o f his officers are o b viously a        behind perimeter fencing.
s    matter for the investigation, it is right, for the credibility o f        Today, the media have been singled o ut, and the local
e    the exercise, that the police preparing the inform ation for          radio stations in Sheffield, both R a dio H a lla m and R adio
[1   Lord Justice T aylor’s inquiry, let alone for eventual                Sheffield, played a major part in helping to co-ordin ate the
i    inquests, should not b elong to the sam e force. Therefore,           m a g n ific e n t efforts m ade by the Sheffield peop le in, for
      the chief con stable lo ok ed for, and found, another force          example, blood d on ation and other services, and the


         2 9 C D 3 9 / 1 0 J o b 3-*
c00
 rs
cc.
O**


CV?
