 CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE




          EDGE HILL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE




  INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
DISASTER CONDUCTED BY LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH




       Responses to Requests for Further Information




                  Professor Phil Scraton
In the course of meetings with Lord Justice Stuart Smith the following requests were
made for further information or clarification:

1     The use o f ambulances between Leppings Lane and the gymnasium to
       transport bodies (Roberts family: Scrutiny transcript 7 October 1997p6 line
       15)

2     The assumption that families would be allowed to pursue questions
       unanswered by the preliminary inquest hearings at the later generic hearings
       (Aspinall and Steele families: Scrutiny transcript 7 October 1997ppl3/14)

3     Inconsistencies in South Yorkshire Police evidence (Scraton: Scrutiny
       transcript 24 October 1997, p24)

4     Pressure on witnesses (ibid: p28)

5     Cursory examinations of those pronounced dead (ibid p30)

6     South Yorkshire Police pronouncements denying full responsibility (ibid p32)

I provide the following in answering these requests:

1     The use o f ambulances

       During the meeting in Liverpool with the Roberts family Lord Justice Stuart
       Smith asked if I could point to evidence confirming my assertion that
       ambulances had been used to transport the dead, or those assumed dead, from
       the Leppings Lane concourse area to the gymnasium. I provided Mr and Mrs
       Roberts with one source which, I believe, was forwarded. I now have the
       following to add:

       Statement of Divisional Superintendent T L Dale (SYMAS) Page 12 Para 34.

               “He (Mr Jones) in turn asked me to take two ambulances round
               to the Leppings Lane end to collect 11 bodies and bring them
               back to the gym ... (he then describes his trip and arrival) ...
               There was already an ambulance at Gate C with its crew and
               Station Officer HIGGINS. He asked why we had come and said
               he had already been sent to collect the bodies and the job was
               complete."

       (D S Dale’s statement is in Adam Spearritt’s body file.)

       Statement of Ambulance Officer,                 released week of 24 November
       1997.

       I have had sight of this statement in which             states that following one
       trip, carrying two casualties, to the Northern General he picked up three bodies
       from Leppings Lane at the “temporary collection point by the side o f the
       river” and transported them to the gymnasium.


                                           l
2   Unanswered questions and the generic hearings

    I refer you to the more detailed discussion preceding the first recommendation   i .
    in the enclosed submission. It was assumed that if the preliminary hearings            ^
    were limited to the ‘when’ and ‘where’ of the deaths and the generic hearings    ^         *
    were concerned with the ‘how’, the bereaved would be able to pursue
    unanswered questions at that stage. While the Coroner does not appear to have          .
    guaranteed the asking of specific questions his constant referral to dealing
    with the ‘how’ at a later stage led to this expectation. Consequently much of
    the families’ counsel’s submission on Day 1 of the generic hearings (19
    October 1990) was given to this matter.




3   Inconsistencies in South Yorkshire Police evidence

    Consideration of inconsistencies and contradictions in police evidence should
    be contextualised first with regard to the damning criticisms made by Lord
    Justice Taylor in his Interim Report:

           ... the senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
           witnesses ... neither their handling of problems on the day nor
           their account of it in evidence showed the qualities of
           leadership to be expected of their rank., [para 280]

           It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their
           submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to
           concede that they were in any respect at fault in what occurred.
           [para 285]




    Taken from Scraton et al No Last Rights (text supplied) page 94:

           It was a theme developed by another officer who saw witnesses
           “pushing”, an act not unusual at football grounds. He
           continued, “they just had this one obsession about getting in
           and if they don’t work with you, you cannot break it.”

           During cross-examination this witness was referred to evidence
           which he had given to the Taylor Inquiry. He had been asked
           whether he had seen “any people who you could truthfully say
           were pushing rather than being pushed”, to which he replied he
           could not.




                                       2
Taken from No Last Rights page 96:

       As far as one Chief Inspector was concerned these late arrivals
       were “fighting drunk”. Never had he seen, “so many people in
       drink at a football match before”.           Yet during cross-
       examination it emerged that his original statement had carried a
       quite different emphasis:

       “The proportion of spectators who had been drinking increased
       as time progressed but they were outnumbered by people who
       did not exhibit any signs of drink.”




Reference: No Last Rights ppl03— 104 (mid page).

These paragraphs, beginning: “The evidence of Superintendent Greenwood
...” and ending “... circumspect about police roles and responsibilities”
demonstrate inconsistencies and contradictions in the evidence given to Taylor
and that given at the Inquests.




In presenting his evidence to the generic hearings Superintendent Marshall
was allowed to embark on an emotional attack against Liverpool supporters.
This attack amounted to unsubstantiated allegations concerning drunkenness
and ticketless fans. The statements were prepared, comprising of lengthy
‘recollections’ (Inquest transcripts Vol 27 p4-21), a ‘voluntary statement (Vol
27 p22-30) and his responses to written complaints (Vol 27 p30-36). Much of
this evidence was outside the scope of and agreed procedure for the Inquests
yet the Coroner allowed its presentation. While on other occasions the
Coroner intervened when the 3.15pm cut off was exceeded, Superintendent
Marshall was allowed to make references to a range of other incidents (ie
Wembley; Trafalgar Square). While Mr King, the Families’ Counsel, was
prevented by the Coroner from quoting from the Taylor Inquiry (Vol 30 pp
13-14), Superintendent Marshall was allowed to criticise the Inquiry in his
‘voluntary statement’. Following objections to the admission of the prepared
statements, the Coroner advised the jury to forget what they had heard.

Superintendent Marshall’s evidence contained significant inconsistencies. He
proposed that many of the Liverpool supporters outside the ground were drunk
and without tickets (Vol 27 p24) and he maintained that experienced officers
were aware of the tactics used to gain illegal entry (Vol 27 p25). He stated
that only so much can be done with a crowd intent on going out of control, ...
“this has been seen time and time again” (Vol 27 p26). Yet throughout his
statements Superintendent Marshall portrays the spectators’ behaviour as
unprecedented, particularly in rejecting “the measures in place” (Vol 27 pp25-
27). He claimed support for this from unattributed comments made by


                                   3
Merseyside Police mounted officers at the ground (Vol 27 p31). The
inconsistency in his evidence was underlined when he claimed that the only
previous occasion on which such problems had occurred was in the late 1970s
in a game involving the other Liverpool club, Everton. He stated that,  the
mood and manner almost was the same as ... of the late arrivals on the 15th
April. They were ignorant, abusive and violent” (Taylor transcripts, Vol 11
pp35 and 43).

On the one hand Superintendent Marshall refused to concede that sheer
numbers and the turnstile area layout contributed to the crush outside the
ground, stressing only the “hooligan element” (Vol 11 pl7). On the other
hand, when responding to the proposition that regardless of the circumstances
sooner or later there would have been a tragedy at the turnstile area, he replied
“I think that is a very fair summary, yes ...” (Vol l i p 15). Further: “Would
you concede one of the major factors in the press of people at Leppings Lane
turnstile was the sheer weight of numbers that were in the road and in the
turnstile area itself? A. Yes” (Vol 11 pl7).

Despite Superintendent Marshall’s assertion that the main objective of the
police outside the ground was to counteract public disorder (Vol 29 p58), and
despite his perception of such “unprecedented behaviour”, he did not consider
the need to communicate the “mood” of the crowd to the Control Box (Vol 11
p27) nor his perception of a volatile, ticketless crowd to Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield (Vol 31 p9).




Superintendent Greenwood claimed that he was exasperated by the lack of co­
operation and response from spectators when he climbed onto the perimeter
fence and motioned to them to move back up the Leppings Lane terrace. He
rejected the suggestion that the noise of the crowd and spectators’ attention to
the game were reasons why there was no response: “I was bellowing at them
... at one stage I threw my hat off” (Inquest transcripts Vol 66 p20). Yet when
questioned as to why police officers on the perimeter track did not hear the
cries for help from desperate spectators when the goalkeeper, Bruce Grobelaar
had, he replied that it was the noise of the crowd, “... you know, one is talking
about the question of crowd ... in a stadium containing 54,000” (Taylor
transcripts Vol 12 p56).




At the Inquests, Chief Superintendent Mole, the previous Match Commander,
noted that the Police Box had the best overall view of the stadium and the
Leppings Lane terrace with cameras with a zoom facility (Vol 62 p i3). At the
Taylor Inquiry he referred to a memo published in a community policing
promotion. It stated that the stadium had “... one of the finest TV monitoring
systems in the country ... used at all matches to ensure any difficulties are
quickly overcome ...” (Vol 7 p96). Also in evidence to the Taylor Inquiry


                                    4
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield noted that   overall you can get a very
good view ...” (Vol 8 plO) from the Control Box. Yet at no time did he
acknowledge the use of the zoom facility which seemingly had received
national recognition (Vol 18 pl28).

At the Inquest, however, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was less confident
over the position of and view from the Control Box, particularly regarding the
use of CCTV monitors. In evidence relating to the opening of Gate C he
emphasised that the TV monitor concerned was only 9 inch, monochrome and
that he was 10 feet away from it at the back of the Control Box (Taylor Vol 9
p52). Rather than providing a good view, he stated at the Inquests that his
view from the monitor was very limited (Inquest transcript Vol 68 pp48-49).

He asserted that he relied on his direct view of the terraces to monitor the
terraces (Vol 69 p49), claiming that he had no knowledge of the “technical
capabilities and extent of those cameras” (Vol 69 p49).

At the Taylor Inquiry, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that he was
unaware of the Fire Brigade cutting equipment that was available (Vol 8
pp 107-8) yet at the Inquest when he was asked if he was aware of the Fire
Brigade equipment available that could have cut through the Pens’ fences he
replied, “Yes” (Vol 69 p85). Further, he agreed that the Fire Brigade was the
primary source for obtaining cutting equipment.




Pressure on witnesses

Apart from those witnesses discussed during the meeting I want to emphasise
the point made at that time concerning the pressure on police witnesses given
the issues raised by Mr Frost, former South Yorkshire police officer.




Cursory examinations o f those pronounced dead

The submission made concerning the death of Andrew Brookes, as I referred
to at my meeting, illustrates the problems concerning ‘cursory’ examinations.
First, there was an opinion given by an unnamed doctor on the pitch and then
he was one of 20 bodies listed in Dr Bull’s statement that he pronounced dead
in a very short period of time. The text which precedes the first
recommendation in the enclosed submission discusses further the problems
relating to appropriate medical examination
Denial o f full responsibility by the South Yorkshire Police

Taylor: Interim Report August 1989

Lord Justice Taylor made the following point, expressing his “regret” that the
South Yorkshire Police would not accept responsibility:

       It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing, and in their
       submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to
       concede that they were in any respect at fault fo r what had
       occurred... the police case was to blame the fans fo r being late
       and drunk, and to blame the Club for failing to monitor the
       pens. It was argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the
       influx through Gate C but was due to a barrier 124a being
       defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause fo r anxiety
       as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been
       more seemly and encouraging fo r the future if responsibility
       had been faced. [The Taylor Interim Report 1989 p50 para
       285.]

The then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Peter Wright stated of Taylor:

       The criticisms have to be accepted. I thought the language was
       savage and fa r heavier then I expected. [Sheffield Star 15
       August 1990.]




Sheffield Star 5 February 1990

Headline:       ‘Coroner Will Reveal the True Story’
                ‘Peter Wright talks frankly about tragedy’

Introduction:

       ‘He says his officers regard as unfair the “harsh” criticism
       voiced by Lord Justice Taylor, who investigated the disaster.
       Mr Wright suggests that additional evidence, particularly
       about the effect o f alcohol on fans, will present a “different
       picture” at the coroner’s inquest into the 95 Hillsborough
       deaths, yet to be held. ”

Text: The judge, in his interim report, published last August, said its
      main cause was “the failure of police control. ”

       The judge, after hearing evidence at a six-week public inquiry,
       criticised senior police officers for “evasive and defensive”
       answers to questions.
Mr Wright said today: “I think there is a very strong feeling of
resentment and injustice in the force as a result of
Hillsborough.

“That’s what I pick up going round the force speaking to
officers, trying to keep soundings o f what the feelings are.

“And there is this feeling o f injustice about it, not in a sense
that we did everything right, but simply nobody seems to have
grasped the full picture. ”

Mr Wright said he thought some o f Lord Justice Taylor’s
comments were “harsh” and “savage. ”

“People have had time to think about the safety of
Hillsborough over generations - the safety o f the turnstiles, the
numbers going through, the crush.

“All the experts in football had had time to think about that,
and had done nothing about it because they had not perceived
any problem.

“And when the problem emerges the only ones who seemed to
be standing there to take responsibility were police officers
who had at the most a quarter o f an hour or 20 minutes to deal
with a situation in very traumatic circumstances. ”

 Mr Wright said he nevertheless accepted Lord Justice Taylor’s
findings.

But the chief constable also made clear he believes the
coroner’s inquest into the disaster, which is expected to last
some months, beginning later this year or early in 1991, will
reveal “different picture. ”

“Lord Justice Taylor was dealing with evidence and he was
emphasising the evidence which was available. ”

“What I found difficult to understand was the finding that there
was drinking among a percentage o f the fans, and that they
were under the influence of drink, but that it had no effect on
the events.

“Ifound that a little difficult to come to terms with.

“There will be a lot of additional evidence presented to the
coroner’s inquiry which was not presented at Lord Justice
Taylor’s inquiry, which may put a different complexion on the
end product. ”



                             7
       The South Yorkshire police authority, while not formally
       admitting that police had some responsibility fo r the disaster,
       have begun talks with lawyers representing with bereaved
       relatives and injured fans, and are prepared to make out-of-
       court settlements, if damages can be agreed.

       Mr Wright said: “There is a lot I would want to say about
       Hillsborough. There are a lot o f comments I would want to
       make on Lord Justice Taylor’s report, but in the circumstances
       I can’t.

       “There is a lot of information to come out that has not already
       come out. ”




Police Review 9 February 1990

Headline:      ‘A Bobby’s Bobby’

Text: After 36 years as a policeman, Mr Wright has clear-cut views
      about the effects on his men o f last year’s tragedy.

       7 think there is a very strong feeling o f resentment and
       injustice as a result o f Hillsborough, ’ he says. ‘That’s what I
       pick up going round the force, speaking to officers, trying to
       keep soundings of what the feelings are.

       ‘And there is this feeling o f injustice about it - not in a sense
       that we did everything right, but simply that nobody seems to
       have grasped the full picture. ’

       He says the circumstances o f the public inquiry put great
       pressure on his senior officers.

       ‘There is a lot I would want to say about Hillsborough. There
       are a lot of comments I would want to make on Lord Justice
       Taylor’s report, but in the circumstances I can’t. ’

These claims led to a complaint by Trevor Hicks to the South Yorkshire Police
Authority that the Chief Constable’s remarks “could affect inquest impartiality
and distort the course of justice” (Sheffield Star. 9 March 1990). Merseyside
MP, David Alton, was quoted as stating: “If all this is going to be dragged up
again in an attempt to blame the victims and other fans, it will cause quite
unnecessary grief for many families.”
Sheffield Star 11 April 1990

Headline:      ‘SHOCKED’ POLICE MAY SUE WRIGHT’

In text: Quote from Ian Walker of Police Federation solicitors Russell,
         James and Walker

        “Officers have their own views why disaster occurred, they feel
        slightly ambivalent about claiming against their own force.
        They have no choice.

        It is not something they chose to do, they hold the view the
        tragedy was caused by 1,000 drunken Liverpool fans. The
        alternative to suing the force was to sue anonymous fans. ”




The Guardian 3 October 1990

Headline:      ‘Police contest disaster blame’

Text:   ‘Police claimed yesterday that the main cause of the
        Hillsborough disaster was the failure o f Sheffield Wednesday
        management to provide a system to control capacity on the
        terraces where 95 supporters died...

        The force, Mr Payne said, claimed negligence and breach of
        common duty and care against the club, and negligence only
        against the engineers ... Mr Payne suggested that the parties
        accepted nearly all the report (Taylor) and took issue only with
        the findings which fell adversely upon each o f them. ’




Liverpool Echo 9 October 1990

Headline:      ‘Families will never know who is to blame’

Text:   ‘Relatives o f the Hillsborough disaster victims will never know
        officially who was to blame fo r the tragedy, claims a Liverpool
        solicitor.

        Doug Fraser says many of the bereaved families he represents
        are bitterly disappointed by an out-of court settlement reached
        between the South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday FC
        and engineers Eastwood and Partners, at the High Court in
        Manchester...
                 Mr Fraser said: “The decision means that the people who
                 caused the disaster are not prepared to let the families know
                 what agreement was reached. They don’t want the finger to be
                 pointed and now we will never officially know in what
                 proportion they were to blame. ”




    vii    Liverpool Echo 24 January 1992

           Richard Wells, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, was quoted as
           stating,

                  “The present view o f the Taylor Inquiry is that whilst some o f
                 its findings in the interim report are considered hasty and
                 based on a less than full account o f the different perspectives,
                 the recommendations o f part two (the Final Report) are fo r the
                 most part very sensible. ”
#
    viii   Letter written by Richard Wells to Mr J Peters 28 January 1992

                  “My position is that there were many parties to blame that day
                  and that the police were just one o f them. Our responsibility
                  was to help prevent people arriving late and in droves and,
                  where unable to prevent it, to react to it. The supporters’
                  responsibility was to arrive on time (as, o f course, the majority
                  did), with tickets, sober and prepared to accept, if not in
                 possession o f a ticket, that entry was impossible. They didn’t
                 fully discharge that responsibility and we didn’t fully discharge
                  ours. Many, many people think - and say in the most robust
                  terms - that the disaster is directly attributable to the fans’
                  behaviour. I stop short o f that and see the cause ...as shared
                  between many, including ourselves.

                 There is clear evidence o f drunkenness amongst very many of
                 the fans who arrived later...”




                                             10
