         NOTES TO ACCOMPANY PHOTOGRAPHS and drawings of EVERTON AND LIVERPOOL

         Football grounds' safety corridors (dry moats).




         1.   The photographs are numbered with labels on the back.   The numbers are

              prefixed A for (Anfield) Liverpool, and G for (Goodison) Everton.

              Drawings with the photographs show the layout and cross sections for

              each of the three enclosures concerned.   The numbered arrows indicate

              the position and direction of the corresponding photograph view.




         2.   These provisions were made rapidly, immediately after the Hillsborough

              disaster to deter pitch incursions by spectators, after the pitch

              perimeter fences were taken down by the clubs.




         3.   The work consisted simply of closing the gaps in the first (existing)

              row of crush barriers, and sheeting in the space under the barrier

              rail, which required a bottom rail to support the bottom edge of the

              sheeting.   At Everton a mid height horizontal rail was added, to give

              further support to the metal sheeting.




         4. The flights of steps, to pitch level, were provided to facilitate safe

              passage for police, stewards and first aid personnel.   They are wide

              enough and jsafe to be used by spectators, if it ever became necessary

              to permit them to come out of the terrace enclosure and onto the

              pitch.   However, there are presently no circumstances envisaged where

              that extreme escape facility would be encouraged, or reasonably
                                         \



              necessary, at these two grounds.




NBEACZ
                                              - 2 -



         5.   The single rail above the pitch retaining wall, (between flights of

              steps) at Anfield, is provided to prevent players from falling into

              the safety corridor.   That is necessary at this ground because the

              distance   from the goal line to the (dropped level) corridor is

              relatively short.




         6.   After more than three months experience there is general satis­

              faction with the provisions, by all experienced parties.       There is

              never the less some call for improved ease of access onto the pitch

              from the relevant enclosures.    This comes from those who have no

              responsibility for safety, and appears to be founded mainly on the

              stark memories of the horrors of Hillsborough and Bradford.       It seems

              to ignore the existance of other, well enforced, measures taken, to

              provide other adequate escape facilities which match the fire risk,

              and to control the numbers entering the enclosures to avoid crushing.




         7.   It has been suggested that by substituting a relatively low level

              barrier for the old pitch perimeter fencing on top of a retaining

              wall, the improved ease of climbing over the new barrier will

              encourage needless mass evacuation into the safety corridor and onto

              the pitch in any minor emergency.       That leads to concern that the

              corridor floor falls away from   the barrier, and that may cause

              stumbling and a dangerous pile   up of bodies.     On the other hand, it is

              argued that such a view is unrealistic, because such pile ups are

              unlikely where the crowd is spread over a long length, rather than

              concentrated at a gap or short   length of failed wall or barrier. One

              must also take accoufnt of the   existance of thecontinuous crush

              barrier, which can be used as a support to prevent falling, both for

              those climbing it and those about to do so.       This objection could be




NBEACZ
                                              - 3 -



              relieved, but not eliminated, by levelling the floor of the corridor

              to that of the bottom step of the terrace behind the barrier.

              However, that would destroy the advantage of having stewards and

              police in the corridor at a lower level than the spectators, which

              avoids obstructing the latters view of the game, and consequent

              aggravation.    In discussions on the likelihood of a need to evacuate

              onto the pitch arising, at Everton or Liverpool, supporters of such a

              need quote such improbable events as, an aircraft falling onto the

              roof of the stand, or an unexploded bomb being thrown into the centre

              of the terrace.




         8.   Early in the existance of the safety corridors, first aid personnel

              complained of increased difficulty of getting into and out of the

              terraces from the corridor,to treat the sick near the front of the

              enclosure.     In practice that has caused no lack of prompt treatment.

              There is always plenty of willing help available from stewards, police

              and the crowd itself.    An acceptable view has been expressed, that if

              gaps or gates were provided, unless they happened to be opposite the

              person needing treatment, it is most likely that first aiders would go

              in over the barrier and the sick would come out over the barrier, as a

              matter of fact.




         9.   To leave simple gaps in the front crush barrier would undoubtedly

              cause minor invasions of the safety corridor at times of pitch

              excitement.     That would create regular and most undesirable points of

              friction between stewards or police and those spectators at the front

              who were pushed through, probably by others from behind.     The police

              are anxious to avoid that aggravation if there is no real need for it.




NBEACZ
                                               - 4 -



               They consider it would be unfair to     those spectators   at the front not

               to have a barrier to lean on.




         10.   The provision of gates inthe front      crush barrier is structurally

               possible, but these need to be easily openable, which means that they

               could be opened, with or without proper     cause and authority, when the

               crowd is leaning heavily on the barrier     for support.That could cause

               a fall of spectators through the suddenly opened gap, which might

               accummulate to cause serious injuries.




         11. Thus, whilst subject to some criticism,       the existing arrangements

               appear to be the best posible compromise, at these two grounds.




NBEACZ
