                      Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football Researc

                                                                 Department of Sociology
                                                                 University of Leicester
      Telephone 0533 522741/522745                               Leicester L E I 7 R H


SUBMISSION TO PART 2 OF THE          INQUIRY   INTO    THE    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
DISASTER


1.   Background to the Sir Norman Chester Centre

1.1   Professor Eric Dunning,    Patrick Murphy and John Williams
in the Sociology Department of Leicester University have been
examining   spectator problems at sporting events, primarily at
football,  since the late 1970's.    The first funded research by the
group, who are now co-directors of the Sir Norman Chester Centre for
Football Research, was commissioned by the Social Science Research
Council (now the ESRC) in 1979.  Grants for further research followed
from the Football Trust and the Department of the Environment.

^^ 2   The Centre for     Football  Research   was   established   at
Leicester in April 1 987.   As Deputy Chairman of the Football Trust,
Sir Norman Chester helped to pioneer funded research into the game,
primarily at Leicester, and the Centre's core funding is now provided
 by the Trust. The Centre is unique in the range and scope of its
 research into various aspects of football and has become a national
 focus for the collection and dissemination of research information
 about the game.

2.   Current Research Activities

2.1   Currently,  the Centre is involved in a range of                        projects
connected with the game and its effects. These include:

           (i)     Football's community projects:

                   The Centre has looked closely at the project at Preston
                   North End and was centrally involved in establishing the
                   Football Trust's Community Award Scheme which was most
                   successfully launched     this  year.    The Centre is
                   analysing   submissions     by   57   clubs   on   their
                   'community' activities,   and we have included in our
                   submission to the Inquiry papers and reports about the
                   philosophy of football-related 'community' ventures as
                   well as a preliminary analysis of the views of fans in
                   Preston of their ov/n club's activities in this area.
                   The Centre was also central in shaping the Liverpool
                   City Council's proposals on extending community links
                   between the clubs in the local area and local people
                   following the Heysel tragedy of 1985.   A copy of the
                   programme is included in the enclosed report on Football
                   and Football Hooliganism on Merseyside.

           (ii)    Cross-national      research       on     football   and    football
                   spectators:

                    The Centre is presently involved in a major research
                    initiative supported by the Council of Europe which aims
                    to compare football-related 'community' programmes in a
                    number of member countries as well as focus on the
                    problems of interaction     betv/een  rival   fans from
                    different European countries.    The Centre is currently
                    compiling a report on last year's European Championships
                    in West Germany, drawing on research contributions from
                                                                2




        Holland, West Germany, Denmark and Belgium as v/ell as on
        material generated by the Centre.     Enclosed in this
        submission is a preliminary analysis of a survey of
        English fans who   travelled to the Championships.   Some
        brief comments on the differences and similarities v/hich
        exist between English     fans   and their continental
        counterparts can be found in the new introduction to the
        second edition of Hooligans Abroad (enclosed).

(iii)   Football and education:

        The Centre is involved in preparing a multi-media
        education package on football and its local and national
        effects   for use    in   secondary   school GCSE study
        programmes.   It has also been involved in school-based
        research projects.   Enclosed in this submission is an
        account    of an    analysis   of   essays   written  by
        schoolchildren from Liverpool on their experiences and
        perceptions of football.      This document is perhaps
        especially significant, given the scope of the present
        Inquiry.

 (iv)   Football and local authorities:

        The Centre has been carrying out a number of case
        studies on those links between local authorities and
        clubs which are of a particularly imaginative kind (e.g.
        Calderdale and Halifax Town; Lewisham and Millwall;
        Preston and Preston North End; Leeds and Leeds United).
        The Centre, in association with the AMA and the ADC,
        also conducted    a survey of local authorities for
        information about their links with clubs.    Information
        on the results of the survey is included in this
        submission.  This data is perhaps especially significant
        now, given the focus on patterns of ground ownership and
        facilities abroad compared to the patterns of ownership
        and location in this country.    We touch on this issue,
        briefly, in the new introduction to the second edition
        of Hooligans Abroad (p.1).

  (v)   Football and membership schemes:

        'T’he Centre has conducted research for the Football
        League on partial membership schemes and the development
        of the membership debate.       The enclosed report on
        Membership    Schemes and Professional Football clubs
        also carries observations on proposals for an 'away' fan
        only membership programme and the potential difficulties
        of introducing and operating a comprehensive membership
        scheme.   Some statements on these issues can also be
        found    in   our   Summary  of    Preliminary   Research
        Recommendations (pp. 13-14) published last July.

        The Centre has also carried out a survey of police
        officers in charge of crowd control at football for
        information on their views of the membership issue. A
        short account of the results of that survey are also
        included in this submission. The views of experienced
        senior police officers on issues like the away fan ban;
        exclusion orders;   the uses  (and abuses) of partial
                                                                        3




           schemes; and the causes of hooliganism are, perhaps,
           especially relevant given the scope of the present
           Inquiry.

           Finally,  the Centre undertook an extensive programme of
           research at Luton Town Football Club into the effects of
           the introduction of a     'home only' members plan at the
           beginning of the 1986/87 League season.      A copy of our
           report on the Luton Home Only Members Plan, and of
           reports   on   Leicester    City's   partial    membership
           arrangements are included in this submission.        Summary
           comments on Leicester City and the effects of the Luton
           scheme,  and about its possible spread elsewhere, are
           also included in our Summary of Preliminary Research
           Findings and Recommendations (pp. 1-.? and 13-1 4 )T
 (vi)      The development of women's football

           The Centre has been concerned to stress in much of its
           recent v/ork on football the overly-masculine character
           of the game and its traditions.           Indeed, in our major
           work so far on hooliganism, The Roots of Football
           Hooliganism (enclosed), we are at pains to point out
           that gender relations are at least as important in
           the production of aggressive masculinity as those of
           social class (p.2 2 0 ) . uie take the resistance of men and
           the male game to women's football in this country as
           symptomatic of more broadly-based problems of gender
           relations in Britain.     For these reasons we have been
           interested in studying and recording the experiences of
           female players and we want to develop a research focus
           on female spectators.     Issues relating to the treatment
           of women as spectators and players are summarised in the
           Summary    of     Preliminary        Research   Findings   and
           Recommendations     (pp-    14-1 Pi), and in our paper on
           Professional Football and Crowd Violence in England: the
           Case for a Community Approach (pp. 13-16).

(v i i )   Football and the inner city:

           The Centre has recently been involved in the setting up
           of a community-based inner city coaching project in the
           Highfields area of Leicester.   The Highfields Community
           Coaching Project is designed to provide local people
           with saleable and marketable skills as well as to
           involve young people in a very deprived part of the city
           v/ith constructive and enjoyable leisure opportunities.
           In addition to these aims,    the initiative is aimed a
           promoting the interests of people of Afro-Caribbean and
           Asian origin, many of whom play football at the local
           level, but are much less in evidence as spectators or
           qualified coaches. This work fits well with the Centre's
           observations on the racism faced by black people both
           inside and outside the game     (see Hooligans Abroad;
           Football and Football Hooliganism on .Merseyside; The
           Roots of Football Hooliganism etc.)
      (viii)     Football supporter networks:

                 T:ie Centre is in close and regular contact with national
                 supporters    organisations, and has conducted a number o c
                 surveys through sucn organisations on fans' experiences
                 o* t**® ysme.  At present the Centre is investigating the
                 rise of the   'alternative' network of supporter contacts
                 which has grown after Heysel. This involves a survey of
                 the football fanzine movement as well as an analysis of
                 the rise and influence of the Football Supporters
                 Association.   The Centro has 'written at length in its
                 publications on the relations between fans and their
                 clubs.

         ix)     Digest of Football Statistics:

                       Centre now nas primary respnsibility for producing
                 L.he annual Digest c1 Football statistics (most recent
                 edition,   193?., enclosed).  The Digest is the most



                 on spectator     organisations,    perhaps   women's football
                 et c.

         (:•:)   Football Conferences:

                 In September, 1933, the Centra hosted the first of its
                 major football conferences.       The theme was Football into
                        1 990's, and the conference dealt in some depth
                 with many issues which are now relevant to the Taylor
                 Inquiry.      These   include:     facilities     at   grounds;
                 relations between clubs and their supporters; media
                 coverage o c the game; policing at football; hooliganism;
                 football's^ community projects and football clubs and
                 local authorities.        The conference proceedings were
                 recorded and they are at this moment being converted to
                 te--.t.     -his    printed    version of     the    conference
                 proceedings should be available over the next fortnight.
3.   Concluding Comments

3.1   The Centre has been involved    in a wide range of football
related research initiatives during its two year history.          Its
present programme includes ambitions for more cross-cultural research
on differences    in football cultures across Europe and work on
monitoring and evaluating the national members shceme when it is
introduced.   The Centre is also currently undertaking a survey of
members   of the FSA to find out their views on the kind of changes in
the game which may      be in the offing as      a consequence of the
deliberations of the Taylor Inquiry.     This data should be available
in the next month or so and complements our previous work on fans and
'alternative' supporters networks.

3.2   The   enclosed materials provide a considerable amount of
information relating    to a  range of issues the Taylor Inquiry is
almost certain to     cover for the purposes of     Part II o f its
deliberations.  It also seems obvious, however, that the Inquiry will
oe pressed into making observations or recommendations on more
specific aspects of the game's organisation including, for example,
                                                                      C,




with respect to perimeter fencing, stewardiny, seating and ground
safety criteria and the general management of football grounds.
These issues are cor.iple:: and,    given the game's traditions and the
particular characteristics o^ football culture in England,     they are
unlikely to yield to simple,         straightforward  'solutions'.  Our
research on the introduction of an all-seated stadium at Coventry
City,  for e::ar.iple, (summary document enclosed), is illustrative of
the sorts of complexities which arise in relation to the question of
'improving' facilities and introducing seats into grounds." Heedless
to say, staff at the Centre will be available for consultation on
those and other issues if, and when, the Inquiry feels it might wish
to use the expertise of the researchers who worh there.
LIST OF MATERIAL SUBMITTED BY THE SIR NORMAN CHESTER CENTRE FOR
FOOTBALL RESEARCH


1.    The Roots of Football Hooliganism - An Historical &
      Sociological Study by Eric Dunning, Patrick Murphy and John
      Williams.

2.    Hooligans Abroad by Eric Dunning, John Williams and Patrick
      Murphy.

3.    House of Cards The Development of the Leicester City Members
      Plan.

4.    Digest of Football Statistics published by the Football
      Trust 1988.

5.    The Luton Town Home Only Members Plan:   Final Report June
      1987.

6.    An investigation of the measures for improving spectator
      behaviour currently in use at seven English football clubs:
      Summary of preliminary research findings and recommendations
      July 1988.

7.    Local Authorities Survey Results.

8.    English Football Fans at the European Championships 1988
      December 1988.

9.    Preston North End Crowd Survey (Preliminary Report) August
      1988.

10.   All-seated Football Grounds and Hooliganism the Coventry
      City Experience, 1981-84. October 1984.

11.   Professional Football and Crowd Violence in    England.   The
      Case for a Community Approach.

12.   Crowd Control, Prevention and Membership at Football. A
       Survey of Police Officers with responsibility for policing
       football matches in England. June 1989.

13.   English Football Fans:   A Return to Europe?   April 1987.

14.   Football and Spectator Behaviour at Watford:    "The Friendly
      Club" 1988.

15.   Young People's Images of Attending Football:  A Preliminary
      Analysis of Essays by Liverpool Schoolchildren. June 1987.

16.   Membership Schemes and Professional Football Clubs July
       1988.

17.   Football Hooliganism and Partial Membership    Schemes:   The
      Case of Leicester City. June 1987.
18.   Hooliganism after Heysel:   Crowd Behaviour in England and
      Europe, 1985-1988.

19.   Spectator Violence Associated with Football Matches:   A
      state-of-the-Art Review. January 1986.

20.   Football and Football Hooliganism in Liverpool.   June 1987.
