                                                      Q U E E N A N N E ’ S GATE L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT

                                                      cc
                                                                                      .05 MAY 1998
T J Burkett Esq                                             Wr
                                                            V»r tc C w jU /'tW c* '

                                                            VA/ Ck w »J^
                                                            W

                                                                  [jJcJtW




Thank you for your letter of 23 February about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the
Hillsborough disaster. I am sorry that you have not received an earlier reply.

I am very conscious of the disappointment and frustration felt by the families at my
decision not to hold a fresh inquiry. I recognise that it will be difficult and painful for you
to accept my decision. I have, though, considered the Judge’s report carefully and I accept
the conclusion which he has reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add
anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor Inquiry and
the Inquests.

The original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it dear that he entirely
accepts Lord Justice Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the
failure of police control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned what he described
as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that fans had opened Gate C.

I do share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter 7 of his
Report when he says:

"I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has personally been
held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent o f
losing their job”.

There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I intend to
address. In January, the Home Affairs Select Committee made some important
recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures. I have recently
announced my response to the HAC recommendations including my intention to reduce
the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline procedures and to remove the
existing double jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the
same facts. I have also endorsed the Committee’s recommendation that forces should show
greater commitment to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where
appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of
disciplinary proceedings.

I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the findings of a Home Office
Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a public
inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the Working Party was to relieve
coroners of the need to resume their inquest after an inquiry has been completed. If this
had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would have spared the
families of those who died unnecessary distress when the Taylor Inquiry had covered
substantially the same ground as the Inquest.

I understand that for the families the grief will never end, but I hope that they will accept
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a rigorous and comprehensive examination of
the submissions put to him. As you know, I am ready to talk to the families to explain my
decision. I met a delegation whilst in Southport on 7 March and I am arranging another
meeting in Merseyside. I will also be opening an adjournment debate on Hillsborough in
the House of Commons on 8 May.




                                      JACK STRAW
