h s .1.2 6/sstadia.dm




INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY


Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the
Hillsborough stadium diaster.


In his statement on 29 Januarv, the Home Secretary indicated that
he would        avui fafeLc.        a schedule setting out the
Government's initial response to the recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report. The schedule is annexed.




29 January 1990
hs.1.2 6/sstadia.peb


Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report.


ALL   seated    ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)

1.     General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
       designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

2.     To apply to all UEFA "high risk" matches from Autumn 1993.

3.    To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
           Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
           Scottish football league, Premier Division
           National stadia.

4.    To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
      other matches played at designated grounds.

The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.


The application of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports cannot be achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989
but the Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the
sporting authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under
the 1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.



ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 5)

The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
that the football league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.




NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)

       (a)     The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
               review the discharge of functions by local authorities.

       (b)     The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
               sports and other sports venues.

The  Government   supports   the  recommendation   that   safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities in
England and Wales in relation to grounds used by football league
clubs and the international football grounds. Consideration will
be given to introduction of legislation extending the role of the
new authority to Scotland and in relation to other sports grounds
and sporting venues after consultation with the representative
sporting organisations, the local authority associations and
other interested bodies.    Consideration will also be given to
extending the Authority's responsibilities in the meantime on a
voluntary basis.

MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES (Recommendations 7-10)

7.    Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
      in pens or areas (interim recommendation l).

8.    Calculations of crowd density:    revised figures   (interim
      recommendation 2, revised).

9.    Arrangements to prevent further access to pens      (interim
      recommendation 3).

10.   Turnstile flow rates.

The Government supports these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates to reflect reductions in terrace capacities
recommended in the Interim Report.      The adjusted figures in
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities'
attention.   The next edition of the 'Green Guide' will reflect
the new figures.

FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES (Recommendations 11-12)

11.   Statements of intent (interim recommendation 4, revised.

12.   Stewarding or policing of pens (interim recommendation 5).

The Government have already urged police and clubs to enter into
non-contractual statements of intent with the aim of ensuring
that no doubt exists as to the respective responsibilities of
each? and to provide monitoring of terraces accordingly.       The
relaxation in recommendation 12 (b) will be drawn to the attention
of local authorities and clubs.

GANGWAYS (Recommendation 13)

Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.

FENCES AND GATES (Recommendations 14-21)

14.   Removal of spikes.

15.   Reduction in height.
16.   Training of stewards (interim recommendation 6).

17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.

18.   Marking of emergency gates (interim recommendation 7).

19.   Gates normally to be kept open         during matches    (interim
      recommendation 8, revised).

20.   Manning    of    emergency      gates      (replaces     interim
      recommendation 9).

21.   Cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).

The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
17 and to note recommendation 19 which varies             interim
recommendation 8.   The revised recommendations on closure and
manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.

CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22, 23)

22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).

23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).

These are repeated from the Interim Report.        They have already
been commended to local authorities.

SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)

24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.

25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.

26.   Terms of safety certificates.

27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).

28.Issue of certificates     to    grounds    without   them   (interim
recommendation 14).

29.   Annual   review  of   certificates;  annual         renewal    of
      certificates (interim recommendation 15).

30.   Review of arrangements for issuing certificates          (interim
      recommendation 16).

31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
      revised).

The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.

Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have an effective review system, the
desirability of a properly constituted team approach to
certification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.

Annual review of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.       The
Government will consider whether any chajige in the law should
be made to make annual renewal of certificates compulsory.

DUTIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS (Recommendations 32-43)

32.   Measurement of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18).

33.   Correlation of turnstile      flow   and    capacity   (interim
      recommendation 19).

34.   Closure of turnstiles (interim recommendation 20).

35.   Closed circuit   television   (interim      recommendation   21,
      extended).

36.   Signposting (interim recommendation 22, extended).

37.   Information on tickets (interim recommendation 23).

38.   Co-ordination with the police (interim recommendation 24).

39.   Computer records of ticket sales.

40.   Restriction of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.

41.   Pre match entertainment (interim recommendation 25).

42.   Recruitment of stewards.

43.   Police control rooms.

These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.

POLICE PLANNING (Recommendations 44-53)

44.   Nomination of a Chief      Officer    for    liaison   (interim
      recommendation 2 6).

45.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation      27).

46.   Operational orders (interim recommendation      28).
47.   Police action on ticketless fans.

48.   Review of arrest procedures.

49.   Postponement of kick-offs (interim recommendation 29).

50.   Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.

51.   Control room facilities.

52.   Training of senior officers.

53.   Charges for police services.

These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior   officer   training  and   the   objective    to  improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches.     The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.

COMMUNICATIONS (Recommendations 54-58)

54.   Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).

55.   Provision of a command channel.

56.   Land lines (interim recommendation 32).

57.   Public address (interim recommendation 33).

58.   Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34:   advice
       on hand signals withdrawn).

These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
to implement. Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
commanders.

CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)

59.   Co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).

60.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).

61.   Communication with emergency services.

62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).

63.   Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).

These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed. The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply with the further recommendation devised to ensure
immediate summons of emergency services.

FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AMD AMBULANCES
(Recommendations   64-69)

64.   First aiders (interim recommendation 39).

65.   First aid rooms (interim recommendation 40).

66.   Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41, revised).

67.   Ambulances (interim recommendation 42, revised).

68.   Ambulances, larger matches (interim recommendation 43).

69.   Major incident vehicles.

The Government will draw attention to variations from the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provision of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES (Recommendations 70-73)

70.   Selling tickets.

71.   Other specific offences.

72.   Attendance centres.

73.   Electronic tagging.

The Government will      look carefully and quickly at all these
suggestions.

GREEN GUIDE (Recommendations 74-76)

74.   Revision of the Green Guide.

75.   Crush barrier tests.

76.   Inspections for corrosion.

The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
