                                                           Nottingham,
                                                           NG4



                                                          24th November 1997



Mr. C.F. Bone,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 528,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
London, SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr. Bone,
                                      Hillsborough

I have now had an opportunity of quickly reading through the shorthand note for
which I thank you.

There is a form of words (which I used on three occasions during the interview) but
which I feel makes me sound rather callous namely my use of the words “neither here
nor there” at page 12 line 13. I am conscious that timing is of great importance to the
bereaved and I would not wish to give offence. What I was trying to express was that
from the point of view of the inquest the thing that mattered was the time when the
damage was done and not for how long after there continued to be signs of life.

I am sure you will have picked up any typographical errors including the need to make
it clear that the times should have full stops between the hours and minutes. I do not
intend to comment on these but draw the following to your attention.

At page 9 line 8 1 presume the word figure refers to the camera.

At page 10 line 7 I think the word “original” has been omitted.

At page 16 line 3 6 1 think the name is Jonathon Owens

At page 20 line 9 the record is correct but in fact Mr. Wardrope said “deeply
unconscious or fitting”. I do not think much turns on it as one is usually unconscious
when fitting.

At page 26 line 5 The sentence does not sound like me but I cannot remember what
else I might have said. In any case as far as I am concerned it is substantially correct.

At page 28 line 1 does not really make sense . I think I was saying “ .. .1 do not think
it adds very much to what we already know about this.”
At page 33 line 25 I do not think I was referring to Mr. Spearitt himself but to
someone else

At page 36 line 9 the name is Dr. Gumpert.

At page 36 line 24 the word ‘here’ should read ‘hear’

At page 41 5-6 I am not sure whether this is correct but I cannot remember what I
said.


Yours sincerely.




P. S. I have just got back from Sheffield and have discovered that there is a statement
o f Dr. E. Walker on the Lee Nicol file. I will write to you further on this.
