             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 1106
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
   1         Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007


 Professor Phil Scraton                                           Your reference:    PS/BH
 Centre for Studies in Crime & Social Justice
 Edge Hill University College                                     Our reference:     PW/97 110/145/13
 St Helens Road
 ORMSKIRK L39 4QP                                                 Date:              September 1997


                                                rectal
  Thank you for your letter of 8 September to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

4 f c s I explained when we spoke a little while ago, the task which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    nas accepted from the Home Secretary is to establish whether there is any significant new
    evidence about the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster which was not previously
    available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary
    authorities. If there is significant evidence, he intends to see if it would have affected the
    outcome of any of the proceedings. He hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary
    by the end of the year.

  You may wish to see Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference, and I attach these.

  The Judge would welcome the meeting you suggest. He will probably be travelling to
  Liverpool in the near future to see family members and others, but I think that it might be
  better for you to meet him at his offices here in London. The meeting will need to take place
  next month.

   I will be in touch again soon.




   C F BONE
   Secretary to the Scrutiny




   G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SCRATQN.090
Terms of reference


To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;


      (a)   to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


      (b)   to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
             Generalfor the purpose o f discharging their respective
            statutory responsibilities; or


      (c)    to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation
             to police disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
available is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the
Secretary o f State for the Home Department o f a further public
nquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any
evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
which should be taken in the public interest.
