From:     David Redhouse                               cc   Mr Michael
          PS/Home Secretary                                 Mr Howarth
          0171 2 7 3 4 6 0 2                                Mr O'Brien
                                                            Lord Williams
                                                            Permanent Secretary
                                                            Mr Boys Smith
          5 June 1997                                       Mr Halliday
                                                            Ms Wheldon
                                                            Miss Drew
                                                            Mr Fulton
                               *                            Ms Loudon
                                                            Mr Middleton
                                                            Mr Evans
                                                            Mr Edmundson
                                                            Mr Horlock
                                                            Ms Walker
                                                            Mr Granatt
                                                            Ms Clifford
                                                            Mr Owen
                                                            Mr Warner



Mr Pugh


HILLSBOROUGH


The Home Secretary met you yesterday to discuss your submission of 23 May.
Mr Michael, Mr Howarth, Mr O'Brien, Mr Boys Smith, Mr Middleton,
Mr Edmundson, Ms Walker, Mr Owen, Mr Warner, Mr Sutton and myself were
also present.

Terms of Reference

2.     The Home Secretary agreed that these should be re-cast to include first
the reference to examining whether there were sufficient grounds for his
establishing a further public inquiry, and, to wrap up with a reference to any
other action which needed to be taken in the public interest. Mr Middleton said
that the drafting should preserve the discretion of the Attorney General, DPP and
Chief Police Officer over the decisions for which they were responsible.

3.     You agreed to re-cast the terms of reference and provide an appropriate
draft to the Attorney General. (Secretary's note: This was done in
Mr Edmundson's subsequent submission that day and the Home Secretary wrote
to the Attorney General as drafted.)




12403DR
Membership

4.    The Home Secretary noted that Mr Justice Collins had previous
involvement with the Hillsborough case and also with issues investigated by the
Scott Inquiry. You said that a QC could undertake the inquiry. Mr Howarth
stressed that whether a judge or a QC was involved they should be of sufficient
seniority. Mr Michael suggested that the Home Secretary might discuss this
privately with the Lord Chancellor and he said that he would do so if necessary.

5.    The Home Secretary said that Ian McBride, who had produced the World
In Action programme should also be approached. You raised the question of
whether the announcement^ should be by PQ or by oral statement. The
Home Secretary agreed that it would be better to make an oral statement. He
considered that he should also talk to his predecessor.

6.     I should be grateful for further advice on who should do the inquiry once
we have received a reply from the Lord Chancellor's Department. Subject to the
replies to the Home Secretary's letter to the Attorney General. I should also be
grateful for further advice on the handling of the announcement of this inquiry.




                              DAVID REDHOUSE




12403DR
