NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 25 JANUARY 1990

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S REPORT

Present:   Home Secretary               Lord Justice Taylor
           Sir Clive Whitmore
           Mr Turney
           Mr Whalley
           Ms Dent


   The Home Secretary had invited Lord Justice Taylor in to
thank him for his report. The Home Secretary began by
confirming that the media were correct in saying that the
Government would not be implementing Part I of the Football
Spectators Act - the intention was to leave it on the Statute
Book in case there was a future need for it. The Home
Secretary broadly accepted the Report's recommendations,
though he had doubts about the proposed new criminal offences,
particularly that of chanting racial abuse. Lord Justice
Taylor thought the chanting offence would be feasible if CCTV
evidence were used in combination with police eye witness
accounts. He did, however, think that this would be the most
difficult of the three proposed new offences to prove. The
Home Secretary said that he wished to say in his statement
that the Government would look sympathetically at the creation
of the new offences against the background of the Public Order
Act.
2. The Home Secretary hoped to use the machinery in Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to establish a Football
Licensing Authority. Although this would cover only football
grounds, he hoped it would encourage voluntary arrangements
for other sports grounds. Lord Justice Taylor queried whether
arrangements for other grounds could be made by regulation
under the 1975 Safety at Sports Grounds Act. Mr Turney
acknowledged this might be a possibility.
3. The Home Secretary explained that in his statement he did
not propose to give a detailed response to every
recommendation, but would draw up a schedule to place in the
Library of the House. He would tell the House that he
accepted Lord Justice Taylor's conclusions and would try his
recommended solutions.
4. The Home Secretary asked Lord Justice Taylor if he was
going to do a press conference. Lord Justice Taylor favoured
only issuing a statement, unless the press gave him a rough
ride. He did not want to become involved in answering
political questions, and felt he was closer to politics than a
judge normally was.
     E.R.
                                       2.




           5.            The Home Secretary said he had been worried that his draft
           statement had been overly critical of football's poor
           situation, but that he was less worried having seen Taylor's
           press release. Lord Justice Taylor felt that shelving the
           football membership scheme would be a useful weapon if clubs
           did not improve conditions at grounds. He emphasised that
        » although the report was his, to havejlt backed up by a chief
/" ^.^/Vwiicc^stable and a professor of EngJ^rtSTfwas valuable. Officials
         jrsuggested that the Home Secretary could acknowledge the work
    f' ’]     the two assessors either in supplementaries after the
    I      statement or in the speech for the debate.                              i
    h>                                                           •
           6. Lord Justice Taylor said that he had not examined in any
           detail the financial implications of his recommendations, and
           the Home Secretary said he intended to skate round them. Sir
           Clive Whitmore stressed the importance of stating publicly
           that this was the last chance for the football authorities to
           set their house in order: they had done little, if anything,
           to meet the criticisms levelled at them by Popplewell four
           years ago. Lord Justice Taylor said he had not been impressed
           by the leaders of the Football Association and the league. He
           described how, when asked for information for his report, they
           had said they would rather express themselves orally than in
          writing in case they "misaddressed themselves"! In
           conclusion, he hoped the report was not a soft one: he was
           very much against hooliganism, and hoped his proposals would
           help lessen it.




         29 January 1990                             MS S J DENT
         Private Office                •          Private Secretary




        CC
             K l/u .


             ( i i W . \ U W /v
             (W. WU_£iLUUj
             flu .                ^


             Aa//- GCiI I o^j V

             |k j.     cIaJ K M J
