                                                QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT


                                           £C                          *10 FEB 1398
                                                P^/n<v le-c .
 Louise Ellman MP
                                                Ur
 House of Commons


                                                                .'
 LONDON
                                                Hr f i u > ^
 S W 1A OAA
                                                     w c u ik
                                                W




Thank you for your letter of 29 January enclosing copies of earlier letters to me
from Mr Colin Moneypenny of Liverpool City Council and Mr Trevor Hicks of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny
into the Hillsborough Disaster.

As you may be aware, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith submitted his report to me on
2 9 January and I am carefully considering it. I hope to publish the report
shortly.

I requested the views of both Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and the Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire on the points raised in Mr Hicks' letter. From w hat they have
told me, I am satisfied that all the material which should have been available for
examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the purposes of the scrutiny was
available to him, and that the scrutiny was able to investigate fully the issues
raised by the Family Support Group and others. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
assured me that he was given full access to the material held by South Yorkshire
Police, and that the force had contributed fully throughout his scrutiny.

When I established the scrutiny and set its terms of reference, I was clear that
the scrutiny should be thorough and th’a t it should be able to examine whatever
matters the judge considered relevant. I am satisfied that the families and the
public can have confidence in the report and in the integrity of the scrutiny
process itself.




                                 JACK STRAW
