                                   f        r     d      e   T    c    r      '       /    „
                                                                                  S       hu<L

                                       <Ta2 X C 4 H -   TZ.UfUo*^eS - N x >

From:         MRS 6 I MOODY                 cc      Miss A M Edwards
              E2 DIVISION
              ® 273 2621
              14 November 1991



HMCIC
Mr Goddard         F8 Division
Miss Harrison      E Division
Mrs Catto          F5 Division


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : LETTER FROM GEORGE HOSfARTH HP

Subsequent to the circulation of my earlier note dated 8 November
(not to Miss Harrison or Mrs Catto), Lord Ferrers called a
meeting for 13 November to discuss the content of the reply to
the attached letter from George Howarth MP to the Home Secretary
on a number of issues arising from the latest developments in the
aftermath to the Hillsborough tragedy. The subjects covered in
Mr Howarth's letter are:-

        (i)     that   "no  detailed     investigation around   the
        responsibilities of those concerned has yet been undertaken
        or published" (para 2 and the last paragraph,)

         (ii)    unhappiness as to the coroner's verdict (para 4,
         top of page 2); and these issues are linked with,

         (iii)   unhappiness as to the medical retirement of Chief
         Superintendent Duckinfield (paragraphs 1 and 5), although
         this seems to be linked to the erroneous notion      that
         disciplinary proceedings constituted some kind of further
         investigation.

2    F2 Division's interest in these three Questions is solely
in the third, ie into any question of whether any officer might
have misconducted himself on this occasion. I should be grateful
if Miss Harrison could confirm that I have made use of the
material she has provided on inquests in a way acceptable to
E Division. As to the operational aspects of the policing of the
event, I believe F8 were the sponsor Division for the Taylor
Inquiry and I should therefore be grateful if they would confirm
that the passages in the draft covering their interest, ie those
refusing a further inquiry, meet their interests. Mrs Catto may




                             MRS 6 I MOODY

GIM-710.000                        7
Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home

Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.



I should like to emphasize once more, as we have on earlier

occasions, how deeply we feel for all those who lost relatives

or friends in this horrific incident.    The whole Government

was, as you know, deeply saddened to hear of this dreadful

disaster at the time it happened.    It is because of our

sympathy with their appalling loss that we have always tried

to ensure that the circumstances which caused it should be as

fully and as openly exposed as possible.    I do not therefore

think it is being entirely fair to say, as you do, that "no

detailed investigation around the responsibilities of those

concerned has yet been undertaken or published" when in fact

at least four investigations of the events have been

undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were

properly covered.




The first of these was of course the formal inquiry by the

Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor commissioned by the Home Secretary

on the second day after the disaster.    The investigation

inaugurated by the Taylor inquiry involved some 440 officers

from the West Midlands police force, who took some 3,776

statements as well as taking advantage of video film from 3

separate sources providing, in all, some 71 hours of further

evidence.     This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted

and in my view the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on


GIM-710.000                      1
the disaster gives a very clear picture of police activity on

the day.



The inquest into the death at Hillsborough, which took over

100 days to examine the material facts, constituted a second

inquiry into these events.



The inquest, in fact, served a separate function, in that the

law states that its purpose is to ascertain the identity of

the deceased, and how, when and where he came by his death.

The Coroners Rules provides that neither the coroner nor the

jury shall express any opinion on any other matters.   In

addition, the rules specifically prohibit the framing of an

inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any

question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,

or civil liability.   Any issue of civil or criminal liability

is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the

coroners inquest.



If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest

including the verdict (as I believe some relatives are), it is
              9
open to them, under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, to

apply with the authority of the Attorney-General, for the High

Court to quash the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be

held, either by the same coroner or by a different one from

the same administrative area.   Coroners inquests may also be

challenged by way of judicial review but anyone contemplating




GIM-710.000                     2
such a course of action would be well advised to seek legal

advice at an early stage.



*In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for

Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted

a further major investigation with a view to discovering

whether the disaster resulted from or was made worse by

criminal activity on the part of anyone.         This too was a very

large investigation, but the Director of Public Prosecutions

did not conclude that the results indicated that any one

should be made the subject of a criminal prosecution.



Perhaps it would be helpful if I comment on this.         It means

that, so far as anyone can discover - and the evidence amassed

has been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the

 result of any criminal activity.  In particular, neither Chief
                    ■e-
 Superintendent Duckinfield nor Superintendent Murray nor any
                    b-«L ja_r>
 other person have cemmiteteed any crime.



 For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end

 of the matter.     For police officers however there remains the

 question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,

 they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as

 police officers.       The fourth investigation of the events of

 the day covered complaints which had been made regarding

 police behaviour.         This investigationvwas conducted by a

 different police force (the Cumbria Constabulary) to ensure an

 independent approach and] involved the taking of a further 5^341


 GIM-710.000                          3
statements as well as the scrutiny of all the material

previously examined.    It was supervised throughout by the

Police Complaints Authority, who subsequently expressed

'themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and

thoroughly conducted.   The privacy of people who complain

against the police is protected by the courts and the results

of this investigation cannot therefore be published.



In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police

Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are

required to consider whether there are ways in which the

officer may have failed in his duty and, if so, to arrange for

a formal hearing of the charges against him.    They did so,

after receiving the report of the complaint investigation, and
                                               e.
the PCA decided that Chief Superintendent DuckiOnfield and

Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges.



As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of

police disciplinary hearings.    Such a hearing is held in

private and is concerned only with whether or not the officer

 concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

The hearing would not therefore in any way contribute to

public knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do

more than receive and consider evidence already known as to
                        £-
the propriety of Mr Duck^nfield's conduct. It is not


 GIM-710.000                     4
therefore really relevant to the question of a further

investigation into police operations on the day which is, I

understand, what you are really seeking.



Another important issue in relation to police discipline which

is often ignored is that the most serious punishment which the

disciplinary tribunal would have been able to impose, had

Mr Duckinfield been found guilty, would have been dismissal or
              !

requirement to resign.   This would be the heaviest punishment

it would be possible to award an officer for the very worst

offence he could have committed, and would be used in any case

where it was clear that the officer's behaviour was such that

it was inappropriate for him to remain a police officer.    By

retiring, Mr Duckinfield has already left the force and thus

made further action unnecessary.



It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr

Ducki'hfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate

authority in police disciplinary cases, but I can and should

say that it needs to be remembered that it is by no means

certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr
    G
Duck^nfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred

against him.



If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man it would not be

right to refuse him retirement on medical grounds in order to

hear charges which may or may not be proved and whose most

serious result could only be that he leave the service he has


GIM-710.000                     5
already asked to leave voluntarily.                                This, however, like the

other matters raised in your letter, is a matter for the South

Yorkshire Police Force and its police authority and I suggest

*that your concerns might best be discussed with them.




 Your main concern however in writing to me was, if I have read

your letter right, the feeling that there should be some

 further investigation of police operations at Hillsborough as

 a whole. / in the light of the very wide ranging investigations

 which have already been conducted, I find it difficult to see

 what yet another (fifth) investigation could achieve.                                            In       ’

 fact, successive Home Secretaries have only j3onsentedTT:o major

 inquiries of this nature where they considered that the whole

 conduct of a force in relation to the community it policed had

 been called in question.                      This is not the case with the South
               J o :.   VV:„,   U .T r v i j - U   *       -a.’:   V   '   -   '   .;_   R vt T        ,

 Yorkshire force.and I am sure that the Home Secretary would

 regard the inquiry already conducted by Lord Justice Taylor as

-having already covered these issues.



 I am sorry I cannot send you a more helpful reply despite the

 very deep personal sympathy we feel here for all those

 bereaved at this terrible event.




 GIM-710.000                                           6
