           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
      k    Room 1106
      la   50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007




The Rt Hon Jack Straw, MP                                      Your reference:
Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                           Our reference:
LONDON SW1
                                                               Date: 1            January 1998




 You asked me in June last year to undertake a scrutiny o f the evidence about the disaster at
 the Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, in 1989. I have done that and now submit
 my Report.

 2      The Report has seven Chapters and ten Appendices. You said at the outset o f this
 exercise that you planned to publish it, and I have written it with that in mind.

 3.       You said that you intended to publish the evidence which I considered during my
 scrutiny. Much o f this (for instance the transcripts o f Lord Taylor’s Public Inquiry and o f the
 Inquests) is already in the public domain and I have found that the families are well
 acquainted with it. Other evidence which I have examined - certain parts o f which I know
 that relatives are particularly concerned to see - is held by the South Yorkshire Police, some^
 o f it on behalf of the Coroner. Some families are also, I know, interested in seeing the BBC s
 videotapes o f the disaster. These are o f course the property o f the Corporation.

 4.     I list at paragraph 4 o f Appendix 1 o f my report the people who gave me evidence
 during my scrutiny. You may wish to publish the transcripts o f their evidence and also the
 written evidence which, as Appendix 1 says, some o f them submitted beforehand. This
 could perhaps be done by depositing them in the House Libraries.

  5.     In paragraph 5 of Appendix 1 1 have referred to the written evidence o f various
  witnesses which I have been asked to consider. I can see no objection to publishing, if you
  wished, the evidence o f Messrs McDermott, Worsley, (Steven) Williams, Flack and Howes^
  This evidence consists of written statements, for the most part obtained by the West midlands
  Police. The Family Support Group already have these statements.

  6.    So far as Dr James Bums and Dr Iain West are concerned, their evidence is in the
  form o f reports which they provided to Mrs Anne Williams, the mother o f Kevin Williams

  C: IHILLSBOR\MAIN\HOMESEC. 2 4 2
who died in the disaster, and (in Dr W est’s case) also in the form o f a letter to me in answer
to questions I raised with him. I do not think that their evidence should be published as it
relates solely to the death o f Kevin Williams.

7.       Mr Noel Bume, whose report to the South Yorkshire Police Authority in connection
with the contribution proceedings, and evidence in those proceedings, I refer to in Chapter 6
(paragraphs 7 to 20) is in a slightly different category. His report would have been
privileged until it was disclosed to the other parties to the litigation (who did not include
survivors or relatives o f victims). I would have thought that it remains the property o f the
Police Authority and/or Mr Bume and that there might be problems o f copyright if you
publish it. Mr Bume’s oral evidence was however given in open Court and is therefore in
the public domain. But it is subject to the caveat that it was not agreed by the other parties to
the litigation. The case was settled before Mr Bume was cross-examined on it.

8       I have been assisted in my Scrutiny by a number o f other people, whom I have listed
at paragraph 6 o f Appendix 1. The discussions which I have had with them concern the
course o f events subsequent to the disaster rather than the disaster itself. There are no
transcripts o f my discussions with most o f these people. Publication o f such transcripts as
there are, and o f other written material arising from the discussions, is a matter for you but I
would not myself think it right to put it in the public domain. I have referred to it as far as is
necessary in my report.

9       Dr Popper, the Coroner who ran the Hillsborough Inquests, falls into the category o f
people I refer to in paragraph 8. I think it is a matter for you whether you wish to publish
what he said to me. It is not evidence relating to the events o f the day and therefore does not
fall within the type of evidence to which my terms o f reference relate.

 10      I also do not think it would be right to publish the transcripts o f the private
 discussions which I have had with relatives o f those who died in the disaster, or the
 submissions which they have sent to me. I believe that some relatives might object to that.
 They certainly are not expecting you to publish this material and they are o f course free to
 make it public themselves if they wish to. I would have no objection to your publishing the
 transcripts o f my open meeting with relatives in Liverpool on 6 October and my meeting on
 30 September with Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group, though I made it
 plain at the time that these were private meetings not open to the public.

 11.     I would of course be happy to meet you to discuss my report.      Perhaps your office
 could telephone my Clerk on 0171 936 6503.

                                           0 St*.




  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


  G:\HILLSBORlMAIN\HOMESEC.242
CONTENTS




Introduction

Chapter 1      The background

Chapter 2      Video evidence about the disaster

Chapter 3      The aftermath o f the disaster

Chapter 4      Alleged improper interference with witnesses

Chapter 5      Other matters o f concern to the victims’ families

Chapter 6      Miscellaneous

Chapter 7      Summary




Appendix 1     People who helped in the scrutiny

Appendix 2      Map and photographs

Appendix 3      Evidence o f Roger Houldsworth

Appendix 4      Analysis o f police CCTV tapes

Appendix 5      Evidence o f Dr Edward Walker

Appendix 6      Statement by David Frost

Appendix 7      Alterations to police statements

Appendix 8      Correspondence about amendments to statements

Appendix 9      Some individual cases

Appendix 10     Ten ‘unresolved’ questions?
