Mr J Race                                      Coventry Senior Attendance Centre
C1 Division                                    Coventry Boys' Club
Room 324                                       Whitefriars Lane
Home Office                                    Coventry
50 Queen Anne's Gate                           West Midlands
London SW1H 9AT                                Tel : Coventry (0203) 224975


                                               All communications addressed to


                                               Inspector P R Court
                                               Uniform Operations
                                               Police Headquarters
                                               PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                               Colmore Circus Queensway
                                               Birmingham
                                               B4 6NQ
                                               Tel : 021 626 5000



Dear Sir

RE - TAYLOR REPORT - USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRE ORDERS IN RELATION TO
EXCLUSION ORDERS

Whilst the use of Attendance Centre Orders to enforce Exclusion Orders would
seem a much more realistic and to a certain extent viable proposition than
offenders reporting to Police Stations at specific times there are a number of
major problems in using the current system as it stands.

Coventry Senior currently operates on a fortnightly basis. This obviously does
not prevent offenders attending football matches on the alternate Saturdays.

Saturday Attendance Centre does not prevent the attendance at mid-week or Sunday
matches. Whilst mid week matches are not popular with Football Clubs because of
lower attendances, since the Hillsborough incident there has been a vast
increase within the West Midlands area of Sunday matches. Indeed as you will be
aware it is one of the recommendations of the Taylor report that there should be
more of these Sunday events.


At Coventry both Senior and Junior Attendance Centres share the same premises.
If it is envisaged that Junior Attendance Centre is to be used in relation to
Exclusion Orders and was also to operate on a weekly basis new premises would
have to be found. If there was no increase in the opening dates of Junior
Attendance Centre both Junior and Senior could be run on a "back to back"
system with adjustment to the Junior starting time so ensuring Senior Offenders
(as at present) spend the majority of "match time" at the Centre.

Whilst none of these problems are insurmountable there would obviously be an
added cost factor and probable staffing difficulties.




                                                                  Continued
The suggested increase in the maximum sentence of 36 hours to 72 hours would in
my opinion need to be acompanied by some sort of incentive to attend rather than
just the threat of being breached for none attendance.

If in the event of an offender being sentenced to 72 hours legislation permitted
the reduction of his sentence by 6 hours for every 3 hours completed and an
increase of 3 hours for every absence (other than certified sickness or work)
and there would be a real incentive to attend.

If at any time the offenders absences meant that his time left to complete
exceeded the original sentence he could be automatically "breached." There
could also be introduced a very rigid rule in relation to the number of absences
allowed.


Whatever system is evolved it is essential that if it is meant to prevent the
offender attending football matches it does just that and gives him no, or as
little opportunity to "beat it" as possible.

It is also essential in my opinion although contrary to the usual thinking to
give Magistrates as little discretion as possible in sentencing both in relation
to making the exclusion orders and in the event of offenders being "breached."
A failure in this quarter will see a reluctance (certainly in some areas) to
make Exclusion Orders or to sentence realistically in the cases of breaches so
bringing the system into disrepute.




(Officer in Charge)
