•-JT




                                               cc.   Miss Nicholson
                                                     HMCIC
                                                     Mr Chi1cot
                                                     Mr Boys Smith
                                                     Mr Goddard
                                                     Mi F J SmiQ?
                                                     Mr Curwen
                                                     Mr Lidington




       Mr Mower


                  NATIONAL FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE UNIT



           The Home Secretary has seen your note of 1 August, whicja
       you discussed with Miss Bannister.

       2. The Home Secretary considered the option of including the
       announcement of the National Football Intelligence Unit in his
       statement today on the Taylor Report on Hillsborough. But, on
       balance, he decided against this because of the possibility
       that this piece of positive news would be subsumed in the
       general reaction to the Taylor Report. He has agreed that we
       should hold the announcement of the NFIU until September.




       Private Office                                   P R C STORR
       4 August 1989                                 Private Secretary
                                                                 A)pfC* M l .
,E.R.


                                              cc Ms Nicholson
                                                 HMCIC,
                                                 Mr Chilcot
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Goddard
                                                 Mr F J Smith
                                                 Mr Curwen
                                                 Mr Lidington




        Mr Storr
        NATIONAL FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE UNIT
        I have seen Mr Smith's note of 28 July and hope that we shall be
        able to hold any further announcement on this until September, as
        he suggests.
        As you know, the proposal to set up a unit was made public by Mr
        Anderton a couple of months ago. We ought however to be able to
        build it up into a reasonably newsworthy announcement.




        1 August 1989
                                        cc.   Ms Nicholson
                                              HMCIC
                                              Mr Chilcot
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Mower
                                              Mr Goddard
                                              Mr Curwen
                                              Mr Lidington




Mr Smith


            NATIONAL FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE UNIT



The Home Secretary has seen your note of 28 July. Given th€
fact that the football season starts on 19 August, he thinks
that it is important to get the Unit in motion, and appoint
the Superintendent to run it, sooner than mid-September. Is
there any reason why this cannot be done by mid-August, or
failing that, as -soon as possible after the start of the new
seasonT

2. I should be grateful for further advice as soon as
possible. When the timing is sorted out, the Home Secretary
will wish to issue a press release.




Private Office                                   P R C STORR
31 July 1989                                  Private Secretary
                   From: F J Smith                             cc: Ms Nicholson
                         FS Division                               HMCIC
                         Ext 2 952                                 Mr Chilcot
                                                                   Mr Boys Smith (o/r)
                          28 Julv 1989                             Mr Mower
                                                                   Mr Goddard (o/r)
                                                                   Mr Curwen
                                                                   Mr Lidington

                   Mr Storr


                   NATIONAL FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE UNIT


                   At a meeting with the Prime Minister and other colleagues in June •*
                   last year to discuss the problems of football hooliganism, the
                   Home Secretary agreed in principle to the establishment of a
                   police national football intelligence .unit."                   -
         ;;0-
                      have now reached formal agreement with the Association\pf
                   1/He

                   Chief Police Officers on the proposals for the unit as set" out in
                   Mr Goddard *s letter of 29 June, attached at Annex A.
                   Sir Clive Whitmore has also written to Peter Wright, Chairman of
                   ACPO to seek formal agreement on the line of accountability
                   .proposed (copy letter attached at Annex B) . “ 7 7' ™; '7~7 " , ~ ' y -

•V-'''    :' " 7
                   The aim is to get:;the unit up and running as early as possible .1'
 £ 7 ., into '^ie:ii.ew „ f o o t i ^ l : :seascm^;;”:;:^e;;;are^in;:the':'process^,of;.;;'.-; ^^^
        recruiting .a Superintendent'to "head the unit and-expect his
                                                                                                     ■:£i-
      ■ selection to take-place in mid-September. ~We suggest that- a
        press release is ‘      issued announcing the setting up of the imit., I■■■:■■
        •following his appointment. ’

                   The Metropolitan .Police are being .helpful over the setting up of
                   the unit, which is likely to l^e located in Tintagel House on the
                   south bank of the Thames not far from Hew Scotland Yard.



                                                                     1     f ^
                                                                      V


                                                                      F J SMITH
