S)Hl}.PURCHflSING/flDMIN          TEL No .021-233-32                    10 Jan 90 17 =24 N o .005 P




        T ram :   D G IBBS                                                        WRST MIDLANDS POLICE
                  A/ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                     HEADQUAKTKKS
                  (Operations)                                                    PO Box 52. Lloyd ifa n e
                                                                                  Cotniure Cincus Queentway
                                                                                  Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                                  Telephone 021-236 5000




                                                                                 DGI/MR

                                          C c   SxT ^ e k s u
       K M Whaliey Esq
       Secretary                                 ft
       Hillsborough Stadium
       Disaster Inquiry                                             r^OUMNC^Q/
       50 Queen Anne's Gate
       LONDON                                    rf/
       SW1H 9AT                                                                  10 January 1990




       J refer to your recent letter to Mr Leopold, and our conversation about the
       difficulties experienced by some Everton supporters seeking entry to the
       Coventry City Football Stadium on 19 August 1989 and other related matters.

       I will not reiterate the text of the letter sent to Councillor Chase on 2h
       and 25 August 19891 by the Match Commander for the day and the Director of
       Coventry Economic Development and Planning Department (attached). The
       former letter contains details of' the Police preparations for the Match arid
       addresses the points raised by the Liverpool Working Party. For ease of
       reference 1 have also attached a plan of the Stadium and have marked the
       relevant locations.

       The Match itself was on the opening day of the 1989/90 Season and was the
       first since the publication of the Interim Report into the Hillsborough
       Disaster. All those involved with the policing and the organisation of the
       event were aware that a critical eye would be cast over the philosophy and
       tactics employed on the day. Indeed there had been a number of meetings
       involving the Emergency Services, the Club, and the Council to discuss
       safety issues in general.

        It 3s accepted that there was congestion outside the four Visitors' Stand
       <EGrnstiles whicTrresultSti'-iti-abuul Aliu Lverton supporters missing the kick
        off. There were no persons outside 'those turns tTJ'es at~37l^prrn— Ss_the“’
        c**owds built up the policing presence outside the turnstiles was increased
        from 11 to 22 officers including k mounted officers. That was more than
        sufficient to control the situation. The queues to the turnstiles were
        segregated by the Police into two groups; one cash sale group which was
        formed east along Thackhall Street, and a ticket holder group which formed
       west along Thackhall Street. The situation was monitored both at the scene
        by the Ground Commander, and on camera by the Match Commander, who was in
       overall charge of the policing operation. There was pushing and inst-Ainf.
        but nothing which caused concern for the safety of those comprising I h e ^
       cj^owd.                                                  ‘           ----- --- -

       The Club have accepted that there was a delay on the day and the Managing
       Director has publicly apologised for the inconvenience caused. The actual
       cause of the delay was due in some part to the introduction of reserved
       seating in the Visitors' Stands. For the previous year a ticket to that
       Stand enabled the holder to choose his seat.

   10 JAN ’90 16:26                                                       021 233 3256           PAGE.001
o)HQ PURCHflSING/flDMIN    TEL No .021-233-3256             10 Jan 90 17=24 No.005 P.02




                                             -   2   -



         Continued


        Unfortunately within the Stand area there is a mixture of covered and
        uncovered seating. Understandably especially during inclement weather most
        supporters want to sit in the covered area. That created marshalling and
        stewarding difficulties and caused frustration and annoyance for those who
        had paid identical prices for different standards of comfort and viewing
        facilities.

        The introduction of reserved seating and a different price structure for
        covered and uncovered seating sought to ease the stewarding difficulties
        experienced in previous years. The Everton Match was the first under this
        new scheme and inordinate delays were being created at the pay turnstiles by
        individuals who wanted a seat in a particular area of the Stand. Turnstile
        Operators understandably found this difficult and time consuming and perhaps
        with hindsight, it was inevitable that delays would be caused by this self
        selection rather than issuing the next ticket available.

        At 2.40 p.m., at the request of the Ground Commander on the scene, the two
        pay turnstileB were re-designated ticket only in an attempt to accommodate
        the growing number of ticket holders. It was not until approximately ten
        minutes later that a Senior Steward was able to effectively convert those
        two gateB to enable ticket only entry. In that time the number of ticket
        holders who sought entry tothe ground had grownsignificantly but did not
        exceed 600 and was probably closer to 400 at any particular time.

         Although there is no recording of the policing tactics prior to 3 pm, at
         that time the video recording clearly Bhows a queueing regime being
         policed. The Ground Commander assured Councillor Chase and his colleagues
         that the regime had been in being upon the arrival of additional officers at
         2.25 pm. Although a contemporaneous written operations log confirmed the
         time of deployment of these additional officers, Councillor Chase was
         unable to accept that assurance without filmed evidence.

         At the meeting with the Liverpool City delegation, it was explained that
         the video shown to them was an edited compilation of the days* eventB which
         recorded the relevant points which were at iBsue. The 70 or so photographs
         taken before, during and after the Match alBo showed the density of the crowd
         at the particular points in the ground. Members of the delegation chose a
         selection of these Btill photographs and took them back with them to Liverpool.
         The Match Commander offered to travel to Liverpool with the unedited video
         tapeB if required, but no request has been made for his attendance.

         Members of the deputation were dismayed and disappointed about not being
         given permission to 'inspect' Coventry Stadium. It was explained to them
         by the Council representative and the Club Secretary that it was the
         responsibility of Coventry Council to inspect and issue a safety
         certificate and a formal inspection from the Liverpool elected members
         was inappropriate. The Club Secretary did, however, invite them to
         the next home match to inspect for themselves the facilities available at
         the Btadium. Continued...




   10 JAN ’90 16:29                                           021 233 3256     P A G E .002
©HQ PURCHASING/RDMIN     TEL N o .021-233-3256             10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.03




                                            - 3 -

        Continued...

        At the end of the meeting they would not agree to issue a joint press
        statement albeit they indicated their verbal agreement to the three
        areas contained in the attached press release.

        Accepting that there were delays .the Club,in consultation with the advisory
        group, immediately introduced a ticket only scheme for the visitor’s seating
        area. A new six position ticket office was erected for the exclusive use
        of visiting supporters. Barriers were erected outside the turnstiles to
        marshal and channel supporters, and the Club employed uniformed security staff
        on the approach to the visitors turnstiles to advise and direct supporters
        before they reached the barriers. In the forthcoming cloBed season the whole
        of the north west of the ground is being redesigned to improve the flow of
        spectators and refreshment facilities in the vicinity of the visiting
        stand.

        A computer based counting system has been installed to enable the Club and
        Police to monitor the throughput of supporters and relevant densities in
        various parts of the ground. The facilities of the system more than meet the Police
        requirements. Improvements and additions to the CCTV will be also
        carried out this Beason. Other alterations which have been introduced
        includes- The use of poly carbon Bheeting to replace the metal grill
        radial fencing and to segregate visiting supporters in the seated overflow
        area; the removal of two rowB of seats to widen the concourse between
        covered and uncovered seats in the North or Sky Blue Stand; the erection of
        a metal fence to segregate the uncovered and covered seating areas;
        structural alterations to seated visitors exit gates to increase the rate
        of flow from the ground; the improvement of information and directional
        signs inside and leading to the ground; the use of uniform security staff
        to keep the Stand stairways clear, in addition, we now,as a rule, allow
        visiting and home supporters to exit at the same time.

        1 am sure that you will be aware that Coventry City
        were in the forefront of pre-match entertainment and in promoting a safe and
        comfortable environment for their customers. They were, in fact, the firBt club
        to introduce an all seater stadium and now have only one quarter of their
        capacity allocated to standing supporters. The move away from an all
        seater stadium and the reintroduction of a standing terrace was at the
        insistence of the supporters, some of whom missed the 'atmosphere1.

        The pointB made by the Director of Economic Development and Planning In his
        letter dated 25 August, to Councillor Chase about the existence of a working
        group before the Hillsborough Disaster and the foresight of the Football Club
        indicated the club's concern for safety which is further evidenced by their
        swift response to the criticism levelled at it.


        Continued




   10 JAN ’90 16:30                                           021 233 3256      P A G E .003
©HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN      TEL N o .021-233-3256             10 Jan 90 17 =24 N o .005 P.04




     Continued....


     The ground and facilities of the Club have been visited by representatives
     of the Football Association and Football League, both of whom expressed
     satisfaction with the existing facilities at the Club and the policing
     philosophy and tactics used on Match days.

     As I have already outlined, Coventry City football club have accepted there
     was a delay at the Visitors' Stand turnstiles and after consultation with
     the Advisory Group, the club have set up new arrangements which have
     increased the flow of spectators into the visitors* seating area. Other
     improvements have also been carried out.

     It was hoped by all concerned that the meeting on 6 September 1989 between
     Councillor Chase and his colleagues, police, club officials and
     representatives from Coventry City Council and the Advisory Group would
     resolve the areas of dispute. Regrettably that was not the case and
     certain areas of disagreement have now reached an impasse' and cannot be
     taken any further. Chief Superintendent Swingewood in his letter of 2
     October 1989 to Councillor Chase, deals once again with the question of
     crowd density arid outlines the new arrangements that have been made at the
     turnstiles serving the visitors' seating area.

     1 attended the meeting on 6 September and viewed the video and photographs.
     I have to say that I saw nothing in the crowd density that gave me any
     cause for concern at all. As you are aware that was also the view of the
     Chairman of the Advisory Group and representatives of Coventry City Council
     and the club.

     This incident has had a 'thorough hearing' so to speak and all parties
     have learned from that particular game. I do not propose to take the
     matter any further and have every confidence in the Football Advisory
     Group ut Coventry to monitor events and recommend improvements for safety
     whenever necessary. I know they are doing just that on a match to match
     basis

     J hope the above has been of further use to you, but should you wish to
     discuss any of the issues raised, please do not hesitate to contact me.
     Yours sincerely




     A/Assistant Chief Constable
     (Operations)




   10 JAN ’90 16:31                                           021 233 3256       P A G E .004
0HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN             TEL N o .021-233-3256           10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P .05


             Coventry.            tel   : 224473                10r01»3U      14:uu N0.00i>     P.    02




    Councillor         Chrvio
    Uvorpool City Council
    ChMman
    H.Ul.-,boi*ou.'*h Uorldnjj Party
    Chief acf‘cu!,lves Offidi ‘                                      P r w r ,w <nv>
    Rocn ‘j                                                         2 Oetobw 1 M ?
    Munictpnl ^uUdingo
    Dnio JJtront
   kuvrapoof. m 2dh




    Dear Councillor Chaie

    S«ptombedV)3C)rr*C^      ^    th° Ch1'ef        t0 r°Ply to yo c letter dated 12

    I am sorry that you f e lt that our' recent meeting did not rosolve aost of
     *j m      '       ,At our neotlnC on ftlth Sopteraijer it was my understandinr
                         an!l   the Ac,v1soi7 Group, thnt you were quite
    satisfied with U s crowd density in a ll or the standing areas and that the
    vidoo^ rtb o lt 00.1tod to a tlras      tnodo, ftrnphicnlly support our
    CO!iten i.Ion that the crowd conditions in that area were confortable.

    Tho s t i l l photographs wcro chosen by you from those taken by our
    photographer. There wcro othorn available to you which you did not
    E * "-                     the photogi^ia ranged from early afternoon to after
    the riniu whistle and i t is unfortunate that your chMc* did not include a
    fu ll ran/je of the photographu available.

    I accopt that the vievre of the crowds outride t'.ie ground wore limited and
        i m poo*** They did not show tho conditions nor our tactics
    mnrshftlllns wd controlling the supporters, I also regret that you f e lt
    unable to ftccept our assurances of what wo did to manage a situation which
    was not of our malting. However, I understand your ro.non for not doinp so,
    but I do not $oo how wo can now progress th is issuo any further.
    I cannot ronlly add wiy iwre to ray lo t tor or to our discussions on 6th
    Soptorpor. As I said to you, recriminations tire unhelpful, we have a ll
    loamed from that gane and wo and the Club continue to refine our
    operations in the light of experience and will continue to do so. flew
    arrangements have bo«n put into place by the Football Club to increase the
    flow of supporter** through the ‘seated* tu rn stile s, which I think you nay
    agree wn3 tho root cause of the problems on that day. Those arrangements
    including security s ta f f outside the tu rn stiles and inside the stands, a
    new 6 position tlekot office for the exclusive use of v isitin g supporters,
    and bnrriers loading to each tu rn stile to a ssist in the management of any
    crowds. Other improvements are planned during this season and next sterner.

    Continued.......

   10 JAN ’90      16:31                                           021 233 3256        P A G E .005
5HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN          TEL N o .021-233-3256              10 Jan 90 17:24 N o .005 P.06


2'2447^iflSU Coventry.          TEL: 224473                      10.01,90    14:00 No.005 P . 03




                                           * 2-

    Conttmi'jrt,

    I nn aura t'wt              will not jvjaln ttcporlence tho difficulties which
    sfOfo 'ipparont on thfi 19th Aujust.

    Your'* faithfully




  rapj. W i n 7 *wood
 I Chlof *up«rtnt<Md!ant




     10 JAN ’90      16:32                                           021 233 3256    PAGE.006
5HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN      TEL N o .021-233-3256                 10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.07
2244731R5U Coventry.        TEL: 22                             10.01.90     14:00 No.005 P .04




   U iM /t                                                              C oventry

      Ac the invitation of th( Police, i dtputition of Liverpool City Councillors
      and representatives of Coventry City Council and Coventry City Football Club
      viewed the Police videos end ttill photographs taken at the Everton game on
      19 August after Allegations of inadequate crowd management.

      The Liverpool City Councillors agreed that

      1    there is no foundation to the complaint that there          was   crushing    and
           unrelieved pressure in the visitors standing area

      i    That there is no evidence to aupport the allegation of overcrowding in
           the visitori overflow area.

      3    pie video evidence elearly shows that there was no mixing of the opposing
                    ^      there was a physical Police presence   In addition to the
           dividing fence to maintain separation of the fane.

      Concerning tht decision not to delay the kick-off, it is policy generally now
      AS& to delay match kick-offs except uodir ixciptiooAl circumstances* on 19
      Augusti the day of the Everton Fixture, there were no such ftacceptiortAl
      ordern,tanCe* prevailil18,    I*1*** **•   no   rl“k to   P ^ H c eafety   or   public


      the Liverpool city Councillors R a t i o n e d the manner in which visitors leave
      the Stadium after matches And the adequacy of the exit gates.              We are
      eatisfied that the site and frequency of exit gates end the manner in which
      they are controlled, more than meet the criteria laid down in the guidelines
      to Safety at Sports Grounds.      on the day in question, there was adequate
      Policing and Stewarding at those exit gates when fans were leaving and there
      was no evidence of discomfort.

      The Councillors accepted that the potential rate of turnstile admittance was
      within the recommendations of the Rt Bon Lord Justice Taylor, however, they
      felt that the recoroaetvdations fell short of auppofttre ffa^uireMntSe

                                         lack of any queueing regime, they accepted
      that the video showed at S.00pm an effective Police operation to marshal end
      steward the small crowd, but they w e r e unable to accept that this strategy had
      been in place since2.25pm as shown in the Police operational log. They did,
      however, accept that there were no persons queueing after3.12 pm.



      DAVID G U I S
      CHAIRMAN - SAFETY At SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

      S Ssptsmber 1989




    10 JAN ’90 16:33                                              021 233 3256        P A G E .007
flHQ PURCHASING/RDMIN        TEL N o .021-233-3256                       10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.08




       Wesf Midlands Police
                                                              V j'V iSiO N H fcA DO L^nTtH b
                                                              1.IT Tl_E    SIB f f 1
                                                              CO VfST«V
                                                              C V 1 2JX

                                                              t«   irP H O "E   0203 SSS311



         Cllr Harry Chase
         Hillsborough Working Party
         Chief Executives Office                                                         KGJB/AJD
         Municipal Buildings
         Dale Street                                                                  24 August 1989
         LJVKHI'OOL L69 2DH




         Dear Sir

         I am directed by the Chief Constable to reply to your letter dated the 23
         August. 1989 about the difficulties experienced on 19 August 1989 by some
         Fverton supporters, and other related matters.

         1 am aware of the content of the letter sent by you to the Chief Executive
         8rscus88ar'Byr &url KBVSS&ty,&f'6&p?""lHeHuiPe£lBP Sf"LtSfiofcTEWetOpliSi aiiu
         Planning will reply to you on behalf of the Advisory Group, but as
         Match Commander on the day I will comment on the points in both letters
         which relate solely to the policing of the event.

         Since the Taylor Enquiry, recommendations 1, 2 and 3 have been addressed by
         the Advisory Group, and as a result the capacity of the Highfield Road
         Ground has been re-adjusted to 26218. Of that number, 5849 is allocated to
         visiting supporters? ?789 for those seated and 3060 for those standing.
         On the date in question the attendance was 17981 which included 5540
         visitors, 2578 of whom were seated and 2962 standing.
          Closed season improvements carried out in the visitors seated area were
          designed to separate the covered from the uncovered area. Those
          improvements allowed the club to re-introduce reserved seating for the
          convenience of seated supporters and to make marshalling and stewarding
          more effective.

          For the match itself, our intelligence indicated that between 4-5000
          Everton supporters would attend the match and that the overall attendance
          would be in the region of 19,000. It became apparent quite early on in the
          week that the seated and standing overspill areas for visiting supporters
          would be required. That information was relayed to the club and
          re-inforced on Friday morning as a result of information received from
          Liverpool. The policing operation was adjusted Lo accommodate a capacity
          crowd in the visitors areas. The tactics used by the Police have been well
          practiced in the rccent past and reviewed in the light of the events at
          Hillsborough and the recommendations made by Taylor.



         Tuf orncet   mr* T*i C0»U$KMOt*CfIS   Supt K Birch             fjrrowiow    3351

   10 JAN ’90 16:33                                                             021 233 3256        P A G E .008
8HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN      TEL N o .021-233-3256             10 Jan 90 17 =24 No.005 P.09




      We have experienced larger visiting support and never before had
      allegations of crowd problems, either' inside or outside the ground which
      were beyond our control and which could have prejudiced safety.

      At the pre-match briefing the potential for a capacity visiting contingent
      and our response to it was dealt with in detail, and sufficient reserves
      identified, again in line with the recommendations made by Taylor.

      The club informed us that almost 2000 tickets had been sold before the
      match and that a further 600 were to be made available for sale on the day;
      Hgain a normal practice.
      The four turnstiles in question arc described by the club as being slow.
      Their potential rate of flow indicates an ability to admit one person every
      4 seconds, that rate correlates very well with the capacity for that
      viewing area (recommendation 1 9 ).

       Two of the four turnstiles into the Sky Blue Stand were Initially allocated
       to ticket holders and two for those wishing to pay. Our deployment
       comprised B officers and a Supervisor and 2 mounted officers. At
       2.15pm we were aware of a buiid-up of supporters at those four turnstiles.
       This was seen on the ground cameras and reported by the Officer Second in
       Command of Operations, who was at the scene.It was apparent that the
       queuing was to the two pay gates but at that time, the queue was orderly
       and good humoured. There was no queuing at the ticket turnstiles. At that
       time there was not need to increase Police presence at that location.
       The situation was monitored and at 2.25pm there was evidence of an increase
       in the size of the queue and an additional 10 officers and 2 mounted
       officers were deployed to that area. It was congested in the immediate
       vicinity of the turnstiles but along its length, supporters were queuing in
       twos and threes. At that time, it is true to say that »ore people were
       arriving than were passing through the turnstiles. Those joining the queue
       again did so in twos and threes. There was a separation of ticket and cash
       queues and it is reported by the Sector Commander that those wishing to pay
       cash formed orderly queues, whereas those with tickets were not so orderly.
       There was an attempt made to form the ticket holders in to some sort of
       order using horses and foot patrols, but because of complaints, the tactics
        used by mounted officers were eased. I was able to view the events on the
        video and there was no request from the Sector Commander to deploy other
        available officers to the scene. I was satisfied with the tactics being
        used and the number of officers deployed to what was a relatively small
        crowd. By 2.40pm the cash sale gates were re-designated "ticket only" to
        ease the congestion outside the tickets turnstiles.

        There is no funnelling at those turnstiles arid therefore, the verbal
        advice and containment tactics from the mounted and the 18 officers was
        ample to control the 400-500 supporters who were outside the ground. I
        think you will agree that the number of officers at that location was
        appropriate to deal with the numbers waiting, but we could do nothing about
        the rate of flow through the turnstiles. Our tactics and availability of
        resources was fully in line with the letter and spirit of recommendation 28.




   10 JAN ’90 16:34                                             021 233 3256       PAGE.009
^$HQ -PURCHASING/ADMIN     TEL N o .021-233-3256              10 Jan 90 17=24 No.005 P.10

                                          - 3 -



      I am aware that by 3.12pm there were no queues at any of the four
      turnstiles mentioned. There were the inevitable late arrivals who
      experienced no difficulty in gaining access to the seated area. You will
      see from the details given in the third paragraph of my letter that the
      number of visiting supporters was under the reviewed capacity. The "Green
      Guide" density recommends 54 persons per 10 square metres. A 15% reduction
      in that figure results in a recommended density of 46. On Saturday the
      actual density averaged out at 44 persons per 10sq.m. T have had the
      opportunity to view the video of the crowd which shows there to be ample
      room in the visiting standing area. The Director of Economic
      Development and Planning will respond to you in more detail about
      densities and video footage which completely refutes the allegations
      contained in your letter to the Chief Executive.
     ,At 3.00pm it was estimated that there were 400 spectators waiting at the
      four turnstiles, and at that time 1 still had 18 patrol and 4 mounted
      officers in attendance. The presence of that crowd did not constitute
      either a public order or a public safety risk. I was able to police the

 •    crowd inside and outside the ground, and the mere fact that there were
      people who could not get in In time to view the kick-off is not sufficient
      justification to warrant a delay in the kick-off. That option was
      considered by me prior to the players taking to the pitch. That fact was
      relayed to those still waiting outside the ground. . They were
      understandably unhappy and frustrated about their delayed entry, but in the
      circumstances were quite orderly. It is interesting to note that one
      complaint related to a persistent, refusal to delay the kick-off, yet in the
      letter to the Chief Executive one of the complaints was that we misled fans
      about a delayed kick-off! There was little the Police could do to
      relieve that frustration as we had no control of the speed of entry of
      those fans into the ground. I saw no justification to order the kick-off
      to be delayed and on reflection T still consider that to be the righL
      decision.

       There is no doubt that a number of people were frustrated at not being able
       to get into the ground in time, even though most had arrived early enough
       to do so. I would say that the 400 outside the ground probably arrived
       near to the kick-off time. Nevertheless, the fact that quite a few of
       them were frustrated can have implications for public order with
       consequential safety ramifications. The mood of a few visiting supporters,
       and only a few, made marshalling and stewarding thereafter more difficult
       than it should have been, but I can fully understand their feelings. On
       Monday morning I expressed my views to the club on the delay caused by the
       turnstile configuration and other related matters. That was discussed at
       the Advisory Meeting on 23 August. The outcome of that meeting will be
       outlined m the letter from the Council.

       In relation to your third point, I recollect that the communications on the
       day were good and that there were no systems failure. The volume of radio
       traffic was reasonable and did not pose any operational problems to the
       experienced operator, nor did the volume of information being fed into the
       Command Post. 1 am not aware of any heated arguments or disagreements
       between Police Officers in the overflow section behind the Everton goal, or
       in any other area. It is true that officers spoke strongly to one or two
       fans. I have viewed the video of that section of the crowd and it
       appeared well behaved, requiring little intervention by the Police.




    10 JAN ’90 16:35                                            021 233 3256       PAGE.010
8HQ ’PURCHASING/ADMIN     TEL N o .021-233-3256             10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.11


                                          -   'i   -




       Nothing occurred which would have led to a ‘discussion’ on policing tactics
       or- action. I certainly saw no arguments between officers. My enquiries
       since receiving your letter confirms that fact.
       Referring now to the last allegation about the attitude of my officers.
       They were briefed to act in a courteous, firm and positive manner and to
       communicate a philosophy of professionalism in dealing with both home and
       visiting supporters.

       We tried to deal with a frustrated section of the crowd with firmness and
       understanding but it was perhaps inevitable, where the tempers of some of the
       fans were becoming frayed, that there was a breakdown in effective
       communication.   At the end of the day, allegations of ci^rtness from both
       sides were inevitable and understandable.

       If I may touch briefly on the letter you sent to Coventry Council, there is
       no evidence whatsoever from the video to support the allegation that there
       was severe crushing or over-packing of the visitors pen which we refer to
       as the oversDill area. I can make the video of this available to you,
       which will show quite clearly that conditions within the crowd generally were
       comfortable and in the pen referred to specifically by you, you will see that
       conditions were very comfortable indeed.

       I listened with interest to some of the comments made on Radio Liverpool
       and you may have heard that I responded to them all. Some of the comments
       about the absence of police , the time taken to get into the ground and
       that some fans were still queuing at 3.40pm were wholly inaccurate and
       unhelpful.
       Like many other grounds, including Goodison Park, the visiting supporters
       are kept in until the streets are relatively clear of home supporters. You
       will fully understand the reasons why we continue to employ that Lactic.
       There were 6 announcements made to the visiting fans that this would be
       done and as far as I am aware, there was no severe overcrowding on the
       approach to the exit gate. Bearing in mind we were under the reviewed
       capacity for that area, there was nothing exceptional in the size or
       density of the crowd which would have warranted police or steward
       intervention. Our Police box is situated just 10 metres from that exit
       gate. It is elevated some 5m above the crowd and the windows at the front
       face out on to the main exit gate and have excellent views of the
       crocodile which forms behind that gate. Police Officers manned those gates
       and assisted with the stewarding of the exiting fans and 1, as Match
       Commander, had an un-restrlcted view of the exodus of fans, saw nothing
       exceptional to justify the allegation that there was severe crushing at
        that location.

        1 hope the above comments have eased your fears over the conditions
        reported to you. I can assure you that everything possible was done on
        the day to allow the match to take place in a safe environment. Having had
        the opportunity to again review the events of the day I ara satisfied that
        the spirit and letter or the Taylor report were followed and that there
        were no safety problems at the ground.

        Yours


         P J SW    rfOOD
         Chief    srintendent




   10 JAN ’90 16:36                                            021   233   3256    PAGE.   011
8HQ PURCHflSING/flDMIN    TEL No .021-233-3256              10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.12




              copy i
              Councillor J Cunningham, Leader of the Council
              Councillor P V G Robinson JP, Chairman of Economic Development
                                            •nd Planning Comittee
              DBDP 7 01
              Superintendent Kevin Birch, Vest Midlands Police
              ADO Les Martin, Vest Midlands Fire Service



              DEDP/P(BC)5/DJG/CS/SSGA
              H Noble, D Giles
              831200
              25 August 1969


              Councillor Harry Chase (Chairman)
              Hillsborough Working Party
              Liverpool City Council
              Chief Executive’s Office
              Room 5
              Municipal Building
              Dale Street
              Liverpool L69 ZDH


              Dear Councillor Chase

              SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
              COVBHTRY CITY V KVMTOS
              19 AUGUST 1989

              Your letter dated 23 August 1989, received by facsimile transmission
              addressed to Mr lain Roxburgh, my Chief Executive, has been passed to me
              for reply as it is this Department in conjunction with the City Secretary
              that has responsibility for overseeing safety at sports grounds.

               Your Working Party would seem to be making a number of serious allegations
               concerning safety standards at Coventry City Football Club’s Highfield Road
               Stadium, however, as • preamble to my reply you should be avare of the
               following facts.

               Imnediately on publication of the Rt Bon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim
               report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster a meeting was called by the
               City Council of all those parties interested in safety at sports grounds,
               namelyt-

               1   The Local Authority
               2   Coventry City Football Club
               3   West Midlands Police
               4   Vest Midlands Fire Service

               This group which has always met on a regular basis was immediately
               reconstituted into a Formal Advisory Group and it was agreed that future
               meetings would also include reprssentatives from the Vest Midlands
               Ambulance Service and a Supporters Group.

                                                                           Continued



   10 JAN ’90 16:36                                           021 233 3256     PAGE.012
®HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN       TEL N o .021-233-3256            10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.13




               The immediate responsibility of thia group was to make sure that the 28
               points of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report were implemented
               as fir is was practically possible before the commencement of the 1089/90
               football season. I am satisfied that this was achieved.

               As you are no doubt aware, Coventry City Football Club had considerable
               foresight in attempting to create an all eeater stadium for viewing
               football many years ago, but this was frustrated by fans who wished to
               stand. Be that as it may the total spectator capacity of the stadium was
               significantly reduced by the experiment and currently is a mere 26,218.

               A new General Safety Certificate was issued to the Club on 24 August 1988
               and this has been amended once since that date. Coventry City Football
               Club have recently made application for a further amendment of their
               General Safety Certificate concerning reduction in ground capacity in the
               light of recommendations. Furthermore, the City Council will be carrying
               out a review of the safety Certificate in its entirety, also as
               recommended.

               There have never previously been allegations of crowd problems, either
               inside or outside the ground, which were beyond the control of Police or
               stewards and which could have prejudiced safety.

               The problems which were encountered on Saturday 19 August were in the
               opinion of the Advisory Croup - many of whom were present - of a minor
               nature and certainly not beyond the capabilities of the Police to control.

               Taking your allegations point by pointt-

               1    The Coventry City Football Club have acknowledged that there was a
                    problem concerning the rate of admission of visiting spectators to the
                    seated areas of 'The Sky Blue Stand*. This has been identified by the
                    Advisory Group as being due to spectators possessing tickets and those
                    wishing to pay by cash attempting to pass through the seme turnstiles.
                    The problem has been addressed, a solution put forward and adopted by
                    the Advisory Group. It must be said that the eituation was
                    exacerbated by the late arrival of Everton supporters.

                    At no time was there 'severe crushing and unrelieved   pressure* and the
                    Police did impose a queueing regime.

               2    It has been the policy, as it is at many football grounds, for the
                    Police to keep *away* supporters inside the stadium until such time as
                    the home supporters have dispersed.

                    Although it is acknowledged that there was crowding, there was nothing
                    exceptional in the size and density of the crowd which would have
                    warranted any Police or steward intervention.

                    I believe it is the Intention of the Match Coamander (Police)
                    to elaborate on the point in his reply to your letter to
                    Mr Geoffrey Dear.
                                                                                        IS




  10 JAN ’90    16:37                                         021 233 3256      PAGE.013
®HQ PURCHASING/ADMIN    TEL N o .021-233-3256               10 Jan 90 17:24 No.005 P.14




                                                 3
            3   I must entirely refute this suggestion. On analysis of the figures,
                 at no time was a density of more than 44 person per 10 m* of terrace
                 prevailing on the visitors terrace. The pen did not contain any
                 Coventry City supporters.

            4   The Match Caomander (Police) in charge of policing natters on
                 1® August entirely refutes the claim that his officers misled and
                misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off. There was never any
                 suggestion of delaying the kick-off. Police officers are there to
                 assist the fans, not to attribute blame.

            I would be pleased to inspect your dossier of complaints when it is
            complete, but I must say that on the unchallengeable Information available
            to me 1 feel that the matter does not warrant any further investigation.

            Yours sincerely




            Director of Economic Development and Planning




   10 JAN '90 16:38                                           021 233 3256   PAGE.014
in

          | COVENTRY CITY F C.   STADIUM                                                                                                 in
in                                                                                                                                       <9
o
o
                                                                                                                                         CD
o                                                                                                                                        a
z                                                                                                                                        a.
CN
                                     THACKAf. l                                                                                          a)
                                                                  NORTH STAND                                                            in
                                                                                                                                         OJ
                                                                                                                                         to
O                                                                                                                     CCTV               to
cn                                                                             /, VISITORS
                                                                                  SEATING
                                                                                               /                                         to
                                                                                                                                         to
(0                                                 o n — u ljlj
r->                                                                                                                                      OJ
                                                                                                                                         o
                                    HOME SEATING           NO
                                        fencing            AREA

                                                                                                    HOME




<£>
                                                                  SUPPORTERS
                                                                  OVERSPiLL
                                                                  AREA
                                                                                                   s t a n d in g /
                                                                                                                       S
in
CM
K>
 I
                                                                                                         il 7
K>
K>
CM
                                                                                                     I                        THE MOAT
 I                                                                                                         Score
rH                                                                                                         board
CM
o
                                                                                                   VISITORS
                                                                                                   STANDING

LU
                                                                                                           CCTV



z
Q
                                                                                       fC i/                                             oo
                                                                                                                                         to
<X                                                                                                                                       co
X
CD                                                           CCTV                                                                        Q
                                                                                                                                         0)
CO
<X                                                 MAIN STAND
                                                                                                                                         z
<_)                                                                                                                                      a
O'
                                                                                                      iPOLfCE CONTROL ROOM!
                                                                                                                                         Q
o                                                                                R e t e n t io n room |
o»    L
                                                \i
         sti/Saov -4<C: ' - 5 e / ^            -«*£:
                        — * ^ a « e cvje. c > ^ < ^ ‘‘v^-i-tes f'tjc
c »b«y   ^ e c s ^ «<» ,^ u £                -<Ce ^ v * . / CAAsyo<\




                            W/tf? compliments




                                            Sa s m       s I aiA
  F8 Division
  Home Office
  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
  LONDON SW1H 9AT
  Tel. 01 273
