From: Peter Edmimdson                                       Mr Omand
      Operational Policing                                  Mr Boys Smith
      Policy Unit                                           Mr Pugh
      Room 527, QAG                                         Mr Clifford ABCU
      9 273 - 2621                                          Ms Clifford CD
      7 May, 1998                                           Mr Warner
                                                            Mr Owen



Clare Sumner
                 ) Simultaneously
Linda Rushton

HILLSBOROUGH: ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998

I attach supplementary Q & A briefing on some of the issues raised at the Home
Secretary’s pre-brief yesterday, including Freemasonry and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
I also attach, as requested, a revised paragraph 31 of his speech (para. 32 in the
version we discussed with the Home Secretary yesterday).

2.       I also enclose at annex C insertions for Mr Howarth’s speech dealing with the
points raised at our meeting this morning. At paragraph 12 of the speech, you should
add that the main inquest was concluded after four months (19 November 1990 to
28 March 1991).

3.      On reflection, after this morning’s meeting with Mr Howarth, we have
prepared revised versions of paragraphs 14 and 16 for Mr Howarth’s consideration, as
we discussed briefly. The revisions, I hope, keep the sense of what Mr Howarth wants
to say (and much of his text), while being less open to possible misinterpretation.




                                     Peter Edmundson




f:\oppu\complnts\misc\mp-0555.doc
Supplementary Q & A briefing                                                  Annex A

Is Lord Justice Stuart-Smith a freemason?

This is a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I have no doubt about his integrity. His
report sets out clearly what evidence he considered, his conclusions and the reasons
for those conclusions. I am committed to introducing a voluntary register across the
Criminal Justice System but this is not a matter to be dealt with on an ad hoc basis.

If the police were to blame for the disaster, shouldn’t the inquest verdict of
'accidental death’ be quashed?

It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame and an
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it.

Indeed, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the coroner correctly stated in his
summing up that an accidental death verdict did not mean that the deaths occurred
without fault.

The jury considered the evidence before the inquest and returned a verdict of
accidental death rather than unlawful killing. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no
grounds for recommending that the inquest verdict should be referred back to the
High Court.

Is the range of verdicts available to the coroner's court too narrow to enable the
inquest to reach proper conclusions?

The Coroners Rules suggest a number of standard wordings to be used when
completing the coroner's inquisition. The object is to standardise conclusions as to the
death across the country and to make statistics on inquests more consistent and
reliable. The wordings are not mandatory and coroners and their juries are free to use
alternatives if they wish to do so.

Alternative descriptions of how the deceased came by his or her death must, however,
be factual and not appear to attribute civil blame or criminal liability to a named
person. That would be beyond the remit of the coroner's enquiry.

Why were the families not allowed to present their own medical evidence at the
inquest?

An inquest is an enquiry conducted by the coroner. Only the coroner, not the families
of the deceased, nor any other interested person, has any right to call witnesses. This
is consistent with the inquisitorial nature of the inquest system. It is not a trial, and
there are no issues to be determined between 'parties'.

It is, of course, open to anyone who believes that they have relevant evidence about a
death to contact the coroner, but that is not to say that the coroner needs to call them



f:\oppu\complnts\misc\mp-0555 .doc
at the inquest - the evidence may be irrelevant to the function of the inquest, or merely
repeat evidence given by others.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found that written statements by prospective witnesses were
available to the coroner, but the witnesses were not called because the issues were
fully dealt with by others. Their evidence had nothing material to add.

Will you publish Appendix 9 of the scrutiny report?

A number of families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent
evidence o f the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases
in appendix 9 of his report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of
evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I decided that it
would be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the families
concerned direct and not include them in the published report.

The Family Support Group have since indicated that they would like appendix 9 to be
published and, subject to receiving confirmation that all the families concerned are so
content, I will place a copy in the Library of the House.

Have the Families received all the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith?

I undertook when I made my statement on 18 February to publish as much of the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible.

Copies of all the original and amended police statements have been placed in the
Library of the House and, in response to a specific request from My Hon Friend
for Liverpool Walton [Peter Kilfoyle] copies were also sent to the Hillsborough
Family Support Group on 16 April.

The other evidence considered by the scrutiny is being placed in the Library of the
House.

If required

The Family Support Group have approached us about three police statements which
were apparently missing from those they received. We are obtaining these from South
Yorkshire Police and will supply them as soon as possible.




f:\oppu\complnts\misc\mp-0555.doc
Home Secretary’s Speech                                              Annex B

31.     He describes submission 1 - that the police blamed their failure to see the
overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being defective when it was not - as “quite
untenable” (paragraph 61) as it was clear that the police could see what was
happening with their own eyes. He describes submission 2 - that evidence of the video
tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately suppressed and concealed - as “completely
unfounded” (paragraph 77) as the vital tapes, TB1 and TB2, were at all times, together
with the schedule of their contents, available to be seen by the legal representatives of
the families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith describes submission 3 - the allegation that the
coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the “missing footage” - as
“unfounded” (paragraph 79) as there never was any missing footage from the relevant
tapes; the two missing club tapes are not relevant to the issue; and the coroner dealt
perfectly properly with the jury’s request to see the camera footage of the terraces. He
describes submission 4 - that Constables Bichard and Ryan and Sergeant Goddard
gave false evidence that camera 5 was not working - as “evidence wholly insufficient
to warrant consideration of criminal proceedings against any police officers”
(paragraph 93) - noting that even if the extent of any defect in what camera 5 was
showing was exaggerated by the police, it was of no consequence, and Lord Taylor
took no notice of it in his considerations.




f:\oppu\complnts\misc\mp-0555 .doc
Mr Howarth’s closing speech                                      Annex C

Insert between para 2 and 3.            When we speak of the “Hillsborough tragedy”, I
am acutely aware that we are, in fact, dealing with 96 individual and very personal
tragedies. When we refer to the “Hillsborough families” we are dealing with many
individuals whose lives have been changed for ever. They have had to come to terms
with the events of that fateful day in their own way. Many have been helped by
mutual support [and I pay tribute to the work of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group], while others have chosen to try to cope with their grief in other ways.

para. 14.       But, inevitably perhaps, he could not capture the strong sense of
confusion and the corrosive anger which many people feel about the 3.15 cut-off
point. It is almost as if it is said that events after 3.15 were of no significance - the fact
that people did continue to suffer and that some of the emergency services could have
been allowed into the ground sooner, seemed to some of those who attended the
inquest to have been put to one side. This feeling is felt by some of the survivors just
as keenly today as it was then.


para 16.        People did die after 3.15. Those people did suffer God knows what
panic, pain and desperation. Neither Lord Taylor nor Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was
able to establish whether any given victim could have been saved had the police acted
earlier. We can never know. The continuing uncertainty surrounding the final
moments of their loved ones merely adds to the pain already felt by the bereaved
families.




f:\oppu\complnts\misc\mp-0555 .doc
