        'RgjiCxrt' jre u *               fk&Ks^    0& $O ^   Mim C7- Lf. * & *}

The current casualty figures resultine from the Mv^rrinnl v, Nottingham
Forest match at Hillsborough total 94 fatalities and 69 »till detained in
hospital of whom 16 are in intensive care. The total figure of those who
suffered injury and were treated at hospital was 150 and 81 of thee* have
been discharged.

The total number of police officers on duty in connection with the match
was 719t of these 225 were inside the ground and 492 plus 26 dog handlers
and 30 mounted officers were outside the ground.

The Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) attended the match. The officer
in overall command was Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the Divisional
Commander.

Police video tapes have recorded the nature of events around the Leppings
Lane entrance to the ground prior to the evacuation of the terrace. These
show the build up of spectators from 2.30 pm, the density of the crowd and
the police efforts to contain the situation which led to the opening of a
gate to relieve the pressure. Additionally there is a considerable number
of police still photographs of events taking place on the Leppings Lane
terraces at the time of the fatalities. These will be available to assist
the Investigation into the tragedy. It is believed that there is a
television recording of the events around the Leppings Lane entrance but
as yet it has not been possible to obtain possession of the film.

On Sunday 16 April the Prime Minister and the Home Secretary visited the
Sheffield Wednesday football ground and were given a verbal description of
the events that took place on the day.

At 4,00 pm on 16 April Mr Peter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire,
issued the following press statement:

     "The planning and the operational decisions of South Yorkshire
     Police officers will form a major aspect of the enquiry to be
     held into the events which led to the tragedy at the Sheffield
     Wednesday football ground on 15 April,

     The Chief   Constable Mr Peter Wright Judges it essential that the
     gathering   and assessment of evidence in relation to these matters
     should be   carried out by officers from another Force. He has
     therefore   asked Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of WeBt
     Midlands,   to nominate a senior officer to lead the enquiry,"

Information has been received that Their Royal Highnesses The Prince and
Princess of Wales will visit the injured in hospitals in Sheffield on
Monday 17 April,


                                                          ct




                                                               Mr H mM.
                                                               rL u^(ix£)
