NOTE OF MEETING WITH MR DAVID PHILLIPS, DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE,
DEVON AND CORNWALL POLICE: 8 NOVEMBER


Present:    Lord Justice Taylpr      Mr David Phillips
            Mr Johnson
            Mr Whalley


All-Seater Stadia and Policing Arrangements


1.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether there was any merit in
retaining standing areas as an act of policy.    Mr Phillips did
not think there was, and furthermore saw it as an all or nothing
issue.     In the redevelopment of Ibrox, the retention of a
standing area as a concession to an older tradition had created a
difficult area to police.    Extensive redevelopment on all­
seating lines was the only way to overcome the poor configuration
and piecemeal effect of the random changes at older stadia.
These had resulted in pinch points (even at Wembley) narrow
gangways, funnelling, and other constrictions, especially where
stadia were situated deep in areas of terraced housing.


2.   The problems of configuration interacted with those
presented by large crowds.     Most home crowds knew how to cope
with the physical limitations of their grounds, but the problems
arose with away spectators, who naturally took what seemed the
easiest or most obvious routes:     and the FA Cup semi-final, with
two large crowds unfamiliar with the ground, presented the
classic danger.     This danger was particularly acute for the
police, who might be unfamiliar with the techniques needed for
handling a large ground, or temporarily out of practice if the
host club was attracting only small crowds at that time.       This
would show up in techniques for the packing of terraced areas.
The debrief on the 1981 semi-final at Hillsborough had analysed
problems of policing at that ground and showed the need for a
complex plan to take account of the configuration of turnstiles.
The inclusion of radial fences was an added danger, and made more
imperative the need for close correlation between turnstiles and
penned areas, as well as the need for sequential packing of pens.
Above all, match commanders needed to be aware of the potentially
unsettling effects of a large crowd on inexperienced officers,
who might well freeze up in the face of the noise and energy
created by a large restless crowd.     The key to the successful
handling of such events lay in clear and simple planning,
effective lines of command, effective communication systems, and
having the right officers in key positions.     Thereafter events
had to be handled as they unfolded.


3.      On the assumption that all-seater stadia would make these
logistical problems easier to cope with, Lord Justice Taylor
probed the timescale for moving to all-seater stadia, and how far
down the pyramid of football clubs such changes needed to be
made.     Mr Phillips was not in favour of drastic overnight change,
which might create as many problems as it would solve,
particularly if inadequate attention was given to the access to
different parts of the ground.     He would support a proposition
that it should apply to the first two divisions of the English
league, with clubs coming in to the second division being
required to make the change.     The influence of changes in
spectators' own attitudes should not be disregarded:     they tended
to have rising expectations, and would over time come to tolerate
inadequate conditions even less.     It would be necessary to
establish certain key criteria with the Football League, for
example in relation to the venues for FA Cup matches, either
because there would be large crowds or because of the potential
disparities in support for the two teams.     Clubs would tend to
keep their capacities high to cater for the odd occasion when
they might attract a big fixture.     One option was to relocate
fixtures likely to attract large crowds to grounds with a higher
proportion of seated accommodation, and as a last resort the
police could use the powers in section 10 of the 1975 Act.


Local Authorities


4.      Mr Phillips stressed that, in any redesign of stadia, or
indeed in the detailed certification process itself, it was
unrealistic to place too much reliance on local authority safety
committees.     Their poor organisation, and indeed ignorance of the
Green Guide, was a problem.     They lacked detailed advice on crowd
movements and flows, and because each ground varied they had
nowhere to turn for independent advice or comparative experience.
The technical advice available to them was usually limited to
structural matters and ignored the dynamic aspects of the
movement of large crowds.     The local authority legal department
were key members but had limited knowledge of sports grounds.
The fire service had a certain knowledge, but their approach
tended at times to conflict with that of the police, in that
their needs were always for expansion of the space available for
a given crowd, whereas the police might need for operational
reasons to confine them at certain stages.     Furthermore, no one
on the local authority was likely to appreciate the enormous
potential for disaster presented by a handful of hooligans in a
large crowd.    A further limitation on the effectiveness of local
authority operations was the close contacts between elected
members of local authorities and football clubs, which undermined
the potential for imposing unwelcome restrictions on clubs in
Safety Certificates, and, in some cases, was associated with a
tendency to waive police charges, to the direct benefit of the
club.


5.      Standing back from these arguments, Lord Justice Taylor
asked whether there was any risk in the current debate of
overreaction. bearing in mind the reductions in capacities on
terraces, improved policing, the installation of CCTV etc.        Mr
Phillips believed that many potential disasters at football
matches had only just been avoided.     The potential for disaster
was so awesome that the responsibility for safety could not be
left simply to the police and the clubs themselves.     Hence the
1975 Act, with its expectation of phased improvements and interim
limits being set until the necessary changes were made.       In fact,
the incremental approach envisaged under the 1975 Act had never
been fully taken up and the only real safe course was to set
crowd limits quite low.


6.      In further discussion of the effectiveness of local
authority procedures, Mr Phillips saw the need for some kind of
ad hoc body which could develop and share corporate experience:
the need was for local authorities to have access to informed and
impartial advice.
Late Arrivals and Early Kick-Offs. Ticketless Fans and Touts


7.   Mr Phillips was in favour of earlier kick-offs:     problems
arose when grounds emptied quickly in the darkening gloom of a
late afternoon.    On the interrelation of timing of matches and
drinking, Mr Phillips drew a distinction between sporadic
disturbances, which were relatively easy to contain, and part of
routine policing, and the problems presented by an away crowd of
many thousands.    Whatever the time of matches, rival supporters
would always seek out opportunities for confrontation in the
early evening.    But policing was easier if matches were kept to a
standard time, so that clubs, and spectators, could develop a
routine.


8.   In Mr Phillips' view, the greatest evil was to allow fans to
think that they would be allowed in to the ground at the last
minute:    there was a direct link between that and the arrival of
ticketless fans.    The problems of policing large numbers of fans
outside the ground further made it difficult to prevent sale of
tickets on the day.     In discussion on where a distinction might
be drawn between all ticket matches and the rest, Mr Phillips
believed the key point was the anticipated capacity crowd.     The
option of deliberately keeping a low capacity (perhaps far below
the potential capacity allowed under the Certificate) and
enforcing an all ticket match could produce discontent among home
supporters, for example in the case of clubs like Leeds on whom
the Football League had at one point imposed a requirement that
all their away matches should be all ticket.    Artificial
restrictions of this kind inevitably produced strains, either for
pressure to sell tickets on the match day to clear unsold
tickets, or by encouragement of away fans to masquerade as home
fans, a practice which could be detected by effective and
informed policing, but was not always easily detectable at big
local derbies.    Last minute ticket sales tended to disrupt
segregation arrangements.    This reinforced the paramount need to
maintain order at the turnstiles, which were the key point in
control of the crowd:    once the turnstiles were lost, the fans
had gained a psychological victory and policing thereafter would
inevitably be more difficult.    The use of horses to control
access to turnstiles was critical in this respect.     Match
commanders needed to be sensitive in the use of horses, keeping
them in groups.    Special care was needed when late arrivals
arrived in large numbers, for example when decanted off trains,
particularly if time was running short and the fans were likely
to be agitated.    Equally, however, commanders should be sensitive
to the relative proportions of the crowd inside and outside the
ground, recognising that resources could quickly become released
outside the ground around the start of the match.


9.    On the question of delaying kick-offs. Mr Phillips was
anxious about encouraging fans to think that they could come late
as a matter of course, and concerned about the potentially
unsettling effect upon a large crowd already in place in the
stadium.    On the whole, however, football crowds reacted
positively if given information.    On the question of touts.
removing them from the scene would greatly lessen the problem of
fans milling around outside turnstiles.    At present, it was
unsatisfactory for the police to have to rely upon arresting them
on suspicion of handling forgeries.     It would be helpful to set
out in the report that police should not have to be put in this
position.


Liaison Between Police and Clubs and their Respective
Responsibilities


10.   Lord Justice Taylor reviewed the relative responsibilities
of the police and the clubs, the preference for statements of
intent rather than written agreements, and the police view that
the clubs should be challenged to take more of their
responsibility over time, perhaps by realistic charging for
police costs.     Mr Phillips thought this was broadly right, but
could see the argument that if the police were unambiguously
responsible for detailed policing of terraces, they would be less
generous on the numbers to be permitted.     It was in the clubs'
interest therefore to create a safer environment for their
spectators if they wished to keep numbers high.     They had been
slow in providing facilities such as control boxes for the police
so it was inevitable and right that limits should be restricted
until they did.      Mr Phillips was less sure about the employment
of private security firms of the Securicor kind, but conceded
that, when properly organised, in liaison with the police, they
could provide both an effective and a reassuring service to the
crowd.    Another way of reinforcing the importance of safety was
to have a specific levy at the gate to be applied to the
defrayment of police costs.


The Extent of the Hooligan Problem


11.    Mr Phillips, as a member of the Minister of Sport's Working
Party, traced out the origins of the Football Spectators Bill,
and the importance which had been attached to a strategy of
containment, based      on the view that hooliganism was a mass
problem which needed to be countered with a high profile
response.      The segregation of supporters had been a retrograde
step, but could not now be reversed.      The Government viewed
hooliganism as a mass problem, hence the emphasis on a framework
of respectable spectatorship, from which progressive exclusions
could be made.      In allowing this scenario to develop, the police
had not been effective as they might have been, partly through
competing manpower priorities.      This had allowed hooligans to
gain tactical ascendancy in many instances, which had in turn led
to the development of hard core groups with their own agenda and
way of life.      The police response was now, however, more
professionally organised, emphasising pre-emption, the need for
proper intelligence and the identification of dangerous groups,
and the importance of getting the real troublemakers before the
courts.       The Bill would create a framework which some hooligans
would merely regard as a challenge to be overcome.       They were
clever and organised with enough money for their purposes.          To
impose enormous controls on those who needed none ran the risk of
striking at the wrong target and encouraging the hooligans to
exploit the weaknesses in the system.


 12.   Mr Phillips identified three critical areas:-


         i.    establishing identity when the membership card was
being applied for:     who should do it, and what criteria
should be used for identifying from among the mass of
applicants those who should be excluded?     Many of the
groups from whom football supporters came lacked the
visible middle class means of identifying themselves
such as bankers or credit cards, driving licences etc.
Troublemakers without convictions would not be readily
identifiable.   Because of the pressures for a black
market in cards, ticket touts would soon get hold of
them, either through multi-applications or by buying
them off people who had no intention of going to
football matches.    Above all, there would be problems
in processing up to 3 million applications within a
short space of time.     No one had yet made clear how the
clubs were to do this, or whether the Post Office would
have a role.    The possibilities of getting cards in
false names, for many other clubs, or by other means
including robbery, were limitless and would only
present a further challenge.


The second set of problems arose when the card was
presented at the turnstile.     Simple reliance upon
machine readable cards was insufficient, because that
carried no proof of identity without a photograph check
at the same time.    Furthermore, there was a risk of
deliberate attempts to ruin the machines and create
unacceptable build ups outside the turnstile.     It would
be unwise to place too much reliance on the clubs:      it
was not in their interests to be too scrupulous over
checking cards on entry.     He himself believed that the
Minister of Sport had been unduly optimistic about the
ability of computer firms to put in workable systems.
It was not yet known whether these problems could be
effectively overcome.     Even so, they would be useless
without a proper photograph check which effectively
identified the presenter.     They might be more effective
if the turnstile operator himself ran the card through,
but that would impose a further time delay and would
depend heavily on the competence and integrity of the
          turnstile operators.      Ideally, a second level of check
          should be included in the turnstiles configuration.


      iii. The third problem arose with the action to be taken
          when a red light showed:     who was then to deal with the
          person at the turnstile?     On the assumption that the
           applicant was unaware of the red light showing, he
          would then need to be dealt with immediately by a
           police officer.    At grounds with large numbers of
           turnstiles, at least one officer per turnstile would be
           necessary, with huge implications for police resources.
           Again, the clubs had no motivation to deal with such
           people and the burden would fall on the police.       Given
           the limitations of the computer technology, the police
           would be unwise to assume that every time a red light
           showed, they should at once intervene.     There would
           have to be an overriding case for doing so given the
           risk of queues building up outside turnstiles, with an
           increased risk of disorder.     The police were in a
           dilemma:   they were always pressing for more turnstiles
           to ease crowd pressures, but under the Bill would have
           to man each turnstile.     Furthermore, since police were
           already reluctant to use valuable time of individual
           officers for dealing with individual arrests, dealing
           with individuals at turnstiles would present a further
           burden.    Above all, the present scheme was bedevilled
           by uncertainty.    Experience at individual grounds had
           not shown answers to all these questions, and the
           police were bound to be sceptical about accepting
           further burdens.    It might well be that spectators
           would become used to what was required, but the
           certainty that systems would be foolproof was essential
           before a nationwide scheme was introduced.


Fences and Pitch Evasions


13.   Lord Justice Taylor asked Mr Phillips' views on the creation
of an offence of going onto the pitch area, however defined,
without reasonable excuse.     Mr Phillips believed that good
fencing could prevent difficulties and create safer conditions,
but aggressive fencing tended to reinforce bad behaviour.      At all
events, police officers must be inside fenced areas to avoid the
impression that they were "no go" areas.    He would like to see
the progressive dismantling of fencing, with the most forbidding
structures being removed at first.    Better crowd control could be
achieved by effective engineering, using natural boundaries,
walls, and other features.    Some barrier was inevitable around
the pitch area but there were always dangers of fans being
trapped however small the barrier.


14.   On the question of an explicit offence, Mr Phillips noted
the traditional pitch invasion on the last match of a season,
more particularly when promotion or relegation prospects had been
confirmed.    Harmless invasions by children need not be prevented.
Much would depend upon how the offence was framed, but it should
take account of the problems caused by large groups of rival
spectators taunting each other under the current segregation
strategies.


Extent of Hooliganism


15.   On the assessment of the extent of hooliganism at present.
Mr Phillips believed that no assembly of excited people could be
trouble free but incidences of hooliganism were much fewer than a
few years previously.    They were usually predictable, and
improving police standards, CCTV coverage and restrictions on
alcohol had reduced the problem to pockets of more serious
violence and criminal activity.    In those circumstances, a
blanket solution directed to the public as a whole was not
necessarily the best strategy.    CCTV was crucial in targetting
hooligans, but there had been mistakes in the past over the
installation of equipment, poor training, and inadequate staff.
It was insufficient to leave funding of CCTV to the Football
Trust, and it should be made a responsibility of the clubs.     The
exclusion order power, also if used properly and selectively,
would be as effective as the membership scheme.    Reporting
restrictions, as under the attendance centre arrangements, were
still used for juveniles.    A system was possible by which details
of convicted offenders could be notified to the NFIU, and the
offender could be issued with a printed form, to be presented at
a police station for endorsement.   It might reduce the offender's
attendance at home matches of his club but it would have resource
and policy implications for the police.


16.   Training of police match commanders had been insufficient.
It needed to be professionalised and standardised, incorporating
a corpus of knowledge and training commitment throughout the
police service.   It should be aimed particularly at those in
command, and concentrate on preventing and handling emergencies.
Those unfamiliar with such situations were likely to require the
most training.


Alcohol


17.   Mr Phillips had mixed feelings about the question of an
absolute ban on alcohol.   He saw the argument that to have some
alcohol inside grounds would encourage others to come in early.
But it was an ambiguous provision and he would be happy to see
alcohol banned entirely from football matches.    It was not as
substantial a problem by comparison with the away supporter who
arrived drunk.    The 1980 legislation had greatly curtailed
problems of alcohol on trains and coaches.    On the Scottish
experience, it was still notable that Scottish fans would drink
outside grounds before entering them, and the difference in
practice might be accounted for by greater reliance on verbal
rather than on physical hostility by Scottish fans.


Breach of the Peace


18.   On the Scottish breach of the peace provision. Mr Phillips
believed it was at variance with the English police context.
Many offences were available to the police if they were prepared
to seek the evidence.    Ejecting fans was the easy way out.    With
the development of better optical evidence gathering video and
photographic facilities, in which there should be a substantial
investment, police would be better placed than by reliance on a
catch-all provision.
