                     MANAGEMENT 1M CONFIDENCE
                                /   ||o4




10TB OF A MEETING OF DEPUTY SECRETARIES HELD OH 21 APRII, U 8 i




                      ■\
     Present;   Sir Clive Whitmore
                Mr Cfiilqot
                Mr Faulkner
                Mr ^ammoi\d
                Mr l^oriarty
                Mr ^alone-rLee
                Mr Mower \
                Mr ifaltersi
                Mr Ifates




Hillsborough.     Sir Clive Whitmore informed the meeting of
latest state of play following the Hillsborough disaster,
Ministers‘ present intention remained that the Football
Spectators Bill would not be withdrawn and that amendments to
require all-seated accommodation at some football stadiums would
be m a d e . Inevitably this could give rise to handling problems
on the relationship between the Bill and the inquiry of
Lord Justice Taylor.     It had been pointed out to Ministers that
Lord Justice Taylor would require some time simply to ascertain
what happened at Hillsborough and thus any interim report was
likely to be confined to relatively simple issues such as
recommendations on perimeter fences or administrative matters
for example allocation of seats.

2. Within the Office the lead was at present with Fire and
Emergency Planning Department although that might change,
DOE had made it clear that they looked to the Home Office
support on implications for the Football Spectators B i l l .
Neither Department had done work on the implications of
introducing all-seated accommodation.  Mr Whalley had been ma
secretary to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry with Mr Luetchfor<|
being given temporary promotion and made acting head of F6.




                                                          \   :



                      MAMAGEMEHT/fM CONFIDENCE
                     MANAGEMENT X N / ^ F I D E N C E




 ' :■
3, The original plan was that Mr Dear should act as poll<
assessor to Lord Justice Taylor.    However on Sunday 16 April
Mr Wright had come under increasing pressure to establish an ■
inquiry into policing of Hillsborough by an independent force.
With the Home Secretary's agreement lie had announced in advance
of the establishment of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry that the
Pest Midlands Force would investigate policing aspects.    As a
result the Home Secretary had agreed that it would not be
appropriate for Mr Dear to act as police assessor and Mr JohriSQ® >;:,-
had been appointed to this role.    in the circumstances there was
an argument that the Home Office should meet part of the costs
of the West Midlands inquiry particularly as the intention was
that any evidence uncovered by this inquiry should be fed into
Lord Justice Tay l or ’s inquiry. Sir Clive Whitmore asked
Mr |€alone-Lee to consider this aspect further.   There would
be a need to ensure that work in taking statements from
witnesses was not duplicated by the Treasury Solicitor and
Midlands Police.    Mr Nursaw was aware of this potential
difficulty and if liaison between his Department and West
Midlands Police needed improvement the Office could expect to
hear from Mr Nursaw or Mr Whalley.    In due course the Home
Office would need to present its own evidence to
Lord Justice Tayl o r’s inquiry.
