                                                                                    rv icoxs
                                                                                    bv O^A-cot
              THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
              Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
              Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3109
                          Switchboard 01-210 3000
              Telex 917564       GTN 210                          "     .o9
              Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488                      "
              DX No. 2318 Victoria

R M Whalley
                                                                 Please quote
F6 Division            rL                                        L89/2117/DB
Home Office                                                      Your reference
LONDON
SW1                                                              Date                 ^   2i%
                                                                 Dictated 21 Anril 1Q80
                      O -'-v V JlX S — |   ^   -n -




INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

I am writing   to let you know that Peter Whitehurst and I had a very useful meeting
this morning   with Chief Superintendent Pemberton of West Midlands Police Authority.
Mr Pemberton is playing a key role in organising the evidence-gathering being
undertaken by the West Midlands Authority.       it appears that the Authority are
committing an impressive amount of resources to the taking of statements from
witnesses in   Sheffield, Liverpool and elsewhere.    (A total of some 250, it would
seem, for Sheffield and   Liverpool together).  I understand that these Officers will
be starting their task on Monday next, 2H April.

      1ST o b v io u s ly going to be of invaluable assistance for the purposes of the
 p      IKnquiry- However, I should be grateful if you would confirm my understanding
of the basis on which the West Midlands force are operating.          I understand that
originally the Chief Constable of West Midlands agreed to carry out the "police
investigation" at the request of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, so that the
findings of an independent force's investigation would be available in the event of
any complaints being made under the Police Complaints Procedure.      However, given the
imminence of the Public Inquiry and to avoid the duplication and overlap that might
    involved if two separate investigations were being conducted in parallel, I
fhfer^ an5 ^ at <-lt:u-,haS been agreed between Lord Justice Taylor, the Home Office and
. ®. ch^ef Constable of the two Authorities concerned that the West Midlands
Authority's investigation should in fact be a dual purpose one, serving the function
described above (provision of material for the South Yorkshire Authority) and also
Inquiry01      imPortant one for our purposes of providing evidence for the Public


You will appreciate that normally the taking of witness statements etc for such
public inquiries is a function performed by the Treasury Solicitor's Department.
Given that the scale of the present Inquiry and the time constraints against which
we are operating, this is clearly something that is not feasible in this case.
However, I should be grateful for your confirmation when replying that there will be
ne o u Tr i r  °- k "6 TreaSUry Soli°“ °r's Department at the end of the day being
ofQ jh r      reimburse the West Midlands Authority   for such proportion of the cost
of their investigation as may properly be attributable to the Public Inquiry.

A copy of this letter goes to Wally Hammond.

                                               Yours sincerely

                                                                              VIA                WS



 I L-j~*                                          D BRUMMELL
