                                         S i/ P d& f
       INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
           t STADIUM DISASTER

 '            —     '         I W n^A,^ ^ f r w   p itvv^ j


 C                   With the Compliments of
                    the Secretary to the Inquiry

     ""’’Y V ll O       <-0   1 V vq_
K ^ u_a< )tiL ct— f o j             L orcL ^ u s z h jjL . u (|
-^ u i     Laf cw -lrvva_.
WJO( o                                      CP^cA
                                            O/'V (t ^vsl ..




                                        f\^Aj(XJ^J uXX-^a_^
       50 Q ueen Anne’s
                  me s Gate
       London SW1HH9AT
                    9AT
      01-273 3602
                                                    n ^ o |r r
E.R.


       Mr Goddard



       HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


       As part of his Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor asked about the
       action the Government had taken following the Popplewell Inquiry.
       This led him to look at various papers on the 1987 Act, in the
       course of which we came across a background note about
       Popplewell's recommendation 11 (an unfettered right to search
       those entering or trying to enter a football ground, conferred by
       statute).  (Page 64 of the final Popplewell report). Lord
       Justice Taylor was not convinced by the arguments set out in the
       background note.  In particular, he challenged the sentence "it
       (the Popplewell recommendation) would be difficult to restrict to
       football grounds". He also wondered whether the Home Office
       would still take the view that the powers available to the
       police, both statutory and to search by agreement, were adequate.
       I attach a copy of the page in question.  I should be very
       grateful to have your up to date comments on this, which I could
       pass on to Lord Justice Taylor. Given the thinking in Lord
       Justice Taylor's mind, it would be helpful if you could reflect
       the fact that the Police and Criminal Evidence Act has been in
       force for some time.




                                               R M WHALLEY
                                          Secretary to the Inquiry
       6 November 1989
 POPPLEWELL i n q u i r y



     rhe Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at
       Grounds was chaired by Mr Justice-Popplewell and the Final
Kepo^t presented to Parliament in January 1986 (Cmnd 9710).

r-c.1             Report made 15 recommendations - ten of those
voiaT         safety; four to expansion of the criminal law? and the
        ning recommended some form of membership scheme for football
_ ^ ^ Ue           England and Wales. The Government's proposals for
^     ni^ effect to the safety recommendations in the Final Report
           •         °Ut ln a consultative document produced jointly by the
Home Office and the Scottish Office in June 1986.

Recommendation 1

I'  ,jTw e distinction between sports grounds and sports stadia
should be   abolished.'»

               19 ° f the Fire SafetY ana Safety of Places of Sport
    2          removes the distinction in the SSGA 1975 between a
spores ground and a sports stadium. The Drovisions of the 1975
Act apply t o •all sports grounds as defined in section 17(1)•of
that Act.                                                  ^ 1

Recommendation 2

  *     F a t h e r designation under the SSGA 1975 of sports grounds
ana sports stadia w i t h accommodation for over 10,000 spectators
where Association Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and cricket
is played m England, Wales and Scotland."

6.   In^England and Wales there are 92 designated grounds for
Association Football, including Wembley (Torquay United is the
exception because it holds less than 10,000 spectators); 22 Rugby
League grounds; and a total of 54 cricket and rugby union
grounds. All sports grounds identified as having accommodation
for over 10,000 spectators are used for those stated sports are
designated.

Recommendation 3

 *    A11 sports grounds and sports stadia not already designated
under the SSGA 1975 and having a capacity in a stand of over 500
spectators should be designated under the FPA 1971 as premises
requiring a fire certificate."

8.       Designation under the FPA 1971 would permit fire authorities
to certificate the stand only in matters relating to fire safety;
they would not be able to seek improvements to the structural
safety of the stand.     Part III of the FSSPGA 1987 stipulates that
a stand at a sports ground which is not a designated ground and
which can accommodate at least 500 spectators under cover must
h a v ® a safety certificate if it is to be used to view the
activities at a ground.     This is known as a regulated stand.
 Recommendation 4

 9.    One authority should be given responsibility for securing
   5uctural safetY at sports grounds and stadia not designated
 under the 1975 Act".

 Iw' TT*    rils           on from the Inquiry's Recommendation 3 in that
 -ne Inquiry recognised that designation under the FPA 1971 would
  e limited m its scope to fire matters only and not to
 s ^ u c . u r a l dangers.   The introduction of regulated stands has
        --icantly increased the number of grounds at which local
                    are now req^ired to carry out inspection for safety
      tij.ication of the unit of covered accommodation.

Regulation 5

11•   In England and Wales indoor sports facilities with
accommodation for over 500 spectators should require a fire
certificate".

loco Part Iv of the FSSPA 1987, which came into force on 1 June
* Z ,4_r®c?uires that premises are not used for sports
en er^ainments except under and in accordance with the terms of a
licence granted by a district or borough council.          The 19 87 Act
  ^ ^ £ es t h e P1 ic,
                      e asiag^of. premises for any entertainment which

                            This allows for more than just fire
safety to be regulated.

Regulation 6

13 * .   urgent r eview of the existing legislation on indoor
sports facilities in Scotland should be undertaken and if they
af 6    currently covered by fire regulations such facilities
snould be designated under the FPA".

14. _ Section 44 (within Part IV) of the 1987 Act stipulates that
a, -‘-f-cence to be known as an "indoor sports entertainment licence"
snail be required for the use of premises as a place of public
sports entertainment.      Again this allows the licensing authority
to deal with safety in general rather than with fire safety
alone.                                                        J

Recommendation 7

15._ "Provision should b e m a d e in the FPA 1971 for authorised
officers °f a fire authority to have power to issue a prohibition
notice".

and

Recommendation 8

16.   "Provision should be made for authorised officers of the
local authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice under
the SSGA 1975".
~1' . Sf ctlon 2 3 .of the -987 Act replaces section 10 of the 1975
net with provision for a system of prohibition notices.      Local
authorities are empowered to serve a prohibition notice where
  ey are of the opinion that the admission of spectators to a
sports ground or any part of a sports ground involves or will
involve a serious risk.      The prohibition notice can take effect
immediately.

18. ^The emergency procedure under section 10 of the FPA 1971
remains m force.

Recommendation 9

 ^           .should be (1) annua 1 renewal of safety certificates
tender the SSGA 1975; (2) a duty on the local ~authoritv t o " T n ' ^ r-t
   e Premises pr^ar^to_reissuing the certificatp and
|tKeiocal authority to revolce the certificate11.-------- --- ----- -

20.  The Government did not accept the need for (1) - and
pherefore (2) - nor for (3).

21.      The 1975 Act works in such a way that revocation is
unnecessary.            A safety certificate can be amended if
Circumstances change so as to justify such a course.            Local
authorities can be flexible in their approach to remedial works
required to be carried out and can regulate the number of
s p e c t a t o r s _permitted into the grounds or parts of it, to match
the conditions which exist within the ground.

22.  Designated grounds are inspected annually by local
authorities.

R-egtHStion 10

J 3 : "The Department of the Environment should urgently amend the
building regulations guideline codes in relation to structural
fire precautions in new stands".
 P0PFLSW2LL RJSPGP.T


 BACKGROU!;!) NOTE

 1•   It waer always accepted that the comprehensive review of the

 -irs Du-il<iing regulations would take some years to complete.
 Thus, the rloise Office cor suit stive document "Fire Safety and

 safety at Sports Venues" indicated at paragraph 2.49 that the

 Department of the Bnvironment would issue interim guidance on the

 need for concealed space in the floor of stands to be sealed and

^^ub-divided where this was necessary to inhibit the spread of fire
 within a stand.

 2.   This interim guidance was never lsdued.      This was because

 it was felt that such new single storey stands as Eight be built

 would not be constructed with a c<p»tfcujstible floor structure open

 to suD-floor voids.    Such a thing was pessible, but for a stand

 of any size it would almost certainly be more economical to use.

 non-colabustible structural materials.     Voids in multi-storey

 stands would be covered by existing provisions in the Approved

 Documents which give guidance on compliance with the existing

 requirements of the regulations dealing with fire spread.

 3.   There are no powers in the building regulations to make

 owners improve existing stands by sub-dividing voids.
R.




     BACKGROUND NOTE




     ^Recommendation 11 - an unfettered right to search those entering
                               or trying to enter a football ground,
                               conferred by statute.



     Police officers at football grounds have a general power, under
     PACE, to stop and search a person whom they reasonably suspect
     Di Possessing a stolen or prohibited article,        including an
     offensive weapon.        They have other statutory powers of stop and
     search,    for example under the Sporting Events     (Control of Alcohol
     etc) Act 1985.     In addition they may,     as elsewhere,   search a
     person with his agreement.        In the case of football matches,
     police powers are backed up by the right of the club to deny
     entry,    or to eject,    a person who refuses to be searched.       This
     has been set out by the Football League in its ground
     regulations.


     The unrestricted power recommended by Popplewell would not depend
     on there being reasonable suspicion that the person concerned was
     committing an offence,       and would represent a substantial
     departure from the principles which were only recently
     established in PACE.        It would be.r.difficu^t to restrict to
     football grounds.        The Popplewell recommendation therefore has
     ramifications extending far beyond football.         PACE had only just
     come into force at the time the Popplewell final report was
     published.     The powers available to the police,     both statutory
     and to search by agreement,       are adequate. ?
*




.R.


      Recommendation 12 - an offence of disorderly conduct at a
                                football ground.


      The Government had already included in the Public Order Act 1986
      an offence of disorderly conduct,           subject to the requirement that
      alarm,   distress or harassment is likely to be caused to another.
      Poppxewe11 recommended no such qualification.            The difficulty
      about that is that the police and courts may have difficulty in
      interpreting what is disorderly.            Conduct which may be disorderly
    ^in   other contexts, may be part of the atmosphere of a football
    ^pnatcn    (cheering,   chanting e t c ) .   Care must be taken not to create
      offences which are oppressive,         or which may give rise to
      inconsistent treatment by the police and the courts, whilst at
      the same time ensuring that the law is adequate.            Experience has
      proved the offence of disorderly conduct in the Public Order Act
      to be adequate.


      Recommendation 13 - a widening of the power to arrest under
                               Section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936.


      The recommendation is for a general retrospective power of arrest
      where the police reasonably suspect that an offence under Section
      5 of the Public Order Act        (threatening behaviour etc) has been
      committed.     The power of arrest,        re-enacted in the Public Order
      Act 1986, provides a power of arrest only when the person is
      committing,    or is reasonably suspected to be committing an
      offence.     But the arrest scheme in PACE provided a general
      retrospective power of arrest if one of the general arrest
      conditions set out in Section 25 is met.            In broad terms the
      police may arrest anyone whom they reasonably suspect of
      committing,    or of having committed an offence,        including the
      offence of threatening behaviour,           if it will not be practicable
      to proceed against that person by way of summons,           for example
      because the person's name and address cannot be obtained, or if
      there are grounds for believing arrest to be necessary to prevent
      certain consequences - such as the person concerned causing
  injury or damage to persons or property.      The general arrest
  scheme in PACE was subject to careful and critical scrutiny and
  had only just come into force at the time of the Popplewell
  recommendations.   There are-no problems in practice so far as we
  know.




  Recommendation 14 - a r e v i e w -of the provisions of the Sporting
                        Events   (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 in
                        relation to executive boxes.


^During   the passage of tne alcohol legislation it was suggested by
  the football organisations'that .clubs derived a total of ¥ 4 m per
  annum from the leasing of executive b o x e s .   Relaxation of the
  controls over the possession's.nd sale of alcohol in executive
  boxes was introduced in sehedu'le: I. of the Public Order Act 1986.
  The effect of the provision was'-to ^reduce the "dry" period at
  designated sports grounds in executive boxes and private rooms
  with a view of the pitch from two hours before until one hour
  after to a period from 15 minutes- before the match until 15          »
  minutes afterwards.                r
