                                                                     0>

                                                                     dB>
Alan Hopkins states:-


1.   I am employed as the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance

     Officer for SYMAS.



2.


3.   I am trained in ambulance aid and, every five years,             I

     attend a two week refresher course in ambulance aid.         I have
     attended    management    and supervisory courses.        I have

     attended major incident courses and been involved in major

     incident exercises.


4.   SYMAS covers the areas of the district health authorities of
     Sheffield, Rotherham, Barnsley and Doncaster.       Every year we

     hold a major exercise in one of those four areas.             This

     involves principally the emergency services            for that

     particular area but will also include the emergency services

     from the other areas.     If I am involved in an exercise.        I

     am not told that an exercise is taking place.



5.   I joined     the   Sheffield   City Ambulance   Service as an

     ambulance man in 1967.     In about 1973 I was transferred to

     Longley     Station.    In early   1974   I was appointed the

     Superintendent      at Corporation Street     and    Lodge    Moor

     Stations.    In 1974 a reorganisation of the National Health

     Service took place and it was at this time that SYMAS was
established.      Shortly after that I was appointed Assistant
Divisional Officer (Operations) at SYMAS.       In 1987 I was

appointed the Divisional Officer (Operations) for Number 1

Division (which covers the Sheffield and Rotherham areas).

I was subsequently transferred to the post of Divisional

Officer    (Control and Communications).       In 1988   I was

appointed the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer.


My normal official working hours are    0900 to 1700 Monday to

Friday but outside those hours either Mr Page or myself are

on call.    The on call rota runs from 0900 on Monday to 0900

the following Monday morning.      During the week commencing

10th April 1989 Mr Page had been on call, but I had agreed

that I would do Mr Page's on call duty on Saturday 15th

April because he was attending a course.     It is not at all

unusual for he and I to reach such an arrangement.



I have now had sight of the South Yorkshire Police memo

dated 9th August 1988, from Inspector Sewell to the Chief

Superintendent 'F' Division.      The meeting which took place

on 9th August 1988 was called by Inspector Sewell on him

taking     over   from Inspector Calvert and the arrival of

Superintendent Murray.      The meeting was arranged by David

Jones, and I attended along with Jones and Inspector Sewell.

The existing arrangements for SYMAS attending Hillsborough

were discussed, which were:-
      (1)   2 season tickets for all home matches.

      (2)   No tickets for F.A. cup semi-final matches.

      (3)   The   gymnasium was         to be the designated casualty

            clearing point.        The Police Officers appreciated the
            necessity       of getting       ambulance vehicles         into the

            gymnasium area without difficulty.                The police also

            agreed to keep Penistone Road clear so as to allow

            access and egress of ambulance vehicles as quickly as
            possible.     If any parts of these areas were blocked             the

               police agreed to clear the areas for our ambulances.
A-t"tkz                        A'W t'TW Ca-X^t/TVNlLCl            (X-~u(      "H-vaX
•VKj2,auUlUL, KoJ-WujmsL             ou/                    ,
                                                            ,O/WKcv^k
 tWfr <^<oec^9j-C<xlv^C I              p'<sAaj&s»r>s>sykoot              ccycy.
8.    Approximately two weeks prior to 15th April David Jones, the

      Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Operations)

      had sought my approval for two ambulances to be deployed

      specifically for the F.A. Cup Semi-final between Liverpool

      and   Nottingham Forest.           This      was in addition to thetwo

      liaison officers who would be at the game                    anyway.        I

      discussed this request with Mr Page and subsequently told Mr

      Jones of the approval.          One ambulance was to be stationed

      inside the ground and the other at Middlewood Ambulance

      Station which is approximately one mile to the north west of

      the ground.       We had arranged for the same ambulance cover

      for the ground for the identical match the previous year and

      there had been no problems.



9.    When on call I carry a bleep and in addition there is a

      telephone and radio in my car.            All messages to me come from
      ambulance control at Moorgate Road, Rotherham.



10.   When on call it is only necessary for me to be contactable
      and to be reasonably near to ambulance control.



11.   Although I was only on call I took my vehicle up to the Ml

      motorway to Junction 33 because if there was to be an

      incident at that time (lunchtime) it was likely to be on the

      motorway.     Nothing happened there and so I went to control.



12.   I arrived at control at 1410 .        I had a cup of tea and took

      a couple of calls          relating   to routine   admissions   to

      hospital.     At 1430     a call came in from the liaison officers

      (Eason and Higgins) to say that they had arrived at the

      ground.


13.   At approximately 1506 I saw the police line light up.       There
      is a direct line to control from the police headquarters at

      Snig Hill in Sheffield.        Superintendent Clark took the call.

      I heard him say something to the effect "What is it.         We've

      got liaison officers there" but he did not seem to get a

      satisfactory reply.        He put the phone down and told me that

      the police had said that they wanted a fleet of ambulances

      at the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough ground.              I

      commented that ambulances could not get into that end of the

      ground and I questioned why they would want them.               The

      police      line   then   lit up again and this      time Control
      Assistant                      took the call.      I heard her say

      something like "What do you want ambulances             there for,

      what's happening".       She did not seem to get a satisfactory

      reply.     I contacted the ambulance which was on standby at

      Middlewood and instructed it to go to the Leppings Lane end

      of the Hillsborough ground to report what was going on.         The

      call was made at 1508.41 (Track 12 page 2).         I knew that the

      liaison officers inside the ground would have difficulty

      getting out to Leppings Lane and so would not be able to

      report    on what      was    happening   there.     I then   told

      Superintendent Clark to contact the liaison officers to see

      if they had anything to report and I then immediately left.



14.   As I left the control building Mr Morley was arriving in a

      marked Range Rover.          He was the duty officer that day and

      had been on the Ml carrying out a similar roll to that which

      I had carried out at Junction 33.         I told him that there was

      an incident going on at Hillsborough and we did not know

      what it was.       I drove the Range Rover to the Ground.



15.   As we drove to the ground we could hear the conversations

      from control to various vehicles, but not the responses from

      the vehicles.        That is quite normal operational staff can

      only hear the control end of each conversation.             Control

      were     clearly    sending more and more ambulances to the

      Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough.          I knew the ambulances

      could not get access into the ground there           and I remember
      commenting to Mr Morley that if any ambulances did try to

      get in there they would be damaged.



16 . The reason why ambulances cannot gain access at the Leppings
      Lane end of the ground is that the entrances           are not
      sufficiently high to permit access.      I knew there had been
      an incident some ten years earlier when ambulanceman

      was dri^tging an ambulance and had tried to gain access to

      the ground from the Leppings Lane end and the top of the

      ambulance had been damaged.



17.   I told    Mr Morley    to radio   to control   for all   Trent

      ambulances to be made available as soon as possible.     He did

      this at 1517   (Track 19 page 7) and I heard the message

      transmitted from control by                  who finished the

      message by adding "particularly Sierra mobiles".     This was a

      reference to vehicles in the Sheffield area.     This would put

      all ambulances on standby and would authorise control to

      bring ambulances      in from other areas to cover for     the

      ambulances in our area.



18 . We arrived at the Penistone Road end of Hillsborough at
      1523 (Track 19 page 10).      We went there because I knew it

      was the only access into the ground which ambulances could

      use, and according to the Major Incident Plan, my station

      would be the gymnasium area.      Attached to this statement is

      a plan.    I parked the Range Rover in the position coloured
yellow.     In the position coloured green was the ambulance

which had been stationed at the ground but the ambulance men

were not with i t .     I do not recall seeing either of the
ambulance men or the liaison officers at that time although

I have     subsequently been told that one of the liaison

officers spoke to me then.      I told Mr Morley to stay with

the vehicle and not to move and I went onto the pitch to see
what was happening in order to provided full details to

Control.


There was a line of police across the ground roughly in line

with the edge of the penalty area in front of the goal at

the Leppings Lane end.       The police were standing two or

three deep.     They were letting people through and there was

a lot of people on the pitch on my side of the police line

with injured people on hoarding.     As I came onto the pitch

people started grabbing at me and shouting at me to help;

they were all spectators who were helping injured people.     I

ignored them.     I knew that the injured were coming from the

Leppings Lane end of the ground as a result of messages

coming over the vehicle radio and that there were several

ambulances at that end of the ground and I thought that they

could not get access to the injured.        The most important

thing for me to do was not to provide immediate help to the

injured immediately around but to supervise the whole of the

ambulance operation.     I went through the police line and the

scene looked like a battlefield.    There were people lying on
      the pitch and I saw others behind the fence with their faces

      pressed against it.    I only stayed there for a few seconds

      and ran back across the pitch towards the area where I had

      left Mr Morley and the Range Rover.      I believed that the

      ambulances at the Leppings Lane end could not get to the

      incident from where they were and I had to get them round to

      the Penistone Road end of the ground.


20.   When I ran through the line I saw a police officer carrying

      a little girl in his arms.     He stumbled, I took the child
      from him and continued running towards the area where the

      Range Rover was parked.    I got to the ramp between the north

      stand and the cop and looked at the girl who was quite

      obviously dead.    The policeman then caught up with me and I

      told him to take the girl's body to the gymnasium which I
      knew, from our standard plan for Hillsborough would be the

      mortuary/patient treatment area.



21.   I went over to the Range Rover and contacted control at 1529

      (Track 16 page 3) and told them "Majax vehicle at the

      original location there's a lot dead.         I need the Majax

      vehicle and as many mobiles as possilbe".     I also asked him
      to tell control to try to contact Mr Page at his home.      The

      major incident vehicle is a communications centre and a

      mobile store.     It contains dressings, triangles for slings,

      tubes   for intubation,    stretchers,   helmets,   protective

      clothing, body bags, and road cones amongst other things.
22 . I then went to the gymnasium.    Outside the gymnasium were a
      group of St. John's ambulance people.     They were aged about

      14 and were clearly extremely upset.          I went into the

      gymnasium where the scene seemed to be one of chaos.      There

      were police officers in there and already some bodies laid
      on advertising boards.   I had gone in there to see if any of

      our staff were there;    there weren't.     There was nothing I

      could do in there and so I went back to the area where the

      Range Rover was parked to find that our ambulances were

      starting to arrive.



23.   The yard was full of police vans which had also been there

      when I arrived and these hampered vehicles entering the
      yard.   In fact,   the entrance marked on the plan as "main

      police access" could not be used because it was blocked.
      There were also police horses in the yard.      I could not see
      a senior officer in uniform to request him to clear the

      area.



24.   The first ambulance which I saw arrive was driven by Mr

              with Mr Edwards as the attendant.    I told them to get

      their ambulance onto the pitch because I thought this would

      help to calm down the crowd who would see that the ambulance

      services were present and also, of course, be able to take

      some of the casualties away.
    25 . Meanwhile Mr Morley was lining up ambulances which were
        arriving outside the ground.         The drivers stayed with the

        vehicles and the attendants came into the ground, onto the

        pitch to help bring injured people off the pitch into the

        yard area.



    26 . I sent   another       ambulance onto the pitch driven by Mr
        '               Station Officer Higgins then reported to me, he

        is one of the liaison officers.          I told him to find the crew
«       of the ambulance which was parked in the yard which had been

        the ambulance originally assigned to the ground.            The cots
        were not in that vehicle and I presumed that its crew had
        gone onto the pitch, to the Leppings Lane end to help with

        the injured.      I told him to find the crew of the ambulance,

        to get it loaded up and off to hospital.              The ambulance

        itself    was    full    of dead   and   injured   people   who   had

        apparently been brought there by the crowd.             Someone was
        trying to get into the cab and seemed to be looking for the

        keys.     I told him to get out and he did so.           I began to

        unload the back and was assisted by Station Officers Eason

        and Higgins and the two crew who had then come back.          We put

        casualties in the ambulance and took the bodies to the gym.

        The ambulance went off to hospital.           They would have known

        to go to the Northern General Hospital.              The emergency

        procedure is that all casualties are taken to the nearest

        hospital (in this case Northern General) until instructed

        otherwise.
27.   I recall that when we were trying to get 1             vehicle
      onto the pitch a St. John's ambulance appeared at the bottom

      of the ramp.       I had not seen the St.    John's ambulance

      previously but I presumed that it must have been on the

      pitch when I was there.       The St. John's ambulance became

      wedged against the stanchions holding up the fencing on its
      right.     Our vehicle was backed off the ramp and then pulled

      forward to let the St. John's ambulance out.    The St. John's

      ambulance forced its way off the stanchion and up the ramp.

      It left the ground.


28.   I only saw two of our ambulances go onto the pitch, although

      I now know that three went onto the pitch.     All the further

      ambulances were reversed into the yard so that they could be

      quickly loaded with casualties before going off to hospital.

      This was because by this time all casualties were being

      brought to us across the ptich by fans,       police and fire

      brigade.     In any event because of the restricted access it

      was a matter of bringing the ambulances into the yard and

      then drive off once casualties were loaded.



29.   The last occasion which I had been at the ground was a year

      before when the same match had taken place.     I had attended

      then simply to speak to the liaison officer.     Since then a

      wheelchair access ramp had been put on the ramp which went

      from the yard on to the pitch.        The wheelchair ramp was
      evidently to get wheelchairs into the north stand.         The

      presence of this wheelchair access ramp had considerably
      restricted the width of the ramp down to the pitch which had

      caused difficulties both for our ambulances and the St.

      John's ambulance.



30.   I was then approached by Alan Hornsby (the Assistant Chief

      Fire Officer).   He told me that he had forty men and that he

      had deployed them to help bring casualties onto the pitch.

      He asked what else they could do and I believe I told him to

      continue what he was doing.     By this time ambulances were

      arriving all the time.    I only saw those ambulances which

      were actually coming into the yard and I did     not know how

      many there were outside the ground.



31.   I do not recall when the ambulances came off the pitch.



32.   I was then approached by Leading Ambulance man             at

      the top of the ramp from the pitch to the yard.      He is a

      trained paramedic and was the first one that I had seen.    I

      sent him to the gymnasium where I knew there were already a

      number of injured as well as dead.    I told him to check all

      the injured, do what he could do for them immediately and

      decide upon the priorities for getting them to hospital.



33 . I then went to the Range Rover and spoke to control to find
      out where the major incident vehicle was.      I was told it
          would be there in three minutes.     They also told me that Mr

          Page was on his way to control.    The major incident vehicle

          arrived shortly afterwards.    I understand that it had been

          directed by police off Penistone Road onto the service road

          round towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground.       I was

          also told that the police had been in the road to prevent a
          disturbance between rival fans who were, by then, leaving

          the ground.


^   34.   I instructed the driver of the major incident vehicle

          (Station Officer Bettison) to position the vehicle in the

          position marked      in blue on the plan attached to this

          statement.    I took some body bags from the major incident

          vehicle and was on my way to the gymnasium when I met Mr

          Jones who had apparently come round from the Leppings Lane

          end of the ground.    I was very pleased to see him.     I told
          him to take control of that area and to be responsible for

          getting the ambulances in and out.



    35.   I am not sure whether I took the body bags to the gymnasium

          or whether I gave them to someone else but at about that

          time I was approached by a Doctor.    He had been in the crowd

          and said he had three other doctors with him.    I do not know

          who he was but he was 45/50 years old and was wearing a

          short coat.   He said that they did not have any gear.    I saw

          a Leading Ambulance man nearby (I do not remember who) and

          told him to take the four doctors to the gymnasium and
introduce them to leading ambulance man                    who had

his paramedic equipment with him.         I told him to tell
            to take    the doctors names.       Mr Morley then

approached me with four or five ambulance station officers

(not from SYMAS) who had been in the crowd.      I asked them to

help and bring casualties from the pitch.       Mr Morley gave

them all yellow ambulance jackets and sent them onto the

pitch.   I do not recall seeing them again.


I then   went   back   to   the    gymnasium   and   saw    Chief

Superintendent Addis.       He was the first senior        police

officer I had seen in the gymnasium area.      I needed to speak

to him to ensure proper liaison between the ambulance and

police services.   He told me that he had just spoken to the

coroner (I think by telephone or radio).       He told me that

the coroner had said that the bodies should be taken to

various locations.      In fact,    the coroner subsequently

changed his mind about this.         Whilst in the gymnasium

talking to Chief Superintendent Addis I noticed that there

was a medical team present and I was told that they were

from the Northern General Hospital.     I am not sure how many

people were in the team but I recall that a coloured doctor

was in charge and I also remember seeing two or three nurses

holding saline drips.       At this time we had just started

moving the injured out of the gym.



By this time the police vehicles which had been hampering
      entrance and exit from the ground had been moved.     Mr Jones

      and Mr Dale had ensured a clear passage for ambulances.     Mr
      Jones came into the gymnasium and told me that he had ten

      ambulances on Penistone Road and five outside the ground

      with a further twenty five in Herries Road bus garage, which

      was the pre arranged overflow site.     He told me that he was

      aware of eleven bodies on the circular road at the Leppings
      Lane end of the ground although I was not clear as to

      whether he meant inside or outside the ground.      I sent Mr

      Higgins with three ambulances to the Leppings Lane end of
      the ground to collect the bodies which Mr Jones had told me

      about.   By this time we had ambulances to spare.



38.   The last ambulances took the injured away before 1630 hours.



39.   At about this time Chief Superintendent Addis told me that

      the coroner had now decided that he wanted all of the bodies
      taken into the gymnasium.   I arranged for a number of bodies

      to be brought back from the Northern General Hospital and

      one from the Royal Hallamshire;    I believe that these were

      all people who had died in hospital or en route, with the

      possible exception of the people who had been taken to

      hospital by the St. John's ambulance.



40.   Some time later the coroner arrived and we discussed with

      Chief Superintendent Addis the question of what to do with

      the bodies.    The coroner decided that the bodies would be
      photographed by polaroid, that the bodies would be taken to

      one end of the gymnasium and the photographs put up at the

      other end so that relatives could look at the photographs

      and then be asked to identify bodies if they thought they
      recognised   the photographs.     The coroner did not want

      anybody to be moved prior to identification.     The gymnasium

      was divided into three by nets to make courts and we put
      blankets over the net towards the east entrance of the

      gymnasium.    The bodies were kept at the west end and the

      photographs put up in the eastern section.     Mr Page arrived

      at about this time.



41.   I introduced Mr Page to Chief Superintendent Addis.    By this

      time a number of ambulances were parked in the car park

      around the gymnasium.   Earlier vehicles belonging to players

      and various executives had been parked there.      There were

      ambulances from other districts as well as Sheffield and
      Rotherham.   I arranged for the ambulances belonging to other

      districts to be sent back.      Mr Jones dealt with this.    I

      also told Mr Jones that I wanted just six SYMAS vehicles in

      the back yard by the gym.



42.   Bodies were removed to the Medico Legal Centre at Watery

      Lane as they were identified.     The Medico Legal Centre is

      approximately two miles south of the Hillsborough ground.



43.   The number of ambulances was later scaled down to two or
      three.


44.   At about 2000 hours I went back to control where a number of

      senior officers discussed the day's events.


45.   I then went back to the ground and by 0300 hours on Sunday
      morning the number of people coming to identify bodies had

      gone down to a trickle.         The last of the identified bodies

      left     the   ground   at    0448   hours   and   then   all   of   the

      unidentified bodies were also taken down to the Medico Legal

      Centre.


46.   I closed the incident at 0530 hours.




Signed
         ALAN HOPKINS


          S’    -    L-       TT>
Dated
                         ^                                jQ-
                                                                                                           Main Police Access

Sheffield Wednesday F.                                    C.                                      Police

    Hillsborough Ground                                                              Aid Room

                                                                                                                V-5* ^ X \ \ V   V

                                                                               Gymnasium

                                                                                                                                     77-88
                                                                                                                                      '73-76
                                                                                                                                        i' 7 2   ^
                                                                      NORTH STAND




                                                 61




                                      §
                                                 41
                                      S—     i                                                                                                   /, \V
                                      R ... H                                                                                                    * \ NNa\
                                                 31                                                                                               \ \ \x-A
                                      £                                                                                                            \\ N'   \V*
                                                                                                                                                    ' \ 'V\5»\«2
                                                                                                                                                     \ \ 't, '\
                                                 21                                                                                                   \ ''sfc \
                                                                                                                                                      V   '   '   '

                                                                     P la y a r *'                                                                       ' v\ '
ay Fans Entrance                                                     Tunnal
                                                 1*
and Enclosures


         Police Control                                             SOUTH STA N D

                                                                                       — I------ -
                                                      O ffic ia l
                                                                                           !    29-32

    <rer
    t u r n s t il e s   r   7777 i
