           c A d d o c ia tio n o l < Scotti6k ^ P o lic e ^Superintendent*


                                                 Strathclyde Police
                                                 'Q ' Divisional Headquarters
                                                 Campbell Street
                                                 HAMILTON     Ml3 6AS

                                                 30 May 1989

R M Whalley Esq
Hillsborough Inquiry
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON   SW1H 9AT.

Dear Sir

I refer to your letter of 23 instant re Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
inviting this Association to make written submissions on the needs of crowd
control and safety at sports grounds and write to inform you that, whilst
we would not wish to comment specifically on the Hillsborough Disaster, we
do feel that, since there are differences in the style of approach used by
Scottish Forces compared to that of our English colleagues, there may be
points of interest for Lord Justice Taylor and his assessors to consider.

It will take a little time to prepare our submissions but we would intend
to have it prepared and submitted to you by 12 June as requested.

Yours sincerely




Chief Superintendent
Honorary Secretary
■i-’A   '" - '" h .
       O ^440Ciat(0H o j S c o t t i s h ^Q oii ce S u p e rin ten d e n td

^                                                                  Secretariat
                                                   Lothian and Borders Police
                                                    'F* Division Headquarters
                                                                  Almondvale
                                                         Livingston EH54 6PX

                                                       Telephone: 0506-31200


                                                            14th June, 1989

R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
Secretary,
Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,  SWlH 9AT.

Dear Mr. Whalley,

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

I refer to your letter of 23rd May inviting this Association to
make written submissions to the above Inquiry under the
chairmanship of Lord Justice Taylor and also to my subsequent
letter dated 30th May outlining our preliminary response.

In Scotland, the responsibility for arrangements for policing
major sporting events lies with the chief constable of    the
force area in which the event         is being held. As   the
legislation in Scotland differs in some respects from that in
England and Wales, there are also some differences in the way
in which such events are policed.

There is no standard code of practice in use throughout
Scotland but the management of crowd control and public safety
at sports grounds is presently regulated within a framework
established by:-

(i)     The Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975;

(ii)    The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act, 1980;

(iii) General Safety Certificates issued by Regional Councils
      under Section 3(2)(a) of the 1975 Act; and

(iv)    Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, 1986, issued by the
        Home Office and the Scottish Office.

It is the considered view of officers experienced in the
control of police operations at major football stadia in
Scotland that the regulatory and advisory provisions outlined
above are currently adequate to ensure an acceptable standard
of public safety. There is, however,    scope for improvement in
the degree of observance of these provisions at certain
grounds, particularly in a greater acceptance by clubs of their
obligations   to  provide   sufficient  trained   and  competent
stewards.   In our view, such improvements as are necessary may
be achieved by firmer direction      by the licensing authority
(the Regional Council) than by any additional regulations.

Please/
Please accept my apologies for the delay in responding to your
letter.




Yours sincerely,




Chief Superintendent
(Honorary Secretary)
