                                                            reference
                                                                        fofal-   Srfais'o/62

Paul Marsden writes about Hillsborough.

The Home Secretary informed the House on 30 June that an independent scrutiny into
the Hillsborough disaster was to be carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The
Hansard transcript of the Home Secretary’s statement is enclosed to be sent with the
draft.

                      ? Drafts to P/S of M of S as within




                      MWard
                      4 July 1997
                          Divisional f il e Rcfgronco     lcT^~ 5>I%(So / ( $ 3 -
HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

Addressee!
 Name         rkJ        M a rA ^
 Address                           Reference
 Tick ooiySox
       0         House of Commons
        □        House of Lords
       □             Other - Insert full postal address




l e t t e r d r a f t e d for S i g n a t u r e by

             \J /s    0A « U t (                _____ ( Nome of Sfqno(ory!|


Enclosures




t o p l e s l o be s e n t l o




                                             (Full oddrcsscs. If accessory'
                                                                                       H ome O ffice
                                                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                                       LONDON SW1H9AT




Paul Marsden Esq MP                                              Our Ref:       PW /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /6 2
House of Commons                                                                PO 1 0 2 7 5 /9 7
London
SW 1A 0A A




Thank you for your letter of 12 June to Jack Straw, about the recent calls for a
new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

As you know, the Home Secretary has been considering whether there is a case
for a further public inquiry into the disaster in the light of the many
representations which have been received. Concerns that a number of issues
relating to the disaster remain unresolved received renewed attention following
the Granada television documentary drama "Hillsborough" last December.

The Home Secretary has had the opportunity to consider fully the material which
has been put forward, calling for a new public inquiry. He has decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no
matter of significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. As you will
know, he therefore announced in the House on 3 0 June that there will be an
independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the
Court of Appeal. I enclose for your information a copy of his statement to the
House, which includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's terms of reference. You will
see that he has undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith gives him.

It is our earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to
t h e u n c e r ta in tv n v e r thfi RX/RntK n f t h a t tprrihlp aftprnn nn
Thank you for your letter of 12 June to Jack Straw, about the recent calls for a new
inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.


As you know, the Home Secretary has been considering whether there is a case for a
further public inquiry into the disaster in the light of the many representations which
have been received. Concerns that a number of issues relating to the disaster remain
unresolved received renewed attention following the Granada television documentary
drama “Hillsborough” last December.


The Home Secretary has had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has
been put forward, calling for a new public inquiry. He has decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter of
significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. As you will know, he
therefore announced in the House on 30 June that there will be an independent
scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. I
enclose for your information a copy of his statement to the House, which includes
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that he has undertaken to
make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives him.


It is our earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.
                            HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                L O N D O N SW1A OAA
                               Paul Marsden Labour MP
                                  Shrewsbury & Atcham




Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H9AT                                              12 June 1997




Dear Jack,

Following recent constituent letters, I would be grateful if you could update me on any
proposals to re-open the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster.

The recently suggested reports of 'new1evidence has prompted calls for a re-examination of
the case and I would appreciate your views on the matter.

Best wishes.


Yours sincerely,




Paul Marsden MP




                                    Telephone 0171219 3M0
