                      |W ^5           6 bo*g

                 CD^~»<vxf2.^ (TvCvvU, -Oc Cc^V

                                      fVv^l_c        p<\ru \ «J* Itl
                                                                                               HOME OFFICE
                   UX£*/                                  ^— | *■-,                Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                                                          Direct line: 01-273 3146
                   •vv^vt-sAjy,                                                          Switchboard: 01-273 3000

               ©    I           (- te - v ^ c              V vo^       U    W     - J o /'W ^ C   ^v ltU v w .     iv ^ u .     Sv
Our reference:                  . ___ . ,       -   . .
Y o u rrtferen ce^V                             U             "U-jcxA/^ £>*■*:      I V&~4b       (t\    K e^       &         d j t w 'O r    V w tv

                      K ^ sst-^,                                      Cu--<K3^_                       ^ ^        'Vwfct            KVU j e ^
             IKW >    Wu, U .   v •                                                                         ^                                     ‘n
    R M Whalley Esq     I 1       T ? o „                                                      i)— ^                  ^           it p a;
    Secretary
    secretary                                                                                           ft ,       .                 .-
    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry                                                         *     v^Ar       K*         iw^ ovrfU wj*
    Home Office
    U r v m A   r \ £ £ . '                                       I

                                                                                       l"vue
                                                                                                  V



    Room 662                                                                                                                            vh   A

•   50 Queen Anne's Gate
    London SW1H 9AT                                                                                   10 November 1989
                                                                                                        e ^ o iA     v t.

                                                                                Covo^ 'Q/v’                                                       (tj
                              C^ c 5 i                                     IS&> W U s r l ^            + isrnsa*                      fc^

    ATTENDANCE CENTRES                                                     wj^     n r ^ u                                               ^\s/
                                                                                                                                              «

    Enclosed are a draft letter and a draft paper on attendance                                                                                       ^
    centres. Have we provided the information Lord Justice Taylor is                                                                               t'fc I [a
    looking for and struck the right note? I should be grateful for                                                                                    * '
    any advice and comments on the draft.

    Does this count as formal Home Office evidence to the enquiry?                                                                           If
    so, ought I to clear it with Ministers?




                                                                                                  Miss J M Goose
D R A F T


R M Whalley Esq
Secretary
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
Room 662
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1                                                     November 1989




You told me that Lord Justice Taylor would welcome our views on
the suitability of attendance centre orders for those convicted of
football-related offences.       He would also like to know the present
position on intermittent custody or weekend imprisonment.


I attach a paper about attendance centres.         It explains the
statutory basis on which they operate; describes how they are
managed and run; and offers some comments on their suitability for
football hooligans.      Whether an attendance centre order is
suitable for an individual will depend upon the circumstances and
his personal characteristics.       Some of those convicted of
football-related offences can sensibly be given attendance centre
orders.     However, we doubt whether the disposal is suitable for
determinedly anti-social offenders.


We considered a year ago whether attendance centres would be
suitable reporting places for football hooligans prevented from
attending matches abroad, under Part II of the Football Spectators
Bill.     I- thirrit ifc will be oloar from -the paper why U    concluded
they could not be used for this purpose; bccxtwsx. ...


On intermittent custody, in 1984 the Government issued a Green
Paper seeking views on the desirability and practicability of
introducing a new disposal of this kind.         In the 1986 White Paper
on Criminal Justice (Cmnd 9658), it announced that it had decided
not to pursue the idea.       The view among respondents to the Green
Paper was that a new disposal of this kind was not necessary and
there was no agreement about the kind of offender for whom it
would be suitable.   Many felt that it would replace existing
community sentences rather than custody; and there was no
agreement over the form it should take.   The additional costs were
a significant factor.   Ministers have considered the issue again
since 1986 but their view remains the same.   Their approach to
sentencing is set out in last year's Green Paper on Punishment,
Custody and the Community.   Custody should be used only for the
most serious and violent offenders.   When it is not necessary,
offenders should be dealt with in the community.   Ministers are
considering what fresh powers courts might need to encourage
greater use of community disposals and their proposals are likely
to be published in the New Year.




                                                   Miss J M Goose
ATTENDANCE CENTRES:     FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS


1.        Under section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982 courts
have the power to make attendance centre orders for young people
under 21 who


     (a)     have been convicted of an imprisonable offence; or


     (b)     have defaulted on payment of their fines etc; or


     (c)     have failed to comply with the requirements of a
             probation or supervision order.


Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
previously been given a custodial sentence except in special
(undefined) circumstances.     The minimum length of an order is 12
hours, except for those under 14.     The maximum is 24 hours for
those under 17, and 36 hours for those aged 17 to 20.


2.        The network of centres is managed centrally by the Home
Office, which has delegated the management of individual centres
to local agents.     In most areas, the agent is the Chief Officer of
Police.     At present there are 137 centres:    111 junior centres
(some mixed) for those aged under 17; and 26 senior centres for
those aged 17 to 20 (males only).     A list of the centres is
attached.     The need for centres is determined by the numbers of
young people coming before the courts locally, and they are mostly
in towns.     Some 50 new centres were opened between 1979 and 1984.
There is a reasonable geographical spread of junior centres in
England and Wales, but senior centres are, for the most part, in
the larger conurbations.     With the fall in number of juveniles
under 17 being dealt with by the courts, the number of attendance
centre orders has also dropped.     The Home Office has recently
reviewed the use of the junior centres and a number with low
attendance figures are being closed.


3.        Most centres are in school premises.   They are normally
open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
usually, but not invariably, in the afternoon.    A typical order
might be completed in 9 sessions over an 18 week period.       Each
centre is staffed by an officer in charge, normally an off-duty or
retired police officer, assisted by other instructors.     Regimes
include physical education and at least one other activity.       Each
centre determines its own programme in accordance with general
guidance from the Home Office.   The range of activities is very
wide and includes instruction in socially useful skills (first-
aid, life-saving) and handicrafts (woodwork, pottery).     The aim is
to encourage the young people to make more constructive use of
their free time during an enforced period of loss of leisure.


4.     Attendance centre orders are used for those convicted of
all kinds of offence except the most serious offences of violence.
There is no reason why they should not be used for those convicted
of football-related offences.    However, there would be
difficulties in their systematic use for determinedly anti-social
football hooligans.   Attendance centres are not secure.      Although
they are run in a disciplined environment, the staff have no means
beyond their own authority of enforcing discipline and some
centres have no police officers on their staff.    Football
hooligans are unlikely to be the most assiduous attenders.
Imposing an attendance centre order on a person who is unlikely to
attend and will be returned to court with a view to a different
order being made is counter-productive.    The activities at centres
are unlikely to be attractive to many football hooligans.       Those
who do attend may well be disruptive and undermine the
constructive work being done with other, more co-operative
offenders.


5.     If the intention is to take football hooligans out of
circulation while matches are in progress, it should be noted that
attendance centres can only be run on Saturdays, even on Saturdays
their hours do not necessarily co-incide with the times of
matches, and local education authorities might not be prepared to
lease their premises for use as centres, if they thought there was
a risk of damage to their property.    Some authorities are already
reluctant - or refuse - to do this.
6.        This is not to say that attendance centre orders should not
be used for some football hooligans.     The orders continue to have
a useful place in the range of sentencing options available to the
courts.     However they should be used for those young people,
whether football hooligans or not, for whom they are suitable and
who are likely to respond to the activities.




C1 Division
Home Office
November 1989
