                           QUESTION                 ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground.
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 - 6 , Volume 2



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself.



Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander.
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training fo r such functions should be the subject
of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
training in the basic strategy of policing football matches and would also give
opportunity for the pooling of experience and the solution of common problems.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 52

52. Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific training course for
senior officers presently acting as Police Commanders and those in line to do so.
Such a course should include training in the basic strategy of policing football
matches.
                           23

                                       B.L. HOLE


Q. But there weren't any Officers deployed on your order to
   the tunnel? - A. At Phase 2 sir.

Q. No,   not Phase 2, Phase 1 which is when people are coining
   in?   - A. The Officers on those serials are at the back of
   the   terraces at the turnstiles, that is on the inside of
   the   turnstiles and that is where they are deployed.

Q. I see. But what is your understanding of vii, Mr. Mole,
   which on the face of it would appear to indicate that you
   ought to post Officers at the back of the terraces to
   help the Stewards to direct, inter alia to direct people
   to fill up the terraces evenly because that is one of the
   steward'.s duties? - A. My understanding of that is the
   Officers are deployed to the rear of those areas and in
   fact do direct as a matter of course people to the various
   locations but they are not actually stood on the terraces.
   That is my understanding of that paragraph.

Q. "Officers engaged on duties in the stands and terraced
   areas will take up positions at the rear of the crowds
   using any raised or otherwise advantageous positions
   which might be provided or available". - A. That is
   correct sir, and when they are deployed to those terraces
   that is the position they take up, but in Phase 1 of
   the order their duties is at the turnstiles for public
   order searching and property and advising and directing.
   When Phase 2 operates at the match they take up advan­
   tageous points at the rear of the terraces.

Q. But of course unlike the league matches, as we have
   indicated, there were no Officers deployed on any duty
   in relation to filling of the terraces, were there? - A.
   I think I have made that point sir.

Q.    One small thing I ought just to have elicited.   The 1987
     final was on a Sunday? - A. It was sir, yes.

Q.    In fact kick-off was due at 12 but delayed till 12.15?
     - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. That, I suppose, avoided to some extent the drink problem?
   - A. It did sir.

Q. Because of course the pubs don't open till 12 and I think
   even now it is slightly more difficult, well can you get
   off licence drinks on a Sunday morning? - A. No, same
   licensing hours.

Q. Same licensing hours as pubs? - A. Yes.

Q. I think that is really all I need ask you about the
   planning because I appreciate you were not involved
   directly with the events of the 15th of April last.

           You told us that you were transferred on the 27th
     of March and therefore of course you were aware that your

                                                                  01
                                                  24

                                                                B.L. MOLE


                             successor, Chiaf Superintendent Duckinfield was going to
                             have to take over the policing of this event? - A. That is
                             correct sir, yes.

                        Q. And although things had gone in your view well in 1988
                           there was always a potential problem with a full house
                           and large numbers of supporters coming in from far afield
                    B      from outside Sheffield? - A, I think whenever you have
                           54,000 people congregating together there is always
                           potential.

                        Q. In effect Mr. Duckinfield was being thrown in at the deep
                           end, was he not? - A. I think his experience of policing
                           football is wide.  Certainly I think he had not policed
                           a semi-final but certainly policed crowds in large numbers.

                        Q. Had he policed Hillsborough before? - A. He had policed
                           Hillsborough when he was there in a different rank sir.

                        Q. What rank? - A. I believe my recollection is as Chief
                           Inspector and Inspector.

                    D   Q. So he had never been in the position of having as it were
                           a overview of the operation? - A. I would be guessing if
                           I said he had or h a d not but I don't think he had ever
                           been in command of the operation at Hillsborough but
                           certainly Sheffield United he had and at other major
                           events in the town sir.

                        Q., And you no doubt then briefed him in some detail about
                    E       the problems that he might anticipate? - A. .I did sir, yes.

                        Q. Did you go around the ground with him? - A. No sir,
                           Ur. Duckinfield has a knowledge of the ground having
                           worked there in the past, as I have said.

                        Q.    So there was no as it were   walk round which you considered
                             necessary? - A. No sir, in    fact I called him to a meeting
                             prior to my departure with    the rest of the people involved
                             in the planning and he was    present at that prior to his
                             promotion.

                        Q. That was a meeting on the 22nd of March? - A. That is
                           correct sir.

                        Q.    This wasa meeting with as it were your sub-Commanders?
                             - A. Yes and other interested parties.  I received noti­
                             fication of the match on the 20th of March and conscious
                             of my move on the 27th I called an urgent meeting for
                             the 22nd which involved all the sector Commanders that
                             I selected to support Mr. Duckinfield together with
                             people like the transport, British Rail; Officers in the
                             Central Division who would be affected by the influx of
                             people and the Traffic Division etc.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                             02
                          114


                                              D.G. DUCKINFIELD


  ground for a period of 12 months.

Q. Your rank at this stage being? - A. Chief Inspector.  In that
   period I think if I am correct which was between September
   1979 and June 1980, I had experience of policing a Semi-Final
   tie between Liverpool and Arsenal, and also the major tie
   between Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United on Boxing
   Day.  On both of those occasions they attracted capacity
   crowds.

Q. Which was your area of responsibility within the grounds? We
   know Chief Inspectors have the responsibility of a number of
   serials? - A. At that time the organisation was a little
   different, and to be quite specific I cannot other than to say
   I was on the perimeter track occupying a position very similar
   to the Sergeant who now occupies that position where the
   players run out.

Q. Near the players' tunnel? - A. That is right.  I had that
   responsibility.  I remained there until June 1980.  In June
   1980 I was transferred again as a Chief Inspector to the
   Attercliffe sub-Division which deals with the industrial part
   of the city, and at that time did not have a particular
   involvement with football matches or public order.   I
   remained there for a period until 1985, when at that time
   after promotion, I moved to West Bar Police station as a
   uniform Superintendent and Deputy Divisional Commander.

        From the transfer to Attercliffe to West Bar then my
   policing role changed considerably.  As you can imagine in the
   city centre I was regularly involved with the policing of
   marches, demonstrations, on a regular basis, and also
   responsible for the policing of Sheffield United football
   ground. During the initial period I policed the ground on a
   regular basis and took a regular interest in the game and also
   the policing of the ground.

Q. When you say responsible for policing, were you the person who
   drew up the operational plan? - A. No.   The structure is such
   that the sub-Divisional Commander, that is the Superintendent
   of the Central Division would with his planning team draw up
   that plan, and as Deputy Divisional Commander would monitor
   that situation and assist and supervise in the absence of that
   Officer.   The Officer at that particular time was
   Superintendent Marshall, who is now my Deputy Divisional
   Commander.   So he and I worked together for a considerable
   period quite closely on public order matters.

Q. That was from 1985 until....? - A. Until I was promoted
   recently.  I may have got that particular date wrong, but
   certainly for a period of three years with Mr. Marshall.

Q. So about three or four years before your promotion? - a. yes.

Q. We know you went into post on 27th March, was it, this year? -
   A. Yes, sir.


                                                                   03
                                                    115


                                                                         D.G. DUCKINFIELD


                        Q. From what you told us, although you had had experience of
                           policing football matches and as a Chief Inspector had had
                           experience at Hillsborough and perhaps as a Constable? -
                           A. Yes, sir.

                        G. You had not had experience of planning an overall
                           responsibility for a big tie such as this? - A. In terms of a
                    B      Semi-Final tie, you are quite correct, but I should make the
                           point that during my period at West Bar I had an involvement
                           not so much in the detailed planning but certainly supervision
                           of the Billy Graham concerts that were held at Bramall lane
                           football ground, where there was a capacity crowd, and only
                           last year during the summer Bruce Springsteen, an American pop
                           artist, came to Bramall Lane football ground for a weekend,
                           and he held two concerts on a Saturday and Sunday evening, and
                           there was an expected attendance of 48,000 people on each of
                           those days.  It would be wrong to say I know that 43,000
                           attended, but almost that number attended.  So I have
                           experience at first hand only last year of policing a Bruce
                           Springsteen concert and a large number of people attended.

                        Q. But your last direct contact with Hillsborough, if I have
                           correctly followed what you told us, was some 10 years ago? -
                    D      A. In terms of a Police Commander, yes, sir.

                        Q. In terms of any sort of policing? - A. Yes, it was.

                        Q. So you were in need, were you not, of reconsidering or looking
                            again at Hillsborough stadium itself? - A. There was,
                            understandably, with a promotion only a short period before
                          / the event, I may not be so well acquainted with the finer
                            detail as possibly Mr. Mole, but the point is I know the area
                            and have policed the area before.

                        Q. Yes, but things have changed since you had been there over the
                           last 10 years.  Most particularly in that period the radial
                           pens had been erected, and that of course made a considerable
                           difference? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. When was it you were first aware you were going to be landed
                           with the policing of this game? - A. I would say, as Mr. Mole
                           was, I think it would have been the Saturday or Sunday, the
                           weekend where the fixtures for the Sixth Round were decided.

                        G. 20th March, I think, or thereabouts.  Only about a week
                           before.  - A. I think the announcement was made on the Monday
                           morning when the draw would be made.

                        Q. I can't immediately remember what date it was.

                                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Monday, 20th March.

                                  THE WITNESS:   So I learned then.

                H       Q.        MR. COLLINS:   You learned then, and you realised
                             immediately this was going to land on your plate very shortly
                             after you had taken over? - A. Yes, sir.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                                                           04
                                 74
                                              W. JACKSON


     in the minds of some on the terraces.          You are unaware of
     that? - A. No, I was unaware of that.

Q. It is right to say, is it not, that in determining whether
   a particular event has been a success, that is a football
   match has been a success in terms of policing, you get
   no input at all from the spectators? - A. That is correct.
   The only input we would get is if we got letters.

Q.   Have you considered ever whether you ought to ask the
     Supporters' Associations, if there are any, whether they
     had any comments that might help you with policing for the
     future? - A.No, I haven't.

Q. Does it occur to- you that it might not b,e a bad, .thing to
   f i n d o u - t -what the actual consumer, as it.were, has to say?
       a. I would have no- objection to ;that^ i ’know the supporte
   are very much aligned to the Club, so I would hope the
   Club M anagement would pass that on to us...

Q. Yes, but the difficulty with a semi-final is you are not
   going to get attending it, certainly in numbers,   the
   supporters of Sheffield Wednesday, are you, because you
   have two- foreign teams? - A. I would have-no objection to
   that.  You !would obviously- have to look at it in an
   independent wa-y but I would have no objection.

Q. But it would give you certainly an angle which has so
   far been -missing? — A. Yes, I think’ generally,’..ye.s.r, v ..

Q. Can I corde- orr to this y e a r . Now. you knew, X. think, as    -
   at about the 20th March 1939 that:Hillsborough wa^ going^
   to hosft' this match? - A. Yes, that is correct;: I'happened,
   to be in Mr .Mole's Division, in fact ini-his'                   r,.
   he received a call from the Secretary.          '              I

Q. You clIso f}th«v;’'of course that Mr. Mole -w.as ^ q u t ^ q ,.l.%av^,.v .
   to go to'Barnsley? - A. Yes, I did.'-'                          ■

Q. Mr. M o l e as you knew was very experienced in policing
   the Sheffield Wednesday ground? - A. Yes, he was,

Q. Mr.-’-bucM'ehfifeTd'-tie new Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t f r a d ;
   experience of'Hillsborough but that- had been -some' ten < -
   years before and not of course as someone in overall
   control? - A. That is right.

Q. So he was coming to some extent new to whatever problems
   might be created by policing Sheffield Wednesday? - A.
   Mr. Duckenfield was a very very experienced Commander.
   He policed Sheffield United ground.  He also policed the
   City Centre which had numerous activities, matches etc.
   He would be surrounded by very very experienced Ground
   Commanders.

Q. It did not occur to you to wonder whether, to ask yourself
                                                        W. JACKSON


       whether it might not be an idea to get Mr. Mole to come over
       for the day   and deal with the policing of this event? - A.
       It was not considered necessary.

    Q. It would not have been impossible, would it? - A. It would
       not have been impossible.

    Q. Did you consider it at all? - A. No, the reason I did not
B      consider it is on^ that Mr. Duckenfield is an experienced
       Officer; polices Sheffield United; polices the City Centre;
       he would be surrounded by the same team as he was last year
       of very very experienced Ground Commanders.

    Q. But of course he is the man in ultimate control and I expect
       you would agree with me that if a problem arises which, is
       not within the •.'■'■anticipation of a plan, experience^ is
       exceedingly       helpful? - A. I think experience is always    1
       helpful but you can 'get a Divisional Coauaait^er who :moves .
        to any particular Division and has to deal with a specific
       •'problem:' 'that he may not have dealt with before, but in.
       Mr.Duckenfield's case he had been* invdlve&Vwith Sheffield
       Wednesday before, albeit          some time ago and he was also
        involved with Sheffield United, so he wa,s very very mu,ch
        aware of football problems.
D
    Q. Now were you involved directly with, the planning or did
        you simply let Mr. Duckenfield get on with it knowing that
       he was going to apply the plan which had proved successful
        the year before? - A. Basically in my conversation with
                          askied-him^if-he .^ould^in-the/ii^i^^s^ggs..^,.--;^                  ..


        tackle the problem and that was on the 20th. of .-March: vand             .
p       then-to arrange               very quick meeting which was- done...Qn . ,
        tlie-‘-2-'2nd- -of -'Marcft.--' --Mr. Duckenf ieid was at that ■meeting
       with*3tr:.-:M ^ l W ’ahid my Chief Superintendent (operationsX                               ’ if.-

        and a ntimJjera o^-^other people and-from .then, on Mr,. Duckenfield
        took c*hafg& ofu:itlie-plan but with the same-planningiteam that ,
      - prepare^-^t-he p-lah-for--Mr. Mole last ,              y  e   a   ^   ' §. : ,

       A n d ^ c w ^ a # 1^ p p W e ^ d ' :th-e plan' t h e 1-year bef ore?-: - >Ai:..I ^-approved-...
       the" pla^ ^ K e :year before and -I-* iistehe'd to' Mir'. .Dackehfield.,, ;
       We did make a slight amendment to the plan.

    Q. Is that the reduction in manpower? - A. N p , ;we.did that
       B u t tHe:>;amen<^6nt to. be -more- effe ctiv e^a^ 'in vte^s.^c^f,*;.U,-.
       the public order patrol sr. What we did' we-ar-ranged for
       I think it was five serials, which is 50 men, to be in
       a coach at Leppings Lane.        The year before they had been
       at Claywheels Lane which was some distance away, so we
       felt it would be more effective having that manpower nearby.

    Q. And the other change was, which Mr. Mole has already
       identified, was the reduction in manpower. Were you
       involved in that decision yourself?


H
                             /A. Yes, I was inasmuch                                           06
