i

    Union of Shop,   , CT ^                  ,                     GENERAL SECRETARY: D, GARFIELD DAVIES
    Distributive and ' ' • ‘:>cAy0
    Allied Workers                                                    DEPUTY GENERAL SECRETARY: JOHN FLOOD



    188 Wilmslow Road, Fallowfield, Manchester M14 6LJ.    Tel: 061 224 2804 / 225 8081 Fax; 061-257 2586
                                   . . . .                                                         ..........................




            The Hon. Colin Moynihan, Mp
            Minister for Sport,
            Department of the Environments.       <.




                                                                     ■«   ■   'p ■




    In reply please quote:

            8947/DGD/KH                                                        2nd June 1989


            Dear M r . Moynihan,

            Sheffield Hillsborough Tragedy

            Please find below the terms of an emergency proposition on the Sheffield
            Hillsborough Tragedy, which was adopted by the Union's 1989 Annual
            Delegate Meeting in April/May and was considered by the Executive Council
            at their May meeting:-

                   "Following the Hillsborough tragedy ADM takes this opportunity
                   to extend its deepest sympathies to the bereaved, injured, their
                   famili es and the supporters of Liverpool Football Club.

                   Conference calls upon Her Majesty's Government to incorporate
                   within the Taylor Report a detailed examination of the
                   financing of investment into British football.

                   Conference calls for the building of:

                   1.  A national stadium in the North.
                   2.  Community owned stadia for all major towns and cities.
                   3.  The conversion to seating wherever possible.
                   4.  Improved policing methods and training.
                   5.  Fairer allocation of tickets in the future to reflect
                       average league gates.
                   6 . The removal of all fixed perimeter fencing.
                   Such improvements to be funded by Central Government.

                   Conference believes these measures are essential if we are to
                   provide any dignity for current supporters or any respect for
                   those who have died."

            The Executive Council have authorised me to acquaint you with the terms
            of the proposition and, at the same time, point out that although the
            Executive Council fully supports the sentiments and concern expressed in
            the proposition, it is not their wish to pre-empt the conclusions to be
            reached by the Taylor Report.
