From: Paul Pugh                                    cc: Mr O’Brien
      Head of Operational Policing                     Mr Howarth
      Policy Unit                                      Perm Secretary
      Room 539                                         HMCIC
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                Ms Wheldon
      S 0171-273-3141                                  Mr Halliday
       20 June 1997                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                       Mr Granatt
                                                       Mr Middleton
                                                       Ms Loudon
                                                       Mr R Evans
                                                       Ms Clifford
                                                       Mr Warner
                                                       Mr Owen




Mr Michael
                               ) sim ultaneously
Home Secretary                 )


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue


To agree the attached Oral Statement announcing the independent review of
alleged new evidence concerning the Hillsborough disaster, and associated handling
arrangements for forewarning interested parties.

Timing

2.        Urgent.

Summary

3.     I met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith today and explained the purpose of the
examination. He will confirm on Monday whether he is willing to do it. The draft
statement, which has been agreed by the Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers,
explains that while you (Home Secretary) do not believe there is any new evidence,
you believe it right that the material should be independently examined. You will
also wish to consider the proposed arrangements for giving advance notice of the
announcement to interested parties. Because of other business in the House, the
start of the week beginning 30 June is now more likely for the announcement.

Recommendation


::odma\meridio\edrm#90233# 1
4.          That you approve:

                        the draft oral statement

                        the proposed handling arrangements.

Consideration

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

5.     I met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith this afternoon. He was not immediately
enthusiastic about the task but fully appreciated that a judge of his seniority is
required. He wanted to reflect over the weekend and will confirm on Monday if he is
willing to take on the task. If he agrees - as I expect him to - a substantial court case
beginning next week and commitments in America in August mean that he could not
devote himself full time to the work until the start of September. This is no
disadvantage, because it will allow interested parties time to prepare representations
which they wish to submit.

Oral Statement

6.      The attached draft statement is largely factual. It explains that you do not
consider that any new evidence has been submitted. To say otherwise would be to
invite the question why a new inquiry was not being established. But it makes clear
that you consider it very important that the material should be independently
considered.

Forewarning interested parties

7.         We suggest that the following need to be forewarned:

The Hillsborough Families

8.    You should probably see the families shortly before the announcement is
made. This includes the representatives of the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
and the families who have made direct representations. They will need to be invited
a few days before the day of the announcement although they would not be told
what you intended to say until the day of the statement itself. You may wish to see
them in the House immediately before the statement so that they can then go to the
Gallery to watch the announcement being made.




::odma\meridio\edrm#9023 3# 1
Merseyside MPs

9.     We do not recommend that the MPs be informed before the families. It is
clear that the families will feel aggrieved if they themselves are not first to be told.
You could see the MPs at the same time as you see the families.

Opposition Home Affairs spokesmen

10.   You will wish to alert the Shadow and Liberal Democratic Home Affairs
spokespersons.

South Yorkshire Police

11.    We should give the South Yorkshire Police 48 hours notice of the
announcement. I propose to speak to the Chief Constable in confidence and to give
him a copy of the terms of reference - partly so that they can make arrangements to
keep former chief superintendent Duckenfield away from media attention. It is right
that the chief constable should receive the terms of reference before the statement
because they refer directly to his role as disciplinary authority.

M r McBride

12.   You have previously indicated that you wished to inform Mr McBride in
advance. We assume you will want to make contact with him on a personal basis
and confidential.

Handling

13.    The media (especially regional media in Merseyside and Sheffield) will need
to be teed up. CD will be putting forward separate advice on media handling.

Timing

14.     The business managers offered Monday or Tuesday as possible dates. At
best that would mean giving 24 hours notice to the families, or trying to contact them
over the weekend, to make arrangements to travel to London. Given that they have
been waiting several months for a decision, I think it would be insulting to give them
such little warning when there is no compelling need to make the statement urgently.

15.     The business managers’ alternative is the start of the following week, 30
June. That has the disadvantage of allowing speculation over the previous weekend
- and pushes a little further back a possible announcement of the police community
relations inquiry - but I think that is greatly preferable to rushing out a Hillsborough



statement in a way which would seriously upset those directly concerned. I propose
we should confirm to the business managers that you will make a statement on
Monday 30 June.


:odma\meridio\edrm#90233#l
                              PAUL PUGH




::odma\meridio\edrm#90233#l
