                    HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY




            WITNESS STATEMENT OF KENNETH J. EVANS




I, KENNETH J. EVANS of;

                    flLL SAY as follows



1.   I am 57 years of age.   In about November 198 6 upon

retirement from the West Midlands Police Force I obtained a

consultancy post with the Football Association ("F.A."). My

brief was to attend matches at the direction of the F.A.

which were usually viewed by the F.A. as "problem matches",

with the possibility of crowd disorder.



2.   I have considerable experience in policing Football

League Grounds and in related matters.



3.   As the Chief Superintendent at Sandwell I had

responsibility for the Hawthorns at West Bromwich and as

Assistant Chief Constable for eight years, I covered all the
six Football League Grounds in West Midlands as one of my

responsibilities.


                                   —   *   .

4.   Sandwell is a Metropolitan^District with over 300,000

residents.   Apart from Coventry it is the largest division

in the West Midlands.   I had 35 years experience as a police

officer before retirement.



5.   At national level I was on a small sub-committee set up

in 1981 by the Association of Chief Police Officers

("ACPO"), to produce general guidance for senior police

officers dealing with hooliganism associated with football.

The guidelines are in my view still relevant today and they

have been amended only to take account of improved

intelligence gathering and the recent legislation dealing

with the sale of alcohol at football grounds.     I represented

the Midlands Region on the ACPO Hooliganism at Sporting

Events Sub-committee under the Chairmanship of Mr. James

Anderton, Chief Constable, Greater Manchester Police.        I

have been the Chairman of meetings of senior police officers

from all over the country who have responsibility for the

policing of clubs in the First Division and have attended

meetings of senior police officers involved with clubs in

the second division.



6.   I was promoted from Chief Superintendent to Assistant

Chief Constable in 1978.     I have personally had overall
responsibility for 8 semi-finals, not including replays.     I

have also attended in this capacity at a league cup final

replay at Villa Park.



7.   Since taking up my employment with the F.A. I have .

regularly attended matches every week as a crowd control

observer.   My practice would be to telephone the police in

advance to let them know I was"coming and for a football

league match I would turn up about li hours before kick-off.

I would then walk around the ground, meet the secretary and

discuss the arrangements for the match and obtain background

information.    I then make contact with the senior police

officer in charge.



8.   My discussions with the senior police officers would

obviously not go into great detail because of time

constraints but I would get an overview of how operations

were handled.    Operational arrangements at most Football

League Grounds follow similar patterns but there is no one

"Master Plan" because football stadia and their environs are

so different.



9.   Every Football League Club has a police liaison

officer.    This can be a Police Constable through every rank

to a Chief Inspector.    These officers exchange intelligence
between themselves on likely football problems and related

incidents.    There is a developed network throughout the

country.                             __



10.    I understand that the F.A., have had crowd control

advisers for quite some time and two of my colleagues who

have been employed for longer than I have at the F.A. are

Sir James Starratt and Leslie Walker.



SEMI-FINAL MATCHES



11.    I normally arrive even earlier for semi-final matches

than I would do for a normal league game.     This is because

these are generally better attended matches with perhaps

more potential problems for the police because of the sheer

numbers of people getting to and from the ground.     I have

been to only two semi-finals in an official capacity for the

F.A.    I went to Villa Park in 1987 and last year I went to

Hillsborough.



Policing



 12.   Speaking from my experience at Villa Park in

Birmingham, the detailed arrangements are normally

 supervised_and controlled by the local Chief Superintendent

 although the Assistant Chief Constable has overall

 responsibility.




                                -   4-
14.     In my experience with regard to responsibility between

the police and the club, the police have the major say in

the staging arrangements for tlje_match.             For example:-
                                    -'^7   _


        i)   We would look at the direction of travel of the

             supporters of the competing teams.          At Villa Park

             we would assess which of the two railway stations

             they should go to and from which motorway junction

             they should travel to the ground. On that basis we

             would advise the club on the allocation of space

             to the two sets of supporters inside the ground.

             Our primary concern would be segregation inside

             and outside the ground and the movement of

             spectators to and from the ground.



      ii)    We would also concern ourselves to make sure

             there was sufficient coach parks, parking areas,

             and other amenities for travelling fans. We would

             liaise with AA and RAC to put up route signs in

             advance and make sure that information was given

             to the competing clubs to advise on which routes

             their fans should take.           We would also arrange for

             such matters to be published in the local press of

             the towns to which the competing teams belong.          We

             would advise the visiting clubs to announce in the




                                -    5-
             local press, for instance, that the match was all

             ticket and a sell out and so there was no use

             travelling.                _



      iii)   The police responsibility in policing a semi-final

             is not just confined to matters in and around the

             ground.     A prime concern is the well being of the

             local community and a lot of police attention is

             given to the surrounding areas to prevent

             disorder.



                           Safety Certificate



15.     I was the West Midlands police representative on the

West Midlands Council Safety Committee which examined ground

safety at the six league clubs in the area following the

Bradford City fire in 1985.        Other members of the Committee

were: an Assistant Chief Fire Officer; a member of the

Engineers Department of the local authority; and a member of

the Local Authority Legal Department.           This Committee

produced a draft of appropriate safety provisions relating

to a particular club in the region so that the Safety

Certificate issued under the 1975 Safety of Sports Grounds

Act could contain all the various measures we had

recommended.




                                   -   6-
16.   The clubs that were covered by this committee             were all

the league clubs in the West Midlands i.e. Aston Villa;

Birmingham City; Coventry; West Bromwich Albion; Walsall;
                               '.'ta .   —   >   ;

and Wolverhampton Wanderers,        fhfe "Local Chief

Superintendents would examine the Committee recommendations

and see whether they satisfied the policing requirements at

specific grounds.



17.   I did not get involved with such matters as the number

of gates required in the perimeter fencing and crush

barriers within grounds which would be dealt with by a

particular provision in the Safety Certificate.               This is a

matter within the province of the Engineers Department.

They would take account of the ingress and egress and

arrange for the barriers to be tested.               The police do

arrange for proper manning and the opening and shutting of

gates in accordance with the government green code on safety

at sports stadiums.   The police and fire authority are

responsible for safe egress from the ground and for

providing emergency evacuation procedures.



1988 HILLSBOROUGH F.A. CUP SEMI FINAL TIE LIVERPOOL -

NOTTINGHAM FOREST



18.   I have been asked to try and recollect my involvement

on the day in question.   Attached at pages 1-3 of this

statement is my report which I compiled soon after attending




                                -   7-
the event.    Matters were then much fresher in my mind but I

should like to deal with what I can remember about the event

in view of what has happened there this year.
                               ■-   _




19.     I arrived about three hours before kick-off.    I was

shown the arrangements there and looked at the ground.          This

was my first visit to Hillsborough on behalf of the FA.          My

only previous visit was as a spectator for a Semi-Final in

1959.



20.     I went to see the Club Secretary Mr. Graham Mackrell

who personally showed me the layout of the ground and in

particular the club control room and the visual display unit

for the computer controlled turnstile counters.        As I have

described in my report of the 10th April 1988 I was very

impressed with the closed circuit T.V. control with 24

cameras covering all exits and turnstiles and other key

areas.     This in my experience was unusual. These screens

were monitored by a club official and a police officer.          The

police officer transmitted information to the police control

room by telephone.     He may also have had a radio link.



21.     A Chief Superintendent had overall control on that day

and Assistant Chief Constable Jackson was also present in

uniform.     I knew him from the ACPO Committee of which we

were both members.     We met in the police control room.
22   .   x then decided to walk around on my own and X left the

police control room and went first to the back of the East

stand at the Penistone Road end.      I checked that all the

turnstiles were open and the giheral behaviour of the people

arriving.      These were Nottingham Forest fans and their

general behaviour was good.



23.      I then decided to walk around past the back of the

north stand into Vere Road so that I could have a look at

the other end to see the Liverpool fans arriving at Leppings

Lane.      In order to get there there are several parallel

roads linking Penistone Road to Leppings Lane.       There were

police officers at the entrances to these roads to prevent

people walking through them.      There were wooden barriers as

well.      I was told that in the past damage had been caused to

various properties in these link roads and so they were

keeping out football supporters. They were only allowing

residents through.       I spoke to the officers and was allowed

through.      This would have been about 2.00 p.m.   An hour

before kick-off, there were a lot of people milling about in

 the vicinity of Leppings Lane. There were about six mounted

 officers.      It was more congested than the Penistone Road

 end.



 24.      There was no evidence of any crushing or drunkenness or

 crowd disorder.      I had a couple of casual conversations with
the Superintendent on duty.     I cannot recall the detail of

these.



25.   There must have been at least 50 or 60 officers present

at the Leppings Lane end;     some were on the inside of the

turnstiles checking for offensive weapons and drink;        some

were controlling the supporters as they approached the

turnstiles;     some were filtering people and checking tickets

before they got to the turnstiles;     some were on traffic

duty and there were various mounted police as I have said

creating channels through which queues could form.      I

estimate that at least six horses were present.      It was too

crowded for me to get right up to see the turnstiles in

operation.    Although it was congested it was not

frighteningly so.     In other words I did not notice any

discomfort or what I would term undue congestion.      It was

just crowded.



26.   The South Yorkshire Police were being very helpful in

my opinion and did not appear to be authoritarian.      They

exhibited no signs of aggression and dealt with people in a

very courteous manner.



27.   I went back to the police control room between the

South and West Stand after having spent 15 or 20 minutes

surveying the scene at Leppings Lane.     I had a look to see

what was happening in the control room and I decided that I
                                                                      1




ought to go back to have a look at the Leppings Lane area as

it seemed likely in my view that not all supporters would be

in the ground in time for kick-off          My impression was that

there was general concern amoncf the police that it might be

difficult to get people inside the ground in time for kick

off.



28.    I"itayed at the Leppings Lane end until very shortly

after kick-off.    Just after kick-off there were still people

going in.    I refer to this in my statement as a ’’trickle” .

By this I mean an orderly continuous stream rather than a

blockage or congested area.        The kick-off was not delayed.



29.    The through put on 'all ticket* matches like

semi-finals is faster through the turnstiles because the

spectators do not have to tender the money.         We used to work

on an average of 650 people going through a turnstile in an

hour without paying i.e. having tickets.         We worked on the

assumption that 450 people could get in if they had to pay

at the turnstiles.    At about 5 minutes after kick-off there

were still people going in but it was considerably less

congested around the turnstiles.          Everything seemed under

control and so I left and went back inside to take up my

position in the director's seats.




                               -   11 -
30.   I did not get the opportunity to take a close look at

the fencing inside the ground although I do make reference

to it at paragraph 9 in my report.      I did not have„a chance

to look at the tunnel area leading from the turnstiles into

the West stand.



31.   I mention in my report that there is stout narrow gauge

fencing.   By that   t~meant   that it would be very difficult to

get a foothold in order to vault up and over the fence.       I

was dealing in paragraph 9 of my report, with the security

vis-a-vis people coming onto the pitch.



32.   I cannot say whether there were people lingering

outside the West stand hoping to buy tickets or not.       There

are always touts at semi-finals but I cannot put a figure on

the number.



33.   I have been asked whether I was aware of any secondary

screening ie the stopping and checking of people for tickets

at various areas around the ground last year.       I remember

that I was told by a police officer last year that there was

random screening of coaches and mini buses to check for

drunkenness, weapons and tickets.       I do not know the extent

to which this instruction was carried out.
    ♦

        1




                                         t    /%

            34.   I have also been asked as to the responsibility in

            relation to allocation of space and segregation at a

            semi-final venue.   In my view the cross migration
                                              ' -"= 3 - ~   •

            of spectators can have serious ""consequences with regard to

            hooliganism.    It is a police decision to lay down

            operational policy in the segregation of fans going to and

            from a match.    Likewise it is a police decision as to

            segregation inside the ground.              We would not wish the club

            or the F.A. to seek to interfere with that decision although

            of course we would consider their views.



            35.   The F.A. did not send any of its three crowd control

            officers to either semi-final this year.              I was actually

            sent to the Bury-Cardiff match as Cardiff had been subjected

            to an all ticket requirement and had introduced a voucher
\


            system which had been criticised recently.



            36.   It is always my practice after the final whistle goes

            at a semi-final match, and indeed every other match I attend

            in an official capacity, to have a look round the ground to

            check on people making their way home.              I did this at

            Hillsborough last year and did not see anything untoward.




                                                                     Kenneth J Evans



             (31350L)




                                          -    13 -
