                                    bs                     T)l\l J
                                )   *-   ■      |» r ^ \       >


                                             J cy.Uw«-^
               HOME OFFICE




    THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

               15 APRIL 1989




INQUIRY BY THE RT. HON. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




               FINAL REPORT
r




                                 CONTENTS

                                                   Paragraph   Page

    INTRODUCTION                                               1

    PART I - FOOTBALL:   PRESENT AND FUTURE

    CHAPTER 1 -THREESOMBRE LESSONS      AFTER                  7
    HILLSBOROUGH

         i.    Previous Reports Unheeded           19

         ii.   "It Couldn't Happen Here"           24

         iii. A Blight on Football                 26

               Old Grounds                         27

               Poor Facilities                     29

               Hooliganism                         34

               Segregation                         37

               What does Segregation Achieve?      45

               Who are the Hooligans?              46

               Alcohol                             49

               Poor Leadership                     51


    CHAPTER 2 -A BETTER FUTURE   FORFOOTBALL                   26


         All-Seating                               61

         The Trend in the UK                       73

         Sir Norman Chester Centre Research        77

         Europe                                    78

         The Football Spectators Act 1989          84

         Association Football only or Designated   85
         Grounds?

         Phasing                                   91

         Planning Ground Improvements              95

         An Advisory Design Council                96

         Research                                   97
     Finance                                       99

    The Football Trust (FT) and the Football      100
    Grounds Improvement Trust (FGIT)

     Fiscal Considerations                        103

     (a)   VAT on the Spot the Ball Competition   104

     (b)   Pool Betting Tax                       105

     (c)   Capital Allowances                     109

     Transfer Fees                                112

    A Levy on Transfer Fees?                      114

     Tax "Anomaly"                                115

    Club Financing                                116

    Upgraded Stadia or New Stadia                 119

     St Johnstone                                 121

     Utrecht                                      122

    Nimes                                         123

    Local Authority Assistance                    124

    Ground Sharing                                126

     Super-Stadia                                 129

    Leadership and Example                        131

     Family and Membership Areas                  135

     The Disabled                                 137

     Conclusion                                   138


PART II - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


CHAPTER 3 - THE FRAMEWORK


    Minimum Standards of Safety                   139

     Legislation for Safety                       141

     Green Guide                                  146

     (i)    The Advisory Group                    152
r




         (ii) A Review Body                           154


    CHAPTER 4 - SUBSTANTIVE PROVISIONS                      64


         Capacity                                     159

         Counting Them In                             173

         Gangways                                     175

         Fencing                                      179

              i.    High Spiked Fences                185

              ii.   Adequate Measures toPrevent       186
                     Pitch Invasions

                    Safety Corridors                  193

                    Moats                             194

              iii. Emergency Escape                   196

                    The Gates at Nimes                200

                    Gates Unlocked                    201

                    Authorising Access to the Pitch   203

                    Monitoring Crowd Density          204

                    Cutting Equipment                 205

         Functions of Police and Stewards             206

              Costs of Police and Stewards            210

              Division of Functions                   211

              Written Statement of Intent             213

         Police Commanders                            215

         Rate of Admission                            216

         Communications                               219

         Other Topics in the Green Guide              225

         Co-ordination of Emergency Services          228

         First Aid, Medical Facilities and            229
         Ambulances

         Status of the Green Guide                    233
     Revision of the Green Guide                 234

    Sports Grounds Within Part III of the        235
    Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
    Act 1987

     Sports Grounds Within Part IV of the Fire   240
     Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
     1987


PART III - CROWD CONTROL AND HOOLIGANISM


CHAPTER 5    - POLICE PLANNING ANDCONTROL              100


     Police Control Room                         249


CHAPTER 6    - ALCOHOL                                 102


     Legislation                                 251

    Alcohol Sales in Grounds?                    255

     Arrests                                     261

     Closing Bars                                262

     Early Kick-Offs                             263

     Sunday Matches                              265


CHAPTER 7    - TICKETS AND TOUTS                       108


     Information on Tickets and Signs            266

     Computer Record of Tickets                  268

     Fans Without Tickets                        269

     Police Policy                               270

    All-ticket Matches                           272

     Touts                                       273


CHAPTER 8    - POLICE STRATEGIESAGAINST                114
HOOLIGANS


     Cautious Optimism                           280
     CCTV                                       282

    National Football Intelligence Unit         287


CHAPTER 9 - OFFENCES IN THE GROUND                    117


CHAPTER 10 -CLUB STRATEGIES AGAINST HOOLIGANS         123


     Luton                                      303

     Benefits of the Scheme                     308

     Ban All Away Supporters?                   312

    Away Members Only                           316


CHAPTER 11 - OTHER POSSIBLE MEASURES AGAINST          129
HOOLIGANS


     Exclusion Orders                           320

     Enforcing Exclusion by Attendance Centre   323
     Order

     Is it practicable?                         325

     Attendance Centres                         326

     Resource Implications                      331

     Fairness                                   332

     Tagging                                    335


PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989


CHAPTER 12 -OBJECT AND PROVISIONS OF THE ACT          135


     Provisions of Part I                       339

     Contents of the Scheme                     344

     Provisions of Part II                      347


CHAPTER 13 -THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME            141


     General Requirements of the ITT and SOR    353
     Ground Modifications

     Applications for Membership

     Validation Procedures

     Provision and Updating of Information to
     Clubs

     Exploitation of the System

     Membership Cards

     Entry Checking Procedures

     Turnstile Alarm

     Detection

     System Contingency

     Performance and Environmental Conditions

     Summary



CHAPTER 14 - ARGUMENTS RAISED BY CRITICS OF
THE SCHEME


     (i)         Disproportionate?

     (ii)        Unfair?

     (iii)       Casual Spectators

     (iv)        Diminished Club Revenue

     (v)         Danger of Congestion and
                  Disorder

     (vi)        Will the scheme Defeat
                  Hooligans?

     (vii)       Police Resources


     Arguments Relevant to this Inquiry


CHAPTER 15 - DANGER OF CONGESTION OR DISORDER


     Present Risk of Congestion

     Additional Time to Check Cards
     (i)     Procedures at the Turnstiles        386

     (ii) The Technology                         392

     Demonstration                               395

     Police Apprehensions                        397

     Computer Reliability                        398

     Relaxation in an Emergency                  400

     Tests                                       401

     Human Guinea-pigs                           407

     Disruption and Sabotage                     408


CHAPTER 16     -WILL THE SCHEME WEED OUT               165
HOOLIGANS?


     (i)     Exclusion from the Ground           411

     (ii) Elimination from the Area and Routes   415
          Near the Ground


CHAPTER 17     -POLICE RESOURCES                       170


CHAPTER 18 -STRATEGIES AGAINSTHOOLIGANISM -            173
CONCLUSIONS

     Suggested Strategy                          425


PART V - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS                         175


     All-Seated Accommodation                    1

     Advisory Design Council                     5

    National Inspectorate and Review Body        6

    Maximum Capacities for Terraces              7

     Filling and Monitoring Terraces             11

     Gangways                                    13

     Fences and Gates                            14

     Crush Barriers                              22

     Safety Certificates                         24
Duties of Each Football Club          32

Police Planning                       44

Communications                        54

Co-ordination of Emergency Services   59

First Aid, Medical Facilities and     64
Ambulances

Offences and Penalties                70

Green Guide                           74
APPENDICES




1.   Organisations Submitting Evidence to the Inquiry.



2.   Sports Grounds Visited.



3.   Report of the Technical Working Party.



4.   Final Report of Mr Justice Popplewell's Inquiry: Chapter



5.   Stadion Galgenwaard, Utrecht.



6.   Perimeter fences at Liverpool (Anfield) and Everton
     (Goodison Park).



7.   The moat at Utrecht.



8.   The perimeter gates at Nimes (Stade des Costieres).




Photographs   are reproduced by courtesy o f :-

Ballast Nedam        (Appendices 5 and 7)
Mr Norman Bush       (Appendix 6)
BBT Gargini          (Appendix 8)
The Rt Hon David Waddington QC, MP
Secretary of State for the Home Department


                THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                          15 APRIL 1989


                     FINAL REPORT OF INQUIRY


                          INTRODUCTION


1.   On 17 April 1989 I was appointed by your predecessor, the Rt
Hon Douglas Hurd CBE, MP to carry out an Inquiry with the
following terms of reference:


     "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
     recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
     safety at sports events."


2.   Two Assessors were appointed to assist me:     Mr Brian Johnson
CBE, QPM, DL, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor
Leonard Maunder OBE, BSc, PhD, ScD, FEng, FI Mech E, Professor of
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne.


3.   The first stage of the Inquiry was primarily concerned with
the investigation of events at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
1989 when 95 people were crushed to death at a Cup semi-final
match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.


4.   Over 31 days between 15 May and 29 June, I heard oral
evidence from 174 witnesses at a public hearing in Sheffield.       I
also received much written evidence by way of submissions and
letters.


5.   On 1 August 1989 I presented an Interim Report setting out
my findings as to how and why the disaster occurred.     Also, in
accordance with your predecessor's wishes, I made interim
recommendations aimed at preventing any further disaster and
improving safety in the short term.


6.   The Interim Report and its recommendations had of necessity
to be made quickly so that action could be taken before the start
of the new football season due to open in mid August.       Despite
all the speed I could muster, the recommendations left very
little time for pre-season action, especially in Scotland where
the fixture list started earlier than in England and Wales.          I
must pay tribute to the clubs, local authorities, police and
other services for responding so promptly and for implementing
the recommendations so wholeheartedly.


7.   In my Interim Report I indicated that it would be necessary
to conduct wider and deeper investigations before delivering a
Final Report on the needs of crowd control and safety for the
future.    Accordingly, I invited and have considered a large
number of written submissions describing present practices and
problems and suggesting future changes.    Those who have
contributed are listed at Appendix 1.    I am extremely grateful to
all of them for their time and their views.    I expect there are a
number of contributors and correspondents who may look in vain
for comment on each and every point they have raised.       I hope
they will understand that time and space make it necessary to be
selective and to have regard to the main issues.


8.   I have also had numerous informal meetings with those
representing relevant public bodies, clubs and spectator
interests.    These have been conducted as private discussion
sessions rather than hearings of oral evidence thereby enabling
controversial issues to be explored and theories tested.


9.   In all of this I have continued to be assisted by the two
Assessors.    Each holds a professional appointment carrying heavy
responsibility and I am deeply grateful to both for devoting so
much time to assisting me.    Their contributions have been of the
highest value.    While the sole responsibility for this report is
mine, I am comforted in the knowledge that both Assessors agree
with it.
10.   At my request, Professor Maunder chaired a Technical Working
Party to review the technical aspects of the Home Office Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 edition), "The Green Guide".        Each
member of his team has much relevant experience and the team was
well qualified for its task.      I am most grateful for the co­
operation and efforts of each member.      The Report of the
Technical Working Party is at Appendix 3.


11.   In the course     of the Inquiry, the two Assessors and I have
between us visited      31 sports grounds.They are listed at
Appendix 2.   Of those, 24 were soccer grounds, but we also
attended at grounds featuring Rugby Union, Rugby League, cricket,
tennis and golf.      I wish to record our thanks to the club
officials who so readily and hospitably facilitated our visits;
also to the officers of local government, the police and the
emergency services who together with club officials conducted us
round the grounds, explained their operations and answered our
questions fully and frankly.      Seeing crowd control and behaviour
before, during and after a match from various sections of the
viewing areas was an essential source of first hand knowledge.
It brought alive the written and oral reports we received.


12.   I should like     to express my thanks to   the Home Officeteam
who have staffed this     Inquiry so well. Mr Robert Whalley was
appointed as its Secretary.     He has handled all the
administrative arrangements impeccably and has given much
invaluable advice and assistance on every aspect of the Inquiry.
He was ably and diligently assisted by Mr Jonathan Sweet, Mrs
Margaret Wither, Mr Tony Moore, Mrs Kate Humphries from the Home
Office and my own Clerk Mr Ernest Pott.      I also renew my thanks
to the West Midlands Police, and, in particular, to Mr Geoffrey
Dear QPM, DL, LLB,      the Chief Constable, and Mr Mervyn Jones MSc,
Assistant Chief Constable in full-time charge of the
investigation, who have continued to provide me with helpful
information at this second stage of the Inquiry.


13.   Having made my findings as to the events at Hillsborough, I
do not in this report say any more about them save by way of
illustration.     I am aware that inquests are still to be held,
civil proceedings are in motion and the possibility of criminal
charges is under consideration.     However, those are not matters
for me.     I therefore turn now to broader issues as promised in
paragraph 304 of my Interim Report.


14.     My terms of reference are extremely wide.     They embrace
crowd control and safety at sports events of all kinds.           However,
crowd problems are directly related to the nature of the event
and the numbers attending it.     Realistically, this means that
attention needs to be concentrated on events within the scope of
the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 and the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.     Even more specifically, the
emphasis in this Report is especially upon football.        The
Hillsborough disaster and indeed other disasters before it
occurred in crowded football stadia.     The numbers and the
atmosphere at a football match have created special problems such
as overcrowding and misbehaviour not, so far, to be found to a
like degree elsewhere.


15.     That football is a special case has been expressly
recognised by the Government in promoting the Football Spectators
Act 1989.     The Bill received the Royal Assent on 16 November
1989.     It had commenced its course through Parliament before the
Hillsborough disaster.     Expressly because of that disaster and
the setting up of this Inquiry it reached the statute book under
unusual conditions.     It was always to be an enabling Act whose
implementation would require a Statutory Instrument.        In order to
have the provisions of the Act in place as soon as possible, the
Government decided to proceed with it forthwith, notwithstanding
Hillsborough and this Inquiry.     That decision was subject to an
undertaking to bring the matter back before Parliament on two
separate occasions.     First, before the appointment of the
Football Membership Authority under the Act;        secondly, to debate
the scheme which the Act provides should be drawn up by that
Authority.
16.   I was expressly told by your predecessor upon my appointment
that my terms of reference included consideration of the national
membership scheme provided for in the Bill.    That was confirmed
on numerous occasions by Ministers in the course of the Bill's
passage through Parliament.    It was made clear that although the
Act would be on the statute book before my Final Report,
Parliament would have the opportunity to consider any
observations I might make, including any about the national
membership scheme.    Thus, to take only two examples, Mr Nicholas
Ridley, then Secretary of State for the Environment, said on the
Second Reading of the Bill on 27 June 1989:


      "I began by referring to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry.
      I will emphasise again now what I said at the
      beginning.   Parliament will have not one but two
      opportunities to debate and vote on the national
      membership scheme after we have received the report and
      in the light of any comments that Justice Taylor may
      make on the scheme.   By proceeding with the Bill now,
      we can put the framework for the scheme in place and
      make it possible to move on rapidly with the scheme, if
      Parliament agrees that we should do so when it has seen
      what Lord Justice Taylor has to say."
(Official Report, column 850).


Secondly, at the Committee stage on 6 July 1989, Mr Colin
Moynihan, the Minister for Sport, said:


      "I am certain that Lord Justice Taylor will feel in no
      way inhibited by consideration of the Bill in our
      suggested format, because we specifically amended the
      Bill to provide for the Secretary of State's approval
      of the scheme after the final report........the Bill is
      amended to enable the House to consider in detail the
      recommendations before we establish the Football
      Membership Authority to draw up the scheme...... To
      hypothesise on whether Lord Justice Taylor is in favour
      of a national membership scheme or whether he may not
      even comment on it, is totally irrelevant because the
      Bill provides for the House of Commons and House of
      Lords to consider the report before setting up a
      Football Membership Authority."
(Official Report, column 56).


17.   It must be a rare if not unique situation for a judge,
appointed to conduct an Inquiry, to have within his remit
consideration of the merits and provisions of an Act of
Parliament already in place.     It cannot be for a judge to opine
upon the wisdom or terms of an Act expressing the established
will of Parliament.    But, where Parliament has passed an Act in
such terms and upon such undertakings as expressly to provide
that the Inquiry judge be uninhibited in commenting upon it and
that Parliament should have the opportunity to consider his
comments in further debate, then I conceive it to be his duty to
express his views.    My doing so should not be interpreted as
showing any lack of the respect and deference due to Parliament.
Not to do so, against the background I have described, would
surely be thought surprising if not pusillanimous.


18.   In Part I of this Report I state some lessons to be learnt
from Hillsborough, examine the state of football today and
propose a range of measures to give it a better future.        In Part
II I consider, in detail, measures to improve safety at sports
grounds.   Part III is concerned with crowd control at sports
grounds and various strategies for dealing with hooligans.        In
Part IV I consider the provisions of the 1989 Act regarding the
national membership scheme.     Finally, at the end of the text, I
set out my Recommendations.     So as to avoid confusion, I have not
set out my Interim Recommendations for the purpose of comparison.
Hardly any excisions have been made.    Where I have decided to
repeat or amend the Interim Recommendations, they are included in
the single list of Final Recommendations.     I hope this report and
the Final Recommendations may be instrumental in promoting better
and safer conditions at sports grounds in the future.



18 January 1990                                 PETER TAYLOR
              PART I     FOOTBALL:   PRESENT AND FUTURE


                              CHAPTER 1
              THREE SOMBRE LESSONS AFTER HILLSBOROUGH


      i.   Previous Reports Unheeded


19.   It is a depressing and chastening fact that mine is the
ninth official report covering crowd safety and control at
football grounds.   After eight previous reports and three
editions of the Green Guide, it seems astounding that 95 people
could die from overcrowding before the very eyes of those
controlling the event.    In January 1986, Mr Justice Popplewell,
whose report following the Bradford Disaster was the eighth in
the series, summarised those of his seven predecessors.      The
Shortt Report of 1924 followed disorder at the Cup Final of 1923.
The Moelwyn Hughes Report of 1946 followed the disaster at Bolton
Wanderers ground when overcrowding caused 33 deaths.      In 1966 the
Government commissioned the Chester Report on "The State of
Association Football".    The Harrington Report of 1968 drew
attention to problems of crowd behaviour and led to the Lang
Report of 1969 on the same subject.     In 1972, Lord Wheatley's
Report on Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds followed the disaster at
Ibrox Park where 66 spectators died.      The McElhone Report of 1977
on Football Crowd Behaviour of Scottish supporters was
commissioned by the Secretary of State for Scotland.      In 1984 an
Official Working Group on Football Spectator Violence set up by
the Department of Environment presented a further report.


20.   As a result of the Wheatley Report, the first edition of the
Green Guide was issued in 1973, and Parliament passed the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975.    A second edition of the Green Guide
was issued in 1976 and a third edition in 1986 incorporated
recommendations made by Mr Justice Popplewell.


21.   Introducing his excellent and concise summary of the
previous reports, Mr Justice Popplewell said:
      "almost all the matters into which I have been asked to
      inquire and almost all the solutions I have proposed,
      have been previously considered in detail by many
      distinguished Inquiries over a period of 60 years".


Because his citations from those earlier reports are still highly
relevant, I append his summary of them at Appendix 4.


22.   In my Interim Report I set out what happened at Hillsborough
and why.    That it was allowed to happen, despite all the
accumulated wisdom of so many previous reports and guidelines
must indicate that the lessons of past disasters and the
recommendations following them had not been taken sufficiently to
heart.     I appreciate how easy it is to criticise with hindsight
and that a new situation can always arise in human affairs which
has not previously been envisaged.     But many of the deficiencies
at Hillsborough had been envisaged.


23.   The Moelwyn Hughes Report in 1924 had stressed the need to
start controlling the crowd well back from the entrance to the
ground.    The Green Guide required that "Turnstiles should be of
such numbers as to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly
large crowds are kept waiting for admission" (paragraph 44).
Chapter 8 of the Guide required "Arrangements should be made ...
to contain pressures before they reach dangerous proportions".
Chapter 16 laid down maximum capacity which was grossly exceeded
in the fatal pens at Hillsborough.     Both the Green Guide (Chapter
15) and Mr Justice Popplewell had stated the need for gates in
the perimeter fencing to be adequate to permit escape on to the
pitch in an emergency.     Why were these recommendations and others
not followed?     I suggest two main reasons.     First, insufficient
concern and vigilance for the safety and well-being of
spectators.     This was compounded by a preoccupation with measures
to control hooliganism.     Secondly, complacency which led all
parties to think that since disaster had not occurred on previous
occasions it would not happen this time.        But there is no point
in holding inquiries or publishing guidance unless the
recommendations are followed diligently.        That must be the first
lesson.


      ii*   "It Couldn't Happen Here"


24.   Amazingly, complacency was still to be found even after
Hillsborough.    It was chilling to hear the same refrain from
directors at several clubs I visited:-


      "Hillsborough was horrible - but, of course, it
      couldn't have happened here."


Couldn't it?    The Hillsborough ground was regarded by many as one
of the best in the country.    It was selected by the FA for the
Cup semi-final and thought by them to be entirely suitable.        The
identical fixture had passed off uneventfully the previous year.
I have little doubt that if the disaster scenario had been
described to the management at Hillsborough prior to 15 April,
they too would have said "Of course, it couldn't happen here".
Yet something like it had happened at Hillsborough in 1981,
albeit with less dire results.    Moreover, I am satisfied from
eyewitness accounts I have received that there have been many
other occasions when overcrowding has led, at various grounds
round the country, to a genuine apprehension of impending
disaster through crushing, averted only by good fortune.     I have
heard from Police Commanders at a number of the grounds I have
visited how relieved they are that capacities have been reduced
in the interests of safety.


25.   So, although the operational errors on 15 April were special
to one ground and one day, the lack of precautions against
overcrowding was not unique.     I do not believe that sufficient
safety measures were being applied at all other grounds.     The
lesson here is that Hillsborough should not be regarded as a
freak occurrence, incapable of happening elsewhere.     All those
responsible for certifying, using and supervising sports grounds
should take a hard look at their arrangements and keep doing so.
Complacency is the enemy of safety.
      iii. A Blight on Football


26.   Football is our national game.    We gave it to the world.
But its image in our country has been much tarnished.       In my
Interim Report I concentrated on overcrowding because it was the
cause of the Hillsborough disaster.     But wider and deeper inquiry
shows that overcrowding is only one feature amongst a number
causing danger or marring football as a spectator sport.       The
picture revealed is of a general malaise or blight over the game
due to a number of factors.     Principally these are:   old grounds,
poor facilities, hooliganism, excessive drinking and poor
leadership.     Crowd safety and crowd behaviour with which I am
concerned are closely related to the quality of the accommodation
and facilities offered and to the standards which are encouraged
and enforced.     So I think it necessary to consider all these
aspects.


Old Grounds


27.   Because we were first into the field, most of our football
grounds are now elderly.     Between 1889 and 1910, 58 of the clubs
belonging to the current League moved into the grounds they now
occupy.*      Many of them are ill-placed on cramped sites boxed
into residential areas.     When they were built, they were not
intended to cater for the stream of coaches, vans and cars which
now arrive and require parking space.     Inside the grounds decay
and dilapidation are often extensive.     The terrace accommodation,
in particular, is often uncovered and little has been done to
improve the layout in accordance with modern expectations.          This
is chiefly because the safety and comfort of those on the
terraces has not been regarded as a priority.     In fairness,
limitations of space at some grounds make it very difficult to
achieve a layout appropriate to present day needs.       By contrast,
clubs in Europe and South America have the advantage of grounds
built more recently on more spacious sites and planned to meet
modern conditions.     Where improvements have been made to our


       *Inglis:    Football Grounds of Great Britain p 10
grounds they have often been patchy and piecemeal.     This approach
is itself a threat to safety.     To build a seated stand over a
standing area, to enlarge or divide a terrace, to rearrange exits
and entrances or to modify turnstile areas - any of these
measures is fraught with safety implications.     Yet often such
changes have been made to achieve one purpose without sufficient
thought about the adverse side-effects which could result.


28.   This was exemplified by the sequence of alterations at the
Leppings Lane end at Hillsborough.     Radial fences were installed
to divide up the terraces;     this led to a reduction in the system
of crush barriers.   The area inside the turnstiles was altered
for purposes of segregation.     Old signs were not removed;   new
signs were inadequate.    The result was a bewildering complex
which contributed to the delivery of excessive numbers down the
tunnel into pens 3 and 4.


Poor Facilities


29.   Football spectators are invited by the clubs for
entertainment and enjoyment.     Often, however, the facilities
provided for them have been lamentable.     Apart from the
discomfort of standing on a terrace exposed to the elements, the
ordinary provisions to be expected at a place of entertainment
are sometimes not merely basic but squalid.     At some grounds the
lavatories are primitive in design, poorly maintained and
inadequate in number.    This not only denies the spectator an
essential facility he is entitled to expect.     It directly lowers
standards of conduct.    The practice of urinating against walls or
even on the terraces has become endemic and is followed by men
who would not behave that way elsewhere.     The police, who would
charge a man for urinating in the street, either tolerate it in
football grounds or do no more than give a verbal rebuke.      Thus
crowd conduct becomes degraded and other misbehaviour seems less
out of place.


30.   The refreshments available to supporters are often limited
and of indifferent quality.     They are sold in surrounding streets
                                  11
from mobile carts and inside many grounds from other carts or
from shoddy sheds.     Fans eat their hamburgers or chips standing
outside in all weathers.     There is a prevailing stench of stewed
onions.    Adequate numbers of bins for rubbish are often not
available;     so wrappings, containers and detritus are simply
dropped.     This inhospitable scene tends to breed bad manners and
poor behaviour.     The atmosphere does not encourage pride in the
ground or consideration for others.     I accept that many fans are
quite content to eat on the hoof when visiting a match, but there
is no reason why the fare available should not be wholesome,
varied and decently served from clean and attractive outlets.
Fast food establishments meeting these requirements are readily
to be found at railway stations and on high streets;        why not at
football grounds?


31.   At most grounds little attempt has been made to provide pre­
match entertainment.     To do so could have a double advantage.        It
would give the spectators more value for their money.        It could
also bring them in earlier thereby avoiding congestion at the
turnstiles in the last few minutes before kick-off.     Such
entertainment as has been tried has mostly failed to appeal to
the spectators.     They do not seem drawn by the musical offerings
of the disc jockey or by marching bands.     The football
supporters' organisations complain that supporters have not
hitherto been much consulted about this or about anything else
affecting their well-being and enjoyment.


32.   In giving this dismal account of the football scene, I have
taken care to use the words "often", "at most grounds" or "at
many grounds".     I acknowledge that there are notable exceptions
where great improvements have been effected and I do not suggest
that every disagreeable feature I have described is to be found
at every ground.     Nevertheless, the overall picture of conditions
and facilities to be expected by a standing spectator is
depressing.    It is in stark contrast to the different world, only
yards away, in the Board Room and the lucrative executive boxes.
I appreciate that they cater for an affluent clientele and bring
in much-needed revenue.    No one would expect or indeed want their
 plush carpeting or haute cuisine when visiting the terraces;        but
 accommodation and facilities     have often been below the basic
 decent standard necessary to give spectators dignity let alone
 comfort.


 33.   It is small wonder that attendances at matches gradually
 fell off from a peak of 77 million in the season 1949/50 to about
 20 million in the late 1980's.    No doubt other reasons played
 their part;    for example, the emergence of other spectator sports
 and television.   Until the 1960's most men worked on a Saturday
 morning and many went straight to the match in the afternoon.
 But the 5 day week together with increased car ownership made
 Saturday outings for the family a popular activity.     On top of
 these factors^however, the prospect of attending football in the
{^conditions I have described clearly became unattractive to many
 erstwhile supporters.   Added to this was the fear of disorder.
 So far, I have not mentioned the further indignities endured by
 supporters as a result of hooliganism and the measures taken to
 contain it.


 Hooliganism


 34.   During the 1970's, hooligan behaviour became a scourge at
 and around football grounds.     Rival fans abused and fought with
 each other on the terraces.    The pitch was invaded, sometimes to
 facilitate the fighting, sometimes in an attempt to abort a match
 by those whose team was losing and on occasions to display anger
 and seek to assault a referee or a player who had incurred
 displeasure.   Throwing missiles, either at a player or a
 policeman or at rival fans, became another violent feature.        When
 the police responded by searching fans for missiles on entry, the
 practice grew of throwing coins (which could not be confiscated).
 Sometimes the coins were sharpened in advance to make them more
 damaging.


 35.   Mass singing of traditional songs, some of nation-wide
 appeal, some local to the area or the club, had become a part of
 the terrace culture.    But the repertoire became augmented and
 degraded by abusive and obscene chants aimed at the referee or
the opposing fans.     A further nasty addition was racist chanting
aimed at any black player of either team.


36.   Hooliganism outside the ground also became rife.    Supporters
of rival teams abused and attacked each other.     Hooligan gangs
caused damage to trains, to buses, and to property on their
route.   Some deliberately went out of their way to rampage
through local shops, stealing, wrecking and intimidating as they
went - an activity known as "steaming".     After a match, rival
supporters would attack each other on the way home in the street,
in public transport or in public houses.


Segregation


37.   To contain and control these manifold forms of anti-social
and criminal behaviour there is now an elaborate complex of
measures.     The policy of segregation was born in the 1970's.
Gradually, it has called for more and more extreme and expensive
strategies by the clubs and the police.     As each measure taken
has been circumvented by determined hooligans, further measures
have had to be grafted on to the system.     Witnessing the full
florid exercise taking place every Saturday afternoon nowadays
makes one wonder how anyone could have contemplated going to such
lengths to facilitate the watching of football.     But nobody did;
it just grew.


38.   Clubs have sub-divided their grounds to keep rival fans
apart by putting fencing and sterile areas between them, by
screening them from inciting each other, by separate entrances
and exits and by perimeter fences round the pitch.     Many of the
fences are very high and are crowned with elaborate spikes and
barbed wire, the top sections being inclined inwards to prevent
their being scaled.     At some grounds a telescopic tunnel is
extended on to the pitch to protect the teams from missiles as
they come on or go off.


39.   The police start and finish their segregation exercise well
away from the ground.     Typically, special trains or coaches
carrying the away supporters are monitored en route.     The police
meet them and escort the fans with mounted officers, dog handlers
and foot officers, ensuring they go only to their allotted
section of the ground.    They are searched at the entrance for
drink or weapons (as are the home fans).     They are then confined
in an area caged by fencing for the duration of the match.         When
it ends, the away supporters are often held back for a quarter to
half an hour whilst the home supporters are dispersed.     They are
then escorted away in the same manner as they arrived and put
back on to their trains or buses.    Although the main body of away
supporters can thus be policed as a group, those who arrive
independently in cars or vans have freedom of manoeuvre.
Occasionally trouble makers get into the wrong area and a violent
episode occurs.    Again, the further away from the ground the
spectators spread, the less the police can do to prevent sporadic
confrontations.    By and large however, the police measures have
worked to prevent violent outbursts in and around the ground.


40.   But at what a price!   In addition to the poor facilities I
described earlier (which are often worse for away than for home
fans) the ordinary law-abiding football supporter travelling away
is caught up in a police operation reminiscent of a column of
prisoners of war being marched anddetained under guard.        I
watched the escort of Arsenal fans after a match at Stamford
Bridge.    They were held in the ground for thirty-five minutes
while the Chelsea supporters left.    They were then escorted by a
substantial body of police to Fulham Broadway underground
station.    There, to avoid overcrowding on the platform, they were
admitted to the station only in measured groups.     Special trains
were run to take them non-stop into the centre of the city to
avoid clashes at nearby stations.


41.   Clearly, the police with their great experience of
controlling crowds at the ground considered this strategy was
necessary in the present climate. Their views were confirmed         in
that despite their efficient and good humoured management of the
match and its aftermath, scuffles took place when some fans got
into the wrong section of the ground.    Moreover such police
practice is not unique to our country.     There are similar
hooligan problems for example in Holland.     I witnessed a very
similar operation carried out by the Dutch police at Utrecht to
control a train load of supporters from Eindhoven.


42.     Necessary though such operations may presently be, they do
nothing to enhance the image of football as a spectator sport
followed for entertainment and pleasure.     I know of no other
sport or entertainment in a civilised country in which it is
necessary to keep those attending from attacking each other.


43.     Apart from their impact on the spectator, operations to
control football crowds have other serious repercussions.        The
cost in money, manpower and disruption is enormous.     Last year,
the cost of policing football in London was some £10 million of
which only £1 million could be recovered from the clubs.
According to the Football Trust, who meet one third of the costs
of police charges incurred by clubs at matches for the Football
League, Scottish Football League and GM Vauxhall Conference, the
cost to clubs during 1988/89 was £4.79 million.     Since this
relates only to costs inside grounds which can be recovered by
the police, the total cost to the police service is substantially
more.     Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary for England
and Wales said, in his annual report for 1988, that:-


        "Football continues to be a focus for hooliganism ...
        demands on the police service continued at a high level.
        Typically, 5000 officers may be engaged on football duties
        on Saturdays during the football season."


The Home Office estimate that the total cost of deploying these
officers is perhaps £200,000 to £300,000 each football Saturday.
At many league matches, policing requires some 300 officers in
the ground with many more outside and others performing related
traffic duties.     At high risk matches, cup semi-finals and the
like, even greater numbers are deployed.     At Hillsborough there
were 800 officers in and around the ground.     Obviously officers
deployed to football cannot be performing police duties
elsewhere.     Although many are brought in on an overtime basis (at
a consequently heavier cost) police commitments to the community
elsewhere must be affected by the concentration of such numbers
in one place.


44.   When upwards of 40,000 converge on a ground in a residential
area the effect on the local community is very disagreeable.
Large numbers of fans chant in the streets, often offensively.
They invade gardens to urinate.     Empty cans and other garbage are
dropped in gardens, yards and in the street.     Shops may be
pillaged.   Traffic is congested or diverted.    Streets are filled
with parked coaches and cars.     Side-streets are cordoned off by
police to protect residents.    Recently, a police cordon was
thought necessary at a half mile radius round Highbury when
Liverpool visited Arsenal.     Residents had to establish their
identity.   The operation was successful in preventing disorder
but the need to conduct such operations and the resultant
disruption contributes to the poor image of football in the
community at large.


What does Segregation Achieve?


45.   Segregation, which is the main feature of present crowd
control policy, aims only to contain and control bad behaviour,
not to eliminate it.    Indeed, the very fact that rival fans are
separated tends to increase and polarise their hostility to each
other.   Segregation breeds an "us and them" attitude.    The
opposing supporters can be seen as a physically distinct group
upon whom animosity can be focussed.     Again, the knowledge that
the "enemy" is physically restrained from violent riposte may
encourage baiting and abuse which caution would otherwise deter.
There is force too in the view that if people are herded and
confined as potential offenders, that concept may in some cases
become self-fulfilling.    So, although segregation may have
appeared the only way to maintain the excitement of the
adversarial atmosphere at football grounds whilst keeping the
peace, it merely controlled the symptoms of hooliganism.        The
disease remained and may even have been intensified by the
segregation.    Other games have not resorted to it.   For example,
there is no segregation at rugby league matches although the
catchment sections of population, from which support is drawn
both to football and rugby league, seem similar.
Who are the Hooligans?


46.   In chapter 5 of his Final Report, Mr Justice Popplewell
exploded three popular fallacies about hooliganism.        First that
it is something new;      secondly, that it is only found at soccer
matches and thirdly, that it is a specifically English disease.
He went on to consider the nature of football hooliganism, the
characteristics of the hooligan, possible causes of hooligan
behaviour and experience in other countries.        I do not propose to
repeat his analysis.     Nothing has thrown any doubt on it in the
four years since he reported although much has been written by
journalists, academics and others.      I agree with him that there
is no simple explanation for all the misbehaviour attached to
football and there is no single remedy.      It is important,
however, to recognise the clear distinction between quite
different groups of hooligans.


47.   There are those who misbehave spontaneously in or around the
ground in response to some perceived grievance - a goal against
their team, a doubtful decision of a referee or taunting from
others.    But there are other groups who go out bent on causing
trouble for its own sake.      The latter were described by Mr
Justice Popplewell      as "the new hooligans".    Often they hold down
good jobs during the week, dress stylishly and detach themselves
from those fans with club scarves who travel on official coaches
or trains.     They plan their violence as a recreation in itself to
which the football is secondary or a mere background.
Unfortunately, these groups can foment trouble and galvanise
support from fans who would not otherwise misbehave.        Thus the
effect of the "new hooligans" can grow out of proportion to their
numbers.


48.   Mr Justice Popplewell summarised his conclusions as to the
nature and motivation of hooligan groups at paragraph 5.90 of his
Final Report as follows


      "I     (a)   That there has always been a group, albeit a small
             group who find violence attractive;     who currently find
             the football ground a convenient theatre for their
violence and the football match the occasion for the
display of their aggressive tendencies which on other
days and at other times they will be exhibiting in
public houses, the city centre or elsewhere.        Their
main target at football grounds is opposing fans.           They
choose to exercise that violence at a football match
for a number of simple reasons.     The date and place of
a match are fixed;     the nature of the opposition is
known;    its presence is certain, so is that of the
police.   Their own support is known.    Its presence too
is certain.   The battle lines can be drawn.       Thus plans
can be made well in advance for the particular acts of
violence that they intend to create.


(b)   And while there is a good deal of academic support
for the view that violence was at one time the
prerogative of the so called "rough" working class that
is no longer the complete picture today.     A majority of
today's hooligans no doubt do fit into that category,
but some do not.     They come from a variety of
backgrounds, many have reasonable jobs and earn a
proper living.


(c)   Whether they are motivated by the same reasons as
their predecessors can only be a matter of conjecture;
there seems little reason however to believe otherwise.


(a)   A second group imitates the first element I have
identified.   Thus those not particularly given to
violence witness violence in others and see it being
exercised, without let or hindrance.     People expect the
spectators on the terraces to behave in an aggressive
way and to use foul language.     It then becomes accepted
as the norm and thus becomes a part of the pattern of
life which would not be tolerated elsewhere.        This
knock-on effect can be seen in violence in the streets
of our cities, unconnected with football.
             (b)   The feeling of anonymity in the crowd gives rise
             to a loss of inhibition and self-discipline.     The
             association with those of similar disposition, the
             enthusiasm and the partisan support for the team, which
             itself causes an atmosphere, all create a situation
             which can readily give rise to violence.


      III    Then there is a third group (not always separate from
             the other two groups) who cause violence for a reason,
             either real or supposed.   It may be an inability
             quickly to get into the ground;     it may be the presence
             of rival spectators in a part of the ground to which
             the fans think they have a claim.


      IV     Finally there are those, the vast majority of
             spectators, who abhor violence and wish only for an
             afternoon of pleasure at a football match."


The oral and written evidence I have received, the studies and
reports     I have read on the subject and my own observations lead
me to agree entirely with that summary.        I would add only one
further element - alcohol.


Alcohol


49.   There can be no doubt that an excited and volatile crowd is
more difficult to control and more prone to disorder if it
includes numbers who have been drinking.        Drink is not a major
factor affecting Mr Justice Popplewell's group I.        Their violence
tends to be planned coldly and soberly.        But group II is often
rendered disorderly and more readily imitates the violence of
others because inhibitions are removed by drink.        Likewise, group
III responds to a grievance, is readier to take offence and
reacts more impulsively and violently because of drink.


50.   Drinking before matches increased in parallel with the
growth of hooliganism.     Before the 5 day week, those coming
straight from work to the football ground on a Saturday had
                                   20
little time to drink excessively.    During the 1960s and 1970s
young men in their twenties acquired a new affluence and spending
on drink increased.    The advent of the supermarket with an off-
licence provided numerous outlets for the sale of canned beer;
so it became easy to have alcohol at the match and on the way to
it, whether the local pubs were open or not.     Finally, apart from
time and liquor being available, there has developed an attitude
to drinking in the UK not found to the same extent elsewhere - a
cult of drinking to excess.    The spectacle of young fans, tanked
up with beer, whether near our own football grounds or (more
damagingly to our reputation abroad) at foreign football stadia
is all too familiar.    Yet, for example in Italy, the largest wine
producing country in Europe, football fans and indeed people
generally do not drink to get drunk.    Although they have their
own brand of hooliganism (from the "Ultras" as they are known)
alcohol is not a major factor.     Here it certainly is and it
remains so despite legislation banning sales or possession of
alcohol in football grounds and the carrying of alcohol on public
service and hired vehicles bound for such grounds.


Poor Leadership


51.   The hierarchy inside football has a number of levels over
and above the spectators.     At the top is the national management
of the game.   In England the Football Association is responsible
for the administration and welfare of all football down to the
lowliest amateur club and football in schools.     The Football
League is a separate body with responsibility for the 92
professional league clubs.     In Scotland and Wales there are
equivalent bodies.     Below that top management, each of the League
clubs has its own Board of Directors.     Then there are the
referees, the managers and the players.     Finally there are
organisations representing the supporters - the Football
Supporters1 Association and the National Federation of Football
Supporters1 Clubs.     One would have hoped that the upper echelons
in this hierarchy would have taken a lead in securing reasonable
safety and comfort for the spectators and in enforcing good
behaviour by precept and example.     Unfortunately, these hopes
have not generally been realised and indeed at times poor
examples have been set.


52.   The FA and the FL have not seen it as their duty to offer
guidance to clubs on safety matters.    In their written submission
they said:-


      "Of course, both The FA and The Football League are
      concerned to ensure that crowd safety standards are the
      highest reasonably practicable.   It is felt, however, that
      neither of these authorities should be charged with the
      responsibility of setting detailed safety standards or
      enforcing them."


They have been much concerned to avoid pitch invasions because
they interfere with the smooth progress of the fixture list and
incur criticism and penalties from the European football
authorities.   But advice, for example, as to turnstile lay outs,
the division of viewing areas and, until recently, on ratios of
seating to standing areas has not been forthcoming.   As another
specific example, in selecting Hillsborough as the venue for the
Cup semi-final, the FA did not consider in any depth whether it
was suitable for a high risk match with an attendance of 54,000
requiring to be segregated, all of whom were, in effect, away
supporters lacking week in week out knowledge of the ground.      No
special inspection was made;   no consultation with Sheffield
Wednesday or the local authority took place.


53.   As for the clubs, in some instances it is legitimate to
wonder whether the directors are genuinely interested in the
welfare of their grass-roots supporters.   Boardroom struggles for
power, wheeler-dealing in the buying and selling of shares and
indeed of whole clubs sometimes suggest that those involved are
more interested in the personal financial benefits or social
status of being a director than of directing the club in the
interests of its supporter customers.   In most commercial
enterprises, including the entertainment industry, knowledge of
the customer's needs, his tastes and his dislikes is essential
information in deciding policy and planning.   But, until
recently, very few clubs consulted to any significant extent with
the supporters or their organisations.


54.   Encouragement and indeed requirement of good behaviour by
the fans should be a prime aim of club management.      Here again
positive leadership has often been lacking and on occasions
counter-productive.   It cannot help to promote good behaviour if
a club chairman has his photograph in the programme presenting a
cheque for £750 by way of recoupment to a club player fined that
sum by the FA for misbehaviour on the pitch.     The same applies to
another chairman who extended a VIP welcome to home coming
"supporters" convicted of misbehaviour whilst attending a match
in Greece, even if he was sceptical as to the fairness of the
criminal process.


55.   Then there is what happens on the pitch itself.    Long
departed are Corinthian Casual standards;     accepting decisions of
the referee without demur;     affecting a modest diffidence on
scoring a sensational goal.     For many years now referees'
decisions have been regularly challenged by spread arms and
entreaties;   even an unsensational goal has caused the scorer to
be hugged and embraced all the way back to the centre spot.       The
cool self-control of Corinthian Casuals will never return.
Perhaps we should not lament its departure since there is no harm
in a reasonable show of joy in success.     But, more recently,
things have gone further.     On scoring a goal a player nowadays
often rushes straight towards the perimeter fencing and either
affects to climb it or, with fists raised and shaking, goes on
his knees to excite response from supporters.     Little has been
done to stop such demonstrations which are calculated to hype up
the fans into hysteria.


56.   At the other extreme from demonstrations of joy and triumph,
violence on the field of play by tackles aimed at opponents'
legs, stamping, elbowing and holding is commonly to be seen.
Until lately, the FA's response to such violence amongst players
has been weak.   Negligible fines on offenders, without penalty to
the clubs either in fines or loss of points, have tended to
discredit the FA's discharge of its disciplinary role.      In the
last couple of months, prompted by a series of much publicised
incidents and by media criticism, a firmer line has at last been
adopted.    These incidents have involved violent conduct by
players off the ball.     At the end of the match between Norwich
City and Arsenal on 4 November 1989, a number of players on both
sides were involved in an incident when punches were exchanged.
The referee said he was not going to make any report on the
matter.    The FA initially announced that if there was no report
from the referee there was nothing they could do.     However, wiser
counsels prevailed;     officials of the FA saw the incident on
video and decided to take action.     In the result Norwich City
were fined £50,000 and Arsenal £20,000.     Other incidents occurred
within days at three other grounds involving violence on the
field between players and, in one instance, managers.


57.   To complete this survey of the present football malaise, it
is necessary to mention the media.     Football is highly
newsworthy.    For the World Cup, provision is being made at the
San Siro stadium, Milan for no fewer than 5,000 journalists.           In
the domestic UK scene, the long haul throughout the season to
become League champions or Cup winners is followed not only by
the millions who actually attend matches but by many millions
more via the media.     They watch games and listen to the pundits
endlessly discussing them on television; they read about them           in
the newspapers and they fill in the football pool coupons.        So
players and spectators are exposed to constant scrutiny.       When
scuffles or fights occur, whether on the field or on the
terraces, they are inevitably witnessed by millions and such
incidents of bad behaviour are aggregated into a reputation
tarnishing the national game as a whole.     When our supporters go
to Europe, they are preceded by this reputation.     It is expected
they will behave badly, so whether they do so initially or not
they are likely to meet a hostile reception from their
counterparts.   Thus incidents are provoked and the syndrome
continues.


58.   I have sought in the broadest terms to identify those
features which disfigure football today.     But despite them, and
despite the decline in attendances from the peak years, the game
still commands massive public support and interest.    Indeed, in
the last couple of years there has been some increase in
attendances for reasons to be explored later.    After the horror
of Hillsborough and the analysis of football's troubles which it
has prompted, the lesson is surely that now is the moment for the
fullest reassessment of policy for the game.    Accordingly, before
considering detailed recommendations for securing a basic level
of safety and for improving crowd control, I think it appropriate
to consider how the low standards described in this chapter could
be raised.




                               25
                               CHAPTER 2


                   A BETTER FUTURE FOR FOOTBALL


59.   It is not enough to aim only at the minimum measures
necessary for safety.     That has been, at best, the approach in
the past and too often not even that standard has been achieved.
What is required is the vision and imagination to achieve a new
ethos for football.     Grounds should be upgraded.   Attitudes
should be more welcoming.     The aim should be to provide more
modern and comfortable accommodation, better and more varied
facilities, more consultation with the supporters and more
positive leadership.     If such a policy is implemented it will not
only improve safety.    There will also be an improvement in
behaviour, making crowd control easier.


60.   At some clubs changes have already been made towards
realising this new concept of how football should be.      For
example, at Ibrox Park, scene of the appalling disaster in 1971,
there has been a total transformation.     The old main stand
remains and still has some standing areas in front of it.         But
three new stands have been built round the rest of the ground.
They are colourful, convenient and are all^jseating.     They are
constructed so as to provide a covered concourse at first floor
level running the length of the stand.     At the rear of that
concourse throughout its length are modern lavatories for both
sexes.   At the front are attractive fast food service points
offering a good range of food and drinks (but no alcohol).         The
walls are clean;   the flooring is of studded rubber.     Mounted
overhead, at regular intervals of a few yards along the whole
concourse, are television sets tuned to a sports programme giving
information on the day's fixtures, excerpts from previous matches
and general sports coverage.     These arrangements encourage fans
to arrive in good time, to have wholesome refreshments in a clean
and pleasant setting, to enjoy on the television the kind of pre-
match entertainment which genuinely interests them, to visit a
                                  26
decent toilet, and then to walk up a few steps to take their
seats for the match.     All of this is under cover and it is
enjoyed not just by the affluent but by the ordinary supporter.
Significantly, the facilities are not abused.     Occasional
graffiti do appear but are wiped away promptly and the overall
impression is that if spectators are offered civilised conditions
they come to respect them.


All-seating


61.   There is no panacea which will achieve total safety and cure
all problems of behaviour and crowd control.     But I am satisfied
that seating does more to achieve those objectives than any other
single measure.


62.   It is obvious that sitting for the duration of the match is
more comfortable than standing.     It is also safer.   When a
spectator is seated he has his own small piece of territory in
which he can feel reasonably secure.     He will not be in close
physical contact with those around him.     He will not be jostled
or moved about by swaying or surging.     Small or infirm or elderly
men and women as well as young children are not buffeted,
smothered or unsighted by larger and more robust people as on the
terraces.     The seated spectator is not subject to pressure of
numbers behind or around him during the match.     He will not be
painfully bent double over a crush barrier.     Those monitoring
numbers will know exactly how many are there without having to
count them in or assess the density by visual impression.         There
will still, of course, be scope for crowd pressure on stairways
whilst entering and especially when leaving, but involuntary and
uncontrolled crowd movements occasioned by incidents in the game
are effectively eliminated.


63.   It is true that at moments of excitement seated spectators
do, and may be expected to, rise from their seats.      But the
moment passes and they sit down again.     I also recognise that
seating is only regarded as more comfortable than standing if
cover is provided.     The consensus is that, although standing on
                                  27
an exposed terrace on a wet day is disagreeable, sitting in the
rain is worse.     So, increased seating does require that cover be
provided.


64.   Apart from comfort and safety, seating has distinct
advantages in achieving crowd control.        It is possible to have
disturbances in a seated area and they have occurred, but with
the assistance of CCTV the police can immediately zoom in with a
camera and pinpoint the seats occupied by the trouble-makers as
well as the trouble-makers themselves.        Moreover, if numbered
tickets are issued to named purchasers, the police have a further
aid to identifying miscreants.


65.   Numbered tickets matching numbered seats also help to
identify forgeries.     Forged tickets for standing areas may not be
discovered.     In the past, they simply led to inflated numbers on
the terraces at all-ticket matches.     But there can only be one
valid ticket for each numbered seat and the existence of a
forgery is immediately exposed.


66.   The evidence I have received has been overwhelmingly in
favour of more seating accommodation.       At present, the ratio
throughout the 92 League clubs in England and Wales is about two
thirds standing to one third seated.        But whilst   most are in
favour of reversing that ratio, there are those who wish to
retain a proportion of standing room.        Amongst them are the FA
and the football supporters' organisations.        Essentially they
deploy three arguments.


67.   The first is an emotional one based on a desire to retain
the traditional culture derived from the close contact of the
terraces.     "My grandfather stood here;     my father stood here with
me;   why shouldn't I stand here with my son?", is a commonly
expressed view.    Moreover, to many young men the camaraderie of
singing together, jumping up and down, responding in unison to
the naming of the players, their emergence on to the pitch, the
scoring of a goal, an unpopular decision - all of these are an
integral part of enjoying the match.        They like being part of an
                                  28
amorphous seething crowd and do not wish to have each his own
place in a seat.


68.   The second argument is that conversion to all-seating will
reduce the numbers of fans who can be admitted to the ground;
so, many would-be spectators will be disappointed.     This assumes
a significantly greater density being permitted for standing
places than for seating.    It also assumes that the size of
present crowds regularly exceeds projected all-seated capacity.
But the FA's own evidence showed that during the 1988/89 season
the number of occasions when attendances at League clubs exceeded
projected all-seater capacity ranged from nil to 16.     The 16
attendances were at Liverpool, who have accepted the need for
all-seating.   For only three clubs in the first and second
divisions did the attendance exceed the projected all-seated
capacity on more than 10 occasions, and for 21 out of 44 clubs in
these two divisions the attendance never exceeded the projected
all-seated capacity.    In only one case (Liverpool) was the
average attendance during the season in excess of the projected
all-seated capacity.


69.   Finally, cost.   Spectators do not want to pay and, it is
argued, many could not pay the substantially higher price of a
seat as against the cost of standing.


70.   I am not convinced that the cherished culture of the
terraces is wholly lost when fans are seated.    Watching the more
boisterous and demonstrative sections at all-seater grounds, I
have noted no absence of concerted singing, chanting, clapping or
gesticulating in unison.    The communal spirit is still there and
finds ready expression.    To such extent as the seating limits
togetherness or prevents movement, that price is surely worth
paying for the benefits in safety and control.


71.   Moreover, the maximum density which experience now shows to
be acceptable in standing areas tends to take the force out of
the first two arguments.    If standing density is little more than
seating density, the melded mass previously found on terraces
                                 29
becomes more diffuse and the intensity of the togetherness
becomes little greater standing than sitting.        Likewise, at such
a density, the difference between the admissible numbers standing
and sitting become marginal.     It can be made up by having two or
more tiers of seating where previously there was only one tier of
standing.


72.   As to cost, clubs may well wish to charge somewhat more for
seats than for standing but it should be possible to plan a price
structure which suits the cheapest seats to the pockets of those
presently paying to stand.     At Ibrox, for example, seating is £6,
standing £4 - not a prohibitive price or differential.


The Trend in the UK


73.   The superior safety of seating has already persuaded a
number of clubs in the UK to convert their terraces to seating
either totally or predominantly.        Following Hillsborough,
Liverpool have announced their intention to adapt their famous
Kop to seating.     In Scotland, Aberdeen's ground at Pittodrie
became all-seater in 1978;     Clydebank followed suit;     St
Johnstone's new ground at Perth is all-seated.        Wembley stadium
will early in 1990 accommodate 80,000 spectators, all-seated.


74.   Those opposed to all-seating point out that previous
attempts to introduce it have met with spectator resistance.
Coventry City was the first English club to install seating
throughout its ground in 1981.     In 1983 the club reverted to
allowing 2,000 to stand.     In 1985, after visiting fans of
Manchester City tore up seats and used them as missiles, the
ground reverted to standing.     Queen's Park Rangers also moved
towards all-seated accommodation but removed some seats under
pressure from supporters.


75.   Since then, however, Hillsborough has happened;       thinking
has changed;   responsible comment by government, football
authorities and media has prepared the way for change.           Moreover,
there are now seats available which cannot be manually torn and
used as missiles.     Those at Utrecht, for example, have survived

                                   30
intact for seven years despite usage and deliberate experimental
tests of their strength.


76.   It is possible that in the early stages of conversion there
may be instances of fans standing on the seats or in front of
them because they are used to standing or in order to register a
protest, but I am satisfied that in England and Wales as in
Scotland and abroad spectators will become accustomed and
educated to sitting.    The evidence I have received shows that
more recently, where seating has been installed, the fans have
come to accept and like it.    At Ibrox Park, for example, the
seated areas are the most popular and tickets for them sell in
preference to those for standing.     Significantly, trouble from
misbehaviour and physical injuries have been reduced since most
of the crowd became seated.     Such trouble and accidental injuries
as still occur are primarily in the remaining standing areas.        It
is planned to convert them to seating in the near future.


Sir Norman Chester Centre Research


77.   The Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football Research,
attached to the University of Leicester, is funded by the
Football Trust.     In November 1989 the Centre undertook a survey
of registered members of the Football Supporters' Association to
discover the views of committed football fans on a number of the
issues after Hillsborough which are covered in my Report.      The
extension of seating was one such issue.      Numerous questions were
asked on a number of different hypotheses.      The Report states
that substantial majorities in the sample were in favour of
maintaining the status quo on the seats/terraces balance at their
own clubs.   However, the Report continues:


      "53.6% claimed they would actually support the drive for
      more seating (sic) if they were reasonably priced and
      covered.    The addition of these last two points -
      concessions on price and cover - also seemed to have
      dramatic effects in reducing levels of opposition to the
      prospects of all-seated facilities as we shall see later".
When all-seating was put to the sample there was a majority
against it, but the Report goes on:


      "Finally, and perhaps significantly, opposition in our
      sample to the introduction of all-seated facilities
      diminishes considerably when one introduces provisos on
      price and protection from the elements.   When this is done,
      more people in our sample support all-seaters than oppose
      them."


Europe


78.   The trend towards seating is even stronger in Europe and is
now being driven by decrees of both national and European
football authorities.


79.   In Italy the imminence of the 1990 World Cup competition has
forced the pace of progress.     The Italian Ministry of the
Interior decreed on 25 August 1989 that for open air facilities
with a capacity of more than 10,000 spectators at football games
and for covered ones with a capacity of more than 4,000
spectators no standing will be allowed after 30 April 1990.
Those facilities must have only numbered seats each not less than
0.45 metres wide.   The San Siro stadium in Milan will by then
seat 85,000 spectators;   the Olimpico stadium in Rome will seat
87,000.


80.   In Holland, Utrecht's ground built in 1982 has seating for
12,000 and standing room for 8,000.     The club already intended to
convert the latter to seating.    However, on 6 December 1989 the
Dutch equivalent of the FA (the KNVB) agreed with the Dutch clubs
to cut the standing capacity of football grounds by 10% each year
over the next decade so as to render football stadia in the
Netherlands in effect all-seater at the end of the 1990s.


81.   In following this phasing Holland's policy is in accord with
a resolution presently under consideration by UEFA (Union des
                                  32
Associations Europeennes de Football).      The resolution proposes
that for the 1990/91 season only 80% of the standing tickets may
be sold, that figure to be reduced every season by 10% until
1999.


82.     FIFA (Federation Internationale de Football Association)
passed a resolution on 26 July 1989 providing that as from the
preliminary competition for the 1994 World Cup (starting in
autumn 1992) "matches may in principle only be played in all-
seater stadia".      The resolution went on "as from 1993 it will be
the duty of the Confederations and National Associations to hold
high-risk matches in their zones only in all-seater stadia."
High-risk matches are defined under UEFA Regulations as follows:


        "I    All UEFA final and semi-final ties of the UEFA club
              competitions as well as final tournament matches of the
              European Football Championship.


        II    When declared as such by UEFA on the basis of previous
              incidents of supporters of one or both teams or of
              other exceptional considerations.


        III   When it is expected that visiting team supporters will
              exceed 10% of stadium capacity or will exceed 3,000
              persons.


        IV    When full capacity stadium is expected or more than
              50,000 spectators present.


        V     When the match is likely to attract a large number of
              emigrants/foreign workers originating from the country
              of the visiting team, who live either in the country
              where the match is being played or in neighbouring
              countries."


Thus world and European football authorities are clearly
determined to enforce the conversion of stadia to all-seating, so
far as international matches and other matches under their
control are concerned.     It is true that their resolutions will
not be binding in regard to League or domestic football matches.
But they are a pointer in the direction of safety and control and
as such have been emulated by Italy and Holland domestically.


83.   Furthermore, I am told by the FA that they regard themselves
as duty bound to follow, in the domestic football scene, any
Resolution passed by FIFA although strictly such Resolution is
binding only in international matches or matches between UK clubs
and clubs from abroad.     Thus, the FA regard the Resolution of 26
July 1989 as effective in relation to the League, Cup and other
domestic fixtures from 1993 onwards.      The Resolution does not
force clubs to install all-seating as a condition of staging high
risk matches.    There is still the option to use only those parts
of the ground which have seating.      Clearly, unless these are
substantial, attendance will be much reduced.      One would
therefore expect the major clubs to adapt their grounds to
accommodate the maximum seating they can manage by the time the
Resolution takes effect.     Smaller and more impecunious clubs may
prefer to postpone conversion.     However, if a small club with
little seating accommodation draws a large first division club at
home in the Cup in 1993 (a high risk match) it will be able only
to use its limited seating accommodation or the game will have to
be played at a better equipped ground elsewhere.


The Football Spectators Act 1989


84.   The intention to follow this same trend was stated by your
predecessor, Mr Douglas Hurd, in a statement to the House of
Commons two days after Hillsborough.     He added:-


      "This would involve the disappearance of terraces at (major)
      grounds.   It might also involve amendments to strengthen the
      Football Spectators Bill so that its provisions for the
      licensing of grounds matched this concept".


In the event, machinery for implementing increased seating is to
be found in section 11 of the 1989 Act.     There, provision is made
                                  34
for the Football Licensing Authority (set up under section 8) to
be directed by the Secretary of State to include in any licence
to admit spectators a condition imposing requirements as respects
the seating of spectators at designated football matches at the
premises;   "and it shall be the duty of the authority to comply
with the direction".


Association Football only or Designated Grounds?


85.   In considering seating and standing, I have concentrated so
far on association football because it attracts the largest and
most volatile crowds and has been troubled with misbehaviour.
But should recommendations about seating be confined to
association football or should they go further?     Wherever a line
is drawn complaint may be made that it is illogical, but two
possibilities seem more logical than most;     either to confine
recommendations to the 92 clubs in the Football League or to
apply them to grounds designated under the 1975 Act as amended.
The latter course would include a number of Rugby League, Rugby
Union and cricket grounds.   I acknowledge that so far, happily,
misbehaviour at those grounds has been minimal.     However, even
leaving aside possible misbehaviour, where there are large
numbers there is a risk of overcrowding.     A well attended Rugby
match of either code may attract numbers in excess of those
attending many Football League matches.    There would seem little
reason for requiring a fourth division League club to convert to
seating whilst permitting major Rugby clubs to keep their
terraces indefinitely.


86.   On the other hand, proposals for all-seating would clearly
be inappropriate in relation to sports events at which spectators
are accustomed, and should be entitled, to move about.     For
example, at horserace meetings, spectators may wish to view
horses in the paddock, place bets, view races from different
vantage points and enjoy the other facilities of what is a social
occasion as well as a sports event.   Other examples of events at
which spectators move about and should be free to do so are
greyhound racing and golf tournaments.
                                35
87.   The criteria for designating a sports ground under the 1975
Act as amended are laid down in section 1(1);


      "The Secretary of State may by order designate as a sports
      ground requiring a certificate under this Act (in this Act
      referred to as a "safety certificate") any sports ground
      which in his opinion has accommodation for more than 10,000
      spectators."


Section 1(1)(A) permits the Secretary of State to substitute such
other number as he considers appropriate for the number 10,000.


88.   Clearly the purpose of such designation is to bring safety
of grounds with capacity for substantial numbers under the
control of the local authority.   Whilst some grounds with a
capacity of more than 10,000 may currently have an average
attendance of only say 3,000, there is always the prospect of a
visit from a large club, an attractive Cup draw, or an upturn in
fortunes bringing in larger crowds.   Safety provisions must be
capable of coping with such events.   Indeed, danger is more
likely to result if there is an occasional match with a large
attendance than if such matches were regular since those
controlling it and those attending it will be inexperienced.


89.   For these reasons, I think recommendations to increase
seating should be applied to all designated grounds.    I
appreciate that the machinery provided in section 11 of the
Football Spectators Act 1989 can be used only to regulate the
extension of seating at association football grounds.   However,
the Secretary of State has power under section 6(2) of the 1975
Act as amended, to provide for securing safety by regulations and
may prescribe terms and conditions to be inserted in safety
certificates under section 15A as indicated in the next chapter.
These powers could be used, even without the provision in section
11 of the 1989 Act, to prescribe mandatory rules about seating.
So, by a combination of his 1989 Act powers and his 1975 Act
powers or solely by exercising the latter, the Secretary of State
can require the progressive extension of seating at designated
grounds.


90.     I therefore conclude and recommend that designated grounds
under the 1975 Act should be required in due course to be
converted to all-seating.     I do so for the compelling reasons of
safety and control already set out;     also, so far as association
football is concerned, because the present trend at home and
abroad and the rules of the world and European football
authorities make the move to all-seating irresistible.


Phasing


91.     Unless some time factors are specified, progress towards
all-seating may well be protracted.     This is recognised in the
phasing proposed in the UEFA Resolution quoted above and in the
machinery set up in section 11 of the Football Spectators Act
1989.


92.     For high risk association football matches I welcome and
endorse the adoption by the FA of the FIFA Resolution requiring
no standing tickets to be sold after 1993 and its application to
domestic fixtures.


93.     As to other matches, I consider that without the impetus
locally of the World Cup, which is the spur for speedy change in
Italy, and having regard to the present state of our grounds, it
would be asking too much to require conversion in the UK in the
next two or three years.     For all grounds designated under the
1975 Act except for first division and second division League
grounds, and national stadia, I think a timing along the lines
suggested in the Resolution under consideration by UEFA (and now
adopted in Holland) is reasonable ie that standing tickets should
be reduced by 10% per year starting with a 10% deduction
effective from August 1990 and so be phased out by August 1999.


94.     However, I recommend that grounds in the first and second
divisions of the League and national stadia should be all-seated
by the start of the 1994/1995 season.     It is at those grounds

                                  37
that the larger crowds attend and, in the interests of both
safety and crowd control, I consider they should have seating for
all spectators in five years rather than ten years.     The
reduction in standing tickets should therefore be at 20% per
annum from August 1990 and be complete by August 1994.        Any club
promoted to the second division of the League should be given a
reasonable period in which to comply.     A similar approach should
be adopted in Scotland.


Planning Ground Improvements


95.   Increased seating and other ground improvements will require
expert planning and much finance.    As to planning, it is crucial
that before clubs embark upon major work, they should have the
best information and advice on modern ground design.     Conversion
to seating cannot necessarily be achieved merely by fixing
seating onto existing terraces.     For example, sight-lines, access
to seats, gangways, roof cover and other factors may require more
extensive changes to the layout.     Some clubs may be able wholly
to redevelop their existing grounds;    others may be limited by
space, finance or crowd needs to more modest alterations.        In
some instances, the best course would be to move to a new site
either alone or in conjunction with another club.     Ultimate
decisions on these options must be for the club management.           No
doubt, some of the bigger clubs will be able to engage the
foremost contractors in this field to advise them and carry out
the work.   But even for them, and certainly for the lesser clubs,
it would be of great value to have a body fully apprised of the
latest developments in ground design, capable of giving expert
advice on possible schemes and on ways and means of achieving
them.


An Advisory Design Council


96.   I therefore support the suggestion of Professor Maunder's
Technical Working Party that there should be established an
Advisory Design Council to fulfil this role.     It should, in my
view, be set up by the FA and the FL whose functions should
include offering a service of this kind to the clubs.     By way of
analogy, in Italy this function is exercised by the Comitato
Olimpico Nazionale Italiano (CONI).    After studying many grounds,
including those in Madrid, Vienna and Athens, CONI produced an
excellent pamphlet on "Design Criteria for Safe Comfortable and
Large Sports Facilities" supported by detailed studies showing
how they can be achieved.     These, together with models which may
be inspected at CONI's headquarters in Rome, show how a modern
stadium can be designed from car park to pitch so as to secure
safety and crowd control.


Research


97.   It has come to my attention only recently that the Sports
Council published in 1981 a "Handbook of Sport and Recreational
Building Design", and in 1989, a work entitled "Arenas, a
Planning, Design and Management Guide".     The 1981 work included,
in volume three, studies on outdoor sports stadia.     The 1989 work
concentrated on indoor stadia.     It seems that neither of these
works was sent to the FA or the FL, nor have they acquired them.
Again, in July 1986, the Institution of Structural Engineers
formed an ad hoc committee "to bring together all current
technical knowledge relevant to the appraisal of sports grounds
and their individual elements.     The committee's task was to
establish a fully referenced body of knowledge within three years
which would be complementary to the 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds'."     The ad hoc committee has prepared a fifth draft of
its report which will be finalised after the recommendations in
my Report have been considered.


98.   It is highly desirable that such worthwhile research as I
have mentioned should all be brought together to achieve maximum
benefit.     With a formidable building and conversion programme for
football grounds ahead, an Advisory Design Council set up by the
FA and FL could make the best use of all available research here
and abroad to assist and advise clubs.


Finance


99.   The scale of the changes I recommend will necessarily
require heavy expenditure, albeit over an extended period.        It is
not my function to make detailed proposals for financing the
work.     That is for football management and essentially for the
clubs.    However, lest it be thought that I have made proposals
regardless of feasible funding, I ought to indicate sources and
methods of finance which should make the improvements
practicable, and some of the fiscal arguments which have been
addressed to me.


The Football Trust (FT) and the Football Grounds Improvement
Trust (FGIT)


100.        Assistance in financing safety measures is presently
available from the FT and the FGIT.     The former is funded by the
three major pools companies (Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters)
from the "Spot the Ball" Competition, at the rate of 21% of
turnover, yielding over £9 million a year.     The total given to
British football since 1958 now approaches £120 million.     The
Trustees are empowered to use their funds to promote measures for
the control or suppression of unruly behaviour in relation to
football;     to assist clubs to meet the obligations of the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975;     to improve grounds and facilities
for those who play and watch the game and for any other purpose
they consider to be a benefit to the game of football in Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.     The FT allocates just over half
its income (ie over £4.5 million) to assisting expenditure by
league clubs on ground safety and improvements.     This is done
through the FGIT, a second independent trust.      The FGIT was
established in 1975, the arrangements being modified later in
1979 when the FT was brought into being.


101.        Although it helps to fund many other works, from those
at international grounds down to those at the lowliest clubs, the
Trust continues to give first priority to assisting expenditure
essential to the grant of a safety certificate for a designated
ground.     Under its trust deed, the FGIT is able to make grants of
up to 75% of the total cost available to clubs carrying out work
as a necessary condition of their being given a safety
                                  40
certificate under the 1975 Act.     Accordingly, should my
recommendation of mandatory increases in seating be made a
condition of the safety certificate, the work would be eligible
for a grant from the FGIT.


102.        However, even at £4.5 million a year, the FGIT fund
would be insufficient.     Additional financial requirements fell
upon the League clubs on the implementation of the 1975 Act and
still more after the fire at Bradford City's ground in May 1985.
By February 1988 over £37 million had been paid out in grants.
Pressures on finance led to the suspension of improvement grants
in June 1987.    The FGIT was able to reintroduce improvement grant
aid on a limited basis during the closed season of 1988.
However, the range of works required to upgrade the League
grounds inevitably means that resources of the FGIT would be
spread quite thinly.     They will not be sufficient to finance the
kind of improvements I have suggested, but the Trust provides a
structure for doing so.    By way of example, Sheffield Wednesday
received a grant of £595,000 for the improvement of the Kop end
at Hillsborough.    This was in addition to some £431,000 given to
the club for a total of 21 safety projects between September 1978
and October 1988.    Even so, funds of this order will be
insufficient to build new all-seated stands.     How then, can
additional revenue be generated?


Fiscal Considerations


103.        Three arguments have been addressed to me by the
football authorities suggesting alterations in tax structure to
make funds available for ground improvements.     Fiscal policy is
for government and ultimately Parliament to decide, not for a
judge.    All I can usefully do is to set out the arguments.



(a)    VAT on the Spot the Ball Competition


104.        The Football Trust have suggested that if VAT were
abolished on receipts from this competition, some £5 to £6
                                  41
million would be available.     This would amount to a direct
subsidy from the Treasury.     It would be contrary as I understand
it not only to present government thinking but to long
established principles of fiscal policy.     If that is so, a
different and perhaps more propitious approach would be for the
FA to urge the Pool Promoters Association (PPA) to increase their
contribution as part of a strategy to ensure the healthy
development of the game from which the PPA makes its money.


(b)     Pool Betting Tax


105.         A second case made by the FA is for a reduction in Pool
Betting Tax now standing at 42^%.     The suggestion is a reduction
to 40% which would yield some £16 million.     This, it is said,
could be passed on to assist ground improvements in one of two
ways:     either the Government could continue to tax pool betting
at the current level but make a donation to football equivalent
to 2^% of the tax recovered, or it could reduce the tax rate to
40% on the strict understanding that present proposals as to how
any reduction of the 42^% might be used were amended to allow
football to derive the entire benefit from the money thus saved
by the pool companies.


106.        The FA seek to support their argument by reference to
the structure of tax on horse racing.     They claim the comparison
shows football to be unfairly treated.     In horse racing, the duty
on off-course betting is 8%;     on-course betting is not now taxed.
There is a Horserace Betting Levy which goes to the improvement
and maintenance of race courses.     However, the comparison between
football pools and racing is not of like with like.     The
relationship of stakes to winnings is different.     The Football
League presently receive £14 million a year from the PPA for the
use of its fixture list.     There is no payment similar to this in
racing.     Nor is there an equivalent in racing to the Football
Trust or the FGIT.     The Horserace Be,tting Levy is essentially
based on voluntary agreement and is not regarded by the Treasury
as a tax.     There could be no basis for a levy on football pools
unless there were agreement between the PPA and the Football
League.


107.      For these amongst other reasons, the racing analogy may
not add weight to the FA's argument on pool betting tax.
However, apart from that analogy, the FA submit there is a strong
case for some reduction of the 42^% tax.   The Chester Report of
1968 recommended the establishment of a football levy.     The
Rothschild Royal Commission on Gambling recommended in 1977 a
reduction in the pool betting tax from the level at that time of
40% to 37% to establish a levy board.   The FA and the FL do not
favour the creation of a football levy board.    They consider that
the Football Trust and the FGIT are appropriate bodies to receive
and administer any money accruing to football were a reduction
made in the pool betting tax.     I can only say that    the casefor a
modest reduction in the pool betting tax which convinced the
Rothschild Commission in 1977    is arguably stronger    now thatthe
rate stands at 42^%.   It must   in general be for commercial
undertakings to be self-financing.    This applies throughout the
entertainment industry of which football clubs are a part.       The
football authorities appreciate and accept that they must find
the necessary funding substantially from their own resources.
Nevertheless, if grounds all over the country are to be upgraded
and in some instances re-located so as to achieve safety for
spectators, improvement in the quality of life for residents near
grounds and a reduction in the expensive police commitment to
controlling matches, it can be argued there is a case for
financial assistance, if not by direct subsidy then by some tax
reduction.


108.      Whether or not the FA's argument for tax reduction
finds favour, there may well be scope for reassessing and
possibly increasing the contribution made by pools to football.
It would not matter whether such contribution is to be by
voluntary levy, by an increase in the present percentage rate on
receipts from the Spot the Ball Competition or by increasing the
amount paid for the use of the fixture list.



                                 43
(c)    Capital Allowances


109.        Complaint   ismade that no capital allowances can be
claimed against tax     inrespect of ground improvements.


110.       When asked why they seem ready and able to spend         large
sums, sometimes into millions of pounds, for a single player in
preference to spending money on improving their grounds, the
clubs usually give two reasons.


111.       First, the attendance and satisfaction of their
supporters depends essentially on success;      so buying a brilliant
player has priority over ground improvement.


Transfer Fees


112.       They say the popular perception of transfer fees         as
excessive and extravagant is mistaken.      The money, I was told
again and again, simply circulates round the League clubs.           It is
calculated to bring on budding players.      The level of payments is
high, but it is forced up by prices continental clubs with huge
financial backing (like Juventus from Fiat) are able to pay.


113.       The "circulation" argument runs like this.       First
division club A buys an ace player for £1 million from club B.
This enables club B     to buy three players at, say, £250,000 each
from three other clubs,     C, D and E.   Clubs C, D and E each buy
two up-and-coming but not yet arrived players from lesser clubs
for perhaps £100,000 each.     So the process and the prices
continue downwards eventually enabling the poorer clubs to keep
going by cashing in on players they have trained from scratch.
Meanwhile, to finance their £1 million purchase, club A may sell
two or three players who are past their best to lower division
clubs.    This analysis may well have some validity, but there are
notable exceptions.     For example, when a French club bought a
player from an English club for over £4 million the money had not
been circulating round the League clubs.
A Levy on Transfer Fees?


114.      Even if the "circulation" argument has some validity,
the fact remains that transfer fees have reached a level which
many regard as grotesque and certainly out of all proportion to
the amounts spent on ground improvement.     There is a case for the
football authorities imposing a levy on such fees, the proceeds
going to the FGIT to fund ground improvements.     I suggest
consideration be given to this.


Tax "Anomaly"


115.       Secondly (and this is the tax argument) football clubs
have a strong fiscal inducement to spend on players rather than
ground improvements.     Payments for players are allowable revenue
expenditure.     Improvements to the ground are not.   In Brown
(Inspector of taxes) v Burnley Football and Athletic Company Ltd
1983 AER 244, it was held that expenditure on a new stand to
replace an old unsafe one did not qualify as an allowable
deduction whether as a repair or as provision of plant.        It is
arguable that a fiscal provision which penalises the
redevelopment of grounds whilst encouraging the payment of huge
transfer fees is an anomaly, that it sends the wrong signals to
clubs, and that it encourages them to neglect questions of safety
in favour of promoting success on the field.     To accede to this
argument might fall foul of the maxim that hard cases make bad
law.   But as a matter of policy, it is argued that the
encouragement of expenditure on ground improvements by a fiscal
concession may well bear re-examination.


Club Financing


116.       Whatever may come from the Pools Promoters Association
via the two Trusts, or from any tax concession, in the end the
bulk of the finances for ground improvement must be raised by the
clubs themselves.     Here, clubs are at a disadvantage compared
with their European counterparts.     On the continent most grounds
are owned by local authorities which lease them to the clubs.
They are regarded as providing a communal facility and often the
stadium is available for a variety of sports and other functions;
sports facilities and offices are built into the stadium complex.


117.         Nevertheless, there are ways of financing improvements
if the club management is enterprising and resourceful.
Sponsorship is one.     Presently it brings £17.5 million into
football annually.     Advertising on electric score boards and on
hoardings round the ground as well as on tickets, programmes and
membership cards is another.     Associated companies marketing
sports wear and other merchandise with the club's logo, the sale
of television rights, the issue of debentures, and the sale of
shares to the public are other methods which can be and have been
used.    In particular, I would expect the football authorities to
seek the highest possible price for television rights.        Under
current contractual arrangements, the Football Association
receive some £6 million pa from the sale of television rights for
domestic broadcasts, of which some £2.5 million is distributed to
clubs.   They also receive between £0.75 million and £1 million
for the sale of television rights overseas.     Separate
arrangements apply at Wembley.     The Football League contracted
some two years ago to sell the television rights for League
matches for £11 million, linked to the Retail Price Index.        The
television companies know that football on the screen has a vast
following.     They should be expected to pay a substantial price
for the rights to relay popular matches.     For their part, the
football authorities should ensure that this valuable source of
revenue is directed towards     improving stadia as a high priority.


118.         The cost of covered seating throughout the 92 clubs in
the Football League has been investigated by the FA.        Whilst the
assessment can only be a rough estimate and is subject to
fluctuations due to inflation and other factors, the consultants
suggested that to install seating throughout all the grounds
might cost about £30 million.    To provide cover over all those
areas could cost a further £100 million.     It should be noted
however, that no breakdown of that figure is given.        Moreover, it
assumes "all existing uncovered standing capacity should become
covered".     Given current attendances, it would seem unnecessary
that all that capacity should be covered.     In many instances,
attendances are always well below the permitted capacity of the
ground.    In those cases, a much smaller scale solution involving
the rebuilding or redevelopment of only part of the ground would
be sufficient.     There would be little point in providing covered
seating accommodation throughout a ground if there is no
realistic possibility of more than half of it being used.         Costs
may therefore be less daunting for the smaller clubs than the
consultants' estimates suggest.


Upgraded Stadia or New Stadia


119.       At major grounds where substantial resources can be
generated, vast improvements can be made on existing sites if
there is sufficient space.     I have seen a number of imaginative
examples of ground redevelopment.      It has been achieved at Ibrox
Park and is in the course of being achieved at Old Trafford,
White Hart Lane and Hampden Park, to give only four examples.


120.       However, I agree with the evidence from the Sports
Council as to the need for space to facilitate car parking,
external and internal circulation and sufficient exits and
entrances to the spectator areas.      They said:-


       "The location of many existing football grounds in central
       city or town sites precludes this provision (of space) which
       implies the adoption of a gradual but progressive policy of
       disposing of grounds in densely developed areas and
       replacing the facility on the urban periphery.    The Council
       believes that opportunities exist for such developments on a
       self-funding basis in many instances.    This would also
       provide the opportunity for more than one club to be based
       at newly developed stadia constructed to a high
       specification and built to meet new demands for safety and
       comfort".


St Johnstone


121.        I was impressed by the way this had been done at three
particular grounds.    At St Johnstone in Scotland, the solution

                                  47
has been to involve private capital directly.     The 'ASDA'
supermarket chain bought the site of the old St Johnstone
Football Club in the centre of Perth, redeveloped it as a
supermarket, and built the club a brand new all-seated stadium
for 10,000 spectators on the outskirts of the town.     The site
was, in effect, donated by a local farmer.     It is close to a
motorway exit and provides for extensive car parks     I accept that
this confluence of factors might not be easy to reproduce
elsewhere.      In particular, land prices in some areas would be
prohibitive and planning permission very difficult to obtain.       A
greenfield site is likely to be in a conservation or green belt
area and the choice of sites is limited by the need to make the
ground accessible to townsfolk albeit outside the town.


Utrecht


122.         I saw two examples abroad where these problems had been
tackled resolutely.    At Utrecht an old stadium on the outskirts
of the town was totally redeveloped on the same site ostensibly
at nil cost.    The contracting company which rebuilt the stadium
(Ballast Nedam) is now in consultation with 11 clubs in England
and Scotland with a view to building similar projects in
partnership with the Football Association and British Aerospace
of which it is a subsidiary.    Their concept involves the
recognition that in the past, for all but a handful of days in
the year, a stadium complex has usually and wastefully lain
deserted.    At Utrecht the stadium is owned by the municipality.
The space underneath the stands and in the corners of the ground
has been developed to provide accommodation for commercial use.
The rent provides the municipality with sports accommodation
which pays for itself.     Some 6,000 square metres of commercial
working areas and 24,000 square metres of commercial offices have
been incorporated into the complex.     The commercial uses of this
accommodation include office accommodation, snack bars, sports
facilities, photocopying and office equipment services, a driving
school and a hairdresser.     The large parking area is used except
on match days as a "park and ride" facility for those working in
the more congested areas of the city.     The advantages for
business are that shops and offices enjoy a prestigious high
profile address with all necessary services and facilities.        For
the community, the commercial stadium serves as an arena both for
trade and recreation.     Appendix 5 is a photograph showing the
stadium with the commercial infill in the corners and out into
the car park.


Nimes


123.         The stadium at Nimes in Southern France is also owned
by the municipality .     It was built recently on the outskirts of
the town with extensive parking and good access to road
communications.     The cost was some £17 million of which £16
million came from the municipality itself.     The justification for
this expenditure of public funds is the belief that the stadium
is a communal asset.     It provides not only a stadium for football
or rugby but an extensive range of other sports facilities built
into the complex.     These include a gymnastic hall capable of
hosting international matches, an "omnisport" hall for tennis,
basket-ball and volley-ball, a judo hall, facilities for fencing
and billiards, and a large exhibition hall which, at the time of
our visit, had just been used for a car sales exhibition.


Local Authority Assistance


124.         All these three stadia are on a comparatively small
scale.   St Johnstone seats 10,000.    Utrecht accommodates 20,000
and Nimes about 28,000.     I accept that in the current financial
climate and with our different approach to communal funding,
local authorities are unlikely to be able to provide subsidies
for such stadia, although local authorities do subsidize, for
example, swimming baths, theatres and other leisure facilities
which may serve fewer of their citizens.     However, clubs which
wish to move from centre town sites to new sites on the outskirts
of town may well be able to find a purchaser as St Johnstone did
with ASDA.     Likewise, those who wish either to build a new
stadium on the outskirts or to redevelop their stadium in town
may be able to do so in a way which incorporates space for
commercial lettings.


                                  49
125.         In such situations, although the local authority may be
unable to assist with finance, it could play a useful role in
bringing parties together and as planning authority.        It could
take a favourable view, for example, of a planning application
which involved the provision not only of a communal sports
stadium but of further facilities, whether for sport or
otherwise, benefitting the community as a whole.     There has
recently been a number of attempts by clubs to find greenfield
sites for new grounds only to be turned down at each attempt on
planning grounds.     Clearly, an application for a football ground
in a conservation area or green belt poses planning problems.
But, although the protection of such areas is an important
principle, two other considerations may also carry weight.
First, that the quality of life of residents living adjacent to a
football ground in a town would be much improved by resiting it
elsewhere.     Secondly, that if we want safety and improved
standards at grounds there are some clubs which will need a new
site at which to achieve them.     To this end, local authorities
should surely give what assistance they properly can.       One useful
example of the mutual assistance which a club and a local
authority can give each other is an agreement made between
Millwall and the London Borough of Lewisham.     The latter agreed
to pay £70,000 a year to the club which for its part agreed inter
alia to make the ground available for various activities
beneficial to the local community.


Ground Sharing


126.         Whether or not income-earning facilities are
incorporated into a sports ground, it seems uneconomic that the
stadium itself should be used by only one club, in effect once a
fortnight.     The cost to each club both of upgrading or building a
stadium and of maintaining it could be halved if sensible sharing
arrangements could be made.     But there is resistance to this.       A
number of cities have two clubs,    each with its own ground. Such
is local rivalry that the idea of ground sharing seems anathema
to many.     Yet, faced with the expense of seating and ground
improvement, it would make financial sense.     Opposition to
sharing an entirely new ground may be marginally less than to one
club sharing another's existing ground.    Recently Mr Peter
Robinson, Chief Executive of Liverpool FC, was quoted as saying:


       "if someone were to build a high-quality stadium on
       Merseyside, we and Everton would be quite happy to share it
       - even though the idea might not appeal to the fans at
       first".


If two clubs could sell their inner city grounds with planning
permission, the resultant capital would go a long way to building
a modern shared stadium on a more suitable site.


127.       It works abroad.   AC Milan and Inter Milan share the
San Siro stadium.    In Turin, Juventus and Torino also share.
Genova and Sampdoria provide a third example.


128.       As long ago as 1981, in the Sports Council's Handbook
of Sports and Recreational Building Design, Volume Three (Outdoor
Sports) ground-sharing was considered in a technical study of
stadia.    The author, Mr Faulkner Brown wrote at page 24:-


       "Several courses would appear to be open to football clubs.
       One is that they might rationalise their position and,
       wherever possible, jointly use a single stadium.    This could
       happen at Sheffield, Nottingham and Bristol.    Fulham could
       move in with Chelsea and Brentford with Queens Park Rangers.
       Inter-Milan and AC Milan, for all their deep rivalry, do
       live happily enough together in the giant San Siro stadium.
       The British clubs could all retain their identity, halve
       their overheads and realise handsomely the value of their
       freehold properties, if they could cope with their fiercely
       held views of club individuality and club pride.


       Another alternative would be, where possible, for clubs to
       offer unused land adjacent to the stadium for development
       and, in realising the assets from the land, to plough them
       back into the cost of stadium reconstruction.   This, of
       course, has happened at Lord's and is having some noticeable
       effects at the Oval and in other county cricket grounds.
       A further alternative is to build additional sports
       facilities alongside the stadium, not necessarily in
       emulation of the ancient Greek example (but nevertheless
       there is a parallel), so that a large number of sports clubs
       could use all the facilities.   This scheme has been
       developed to some extent both in the United States and on
       the continent."


Super-Stadia


129.        So far, I have referred only to club grounds.     But
there is a case for having a small number of super-stadia capable
of accommodating very large crowds for international matches or
major cup ties.    At present, the only such stadium in the UK is
Wembley which will accommodate 80,000 all seated.     Like Wembley,
any other stadia of large capacity could be available not only
for football but for other sports, for pop concerts and other
large events.


130.       The same consortium which built the Utrecht stadium
(Ballast Nedam, British Aerospace and the FA) is presently
considering the building of a new national stadium at Birmingham
to accommodate 100,000.    There is a suggestion that this project,
if carried through, would provide a replacement for Wembley.
However, it may well be that there is room for both.      This would
give a venue in London and a venue in the Midlands for major
events.    Hampden Park has served as Scotland's international
football ground for many years and when planned improvements are
complete it should continue to do so.     It is arguable that one
more large stadium may be required in the north of England but
the upgrading of a ground such as Old Trafford might well suffice
to achieve this purpose.


Leadership and Example


131.        I turn from stadia and money to one aspect of football
which gives wide scope for improvement at very little cost.         Much
is written about the misbehaviour of spectators;    but
misbehaviour is often imitative.     Hooligans in the crowd find
others who will copy them.     Similarly, incitement from the pitch
or bad behaviour by players has a malign influence on the crowd.
For many fervent followers, the men on the pitch are heroes to be
revered and emulated.     After a goal, when the scorer demonstrates
to the fans behind the fencing, the resultant surge forward and
hysteria is bad for safety and bad for crowd control.        It should
not occur.     Worse still, when players fight, the fans follow
suit.   Lest anyone doubt this, the recent examples of fighting
between players bear it out.     In two of the four incidents in
November 1989, crowd misbehaviour resulted directly from fighting
between players.     At Highbury, fans came out on to the pitch to
join in.     At Upton Park, scuffles between Wimbledon and West Ham
players provoked surging, fighting and coin throwing on the
terraces.


132.         It is in the first instance up to the players
themselves, then the referees, the managers and the club
directors to stop both incitement and violence by players whether
on or off the ball.     The referees, managers and directors have
power to do this.     If and when they fail to use it, the FA must
take a firm disciplinary line using their very full powers to
fine those involved including the clubs and to penalise the clubs
in points.     If all else fails, there is no reason why violence on
the pitch should have any immunity from the law of the land or
from police action.


133.         On the positive side, management could do much to
create a better atmosphere in the grounds by what they say and
what they write in programmes and magazines.     By consulting with
supporters they could enlist the goodwill and help of the decent
majority to isolate and rebuff misbehaviour from the minority
rather than imitate it.     A campaign for better behaviour could be
launched by the clubs through their literature and backed by
managers and players using their popular hero appeal.


134.         I should add that violence on the pitch is not confined
to soccer.    There has been a growing incidence of stampings and
punchings in Rugby Union games even at the highest level.
Reaction from referees, clubs and even international selectors
has tended to play such incidents down.    Although spectator
behaviour has not, as yet, been adversely affected by such
incidents, the authorities ought to deal firmly with them before
that happens and in any event, simply because violence should be
put down.


Family and Membership Areas


135.        Much progress has been made at a number of clubs
recently in bringing women and children back to watching football
by creating separate family areas.     Similarly, partial membership
schemes have enabled clubs to reserve parts of the ground
exclusively to members.     This has had the dual advantage of
creating areas of reliable good behaviour and offering discounts,
favourable travel facilities and other benefits to members.      The
good behaviour depends on those who pay for membership being more
likely to be responsible and upon their risking loss of
membership if they transgress.


136.        At a number of grounds, family areas have been de­
segregated in the sense that families drawn from away supporters
have been permitted to share family areas with home supporters.
I have already indicated how segregation has tended to worsen
hostility between rival fans.     It is difficult once segregation
has been practised to dispense with it, certainly at a stroke.
These joint family areas may prove to be the first step in a
retreat from segregation.     If the process can be extended
gradually to allowing members of the visiting club to share the
membership area of the home club, useful progress will have been
made.   It will be made easier if there is seating rather than
standing.


The Disabled


137.        I received evidence from the Royal Association for
Disability and Rehabilitation (RADAR) and the Access Committee
for England drawing attention to the opportunity which
redevelopment of grounds presents to make better provision for
disabled people.    Many clubs already make provision for the
disabled but this is by no means universal.      Particular attention
is needed to the provision of safe and adequately spacious
viewing areas for wheelchair users, with a seat alongside for a
companion, protected from the weather, accessible to toilet
facilities designed specifically for the disabled, and easily
reached from a car park (with reserved car spaces for orange
badge holders) by means of ramps.      The needs of other disabled
people - those who have difficulty walking, the partially
sighted, and those with impaired hearing - require special
attention, for example by the provision of handrails, clear
signposts, steps painted in bright colours, and the use of
electronic scoreboards to supplement loudspeaker announcements,
if these people are to be able to attend sporting events
enjoyably and safely.     I endorse the importance attached to these
suggestions and I hope that the comprehensive improvements which
I am proposing will include careful attention to them.      Clubs
should regard them as integral to their planning, not as an
optional extra.


Conclusion


138.         I hope in these two chapters I have made it clear that
the years of patching up grounds, of having periodic disasters
and narrowly avoiding many others by muddling through on a wing
and a prayer must be over.    A totally new approach across the
whole field of football requires higher standards both in bricks
and mortar and in human relationships.




                                  55
                  PART II - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


                               CHAPTER 3
                             THE FRAMEWORK


Minimum Standards of Safety


139.        It is a truism that safety and crowd control are inter­
dependent.     If a crowd gets out of control safety will be in
jeopardy.     Measures to control the crowd, such as fencing, almost
always have an impact on safety.     Nevertheless, I shall seek to
treat each separately.     In this Part I shall deal with management
and features of the ground affecting safety.


140.        I have already stressed the need for football
management to give higher priority to the safety and well-being
of spectators.     Clearly, the cost of safety measures and
improvements can more easily be borne or raised by the successful
clubs than by those struggling to keep going.       But the safety of
spectators invited to a ground cannot be left to depend upon the
affluence of the club.     There must be prescribed minimum
requirements which have to be fulfilled at any ground if
spectators are to be admitted there.       The evidence of practice
pre-Hillsborough and indeed post-Hillsborough, right up to
December 1989, convinces me that the provisions presently in
place, statutory and otherwise, have not been strong enough to
enforce that basic level of safety.


Legislation for Safety


141.         The principal instruments aimed at achieving a
framework for safety are the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as
amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
and the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green
Guide).


142.         The 1975 Act, as amended, requires a safety certificate
to be issued by the local authority in respect of designated
sports grounds.    It is an offence (Section 12(d)) to contravene
any term or condition of the certificate.       Thus the requirements
of the certificate are mandatory but what those requirements
should be is in the discretion of the local authority.


143.       Section 2(1) of the 1975 Act provides


       "A safety certificate shall contain such terms and
       conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
       expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it
       is in use for the specified activity or activities, and the
       terms and conditions may be such as to involve alterations
       or additions to the stadium."


144.       Originally, certain obligatory terms had     to be inserted
in safety certificates.   Section 2(2) provided


       "Without prejudice to subsection (1) above,    a safety
       certificate -


       (a) shall specify the maximum    number of spectators to be
       admitted to the stadium;


       (b) may specify the maximum number to be admitted to
       different parts of it;     and


       (c) shall include terms and conditions


            (i) as to the number, size and situation of entrances
            to and exits from the stadium or any part of it
            (including means of escape in case of fire or other
            emergency) and the means of access to any such
            entrances or exits;


            (ii) requiring those entrances, exits and means of
            access to be properly maintained and kept free from
           obstruction;   and
             (iii) as to the number, strength and situation of any
             crush barriers."


However, when the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 extended the application of the 1975 Act from sports stadia
to all sports grounds, there was substituted for section 2(2), by
section 19 of the 1987 Act, a new section 2(2) and a new section
15A giving power to the Secretary of State by order to lay down
what terms and conditions a safety certificate shall include.          No
order has yet been made but guidance from the Home Office has
recommended local authorities to approach their function under
section 2(1) in accordance with the criteria in the superseded
section 2(2).     (See Home Office Circular 71/1987 dated 25
November 1987, Annex A, paragraph 6.)


145.         So, presently, local authorities are not bound to
include terms or conditions on any particular aspect of safety in
the certificate.     In practice, they no doubt follow the Home
Office guidance.     They also take account of the Green Guide.


Green Guide


146.         The latter, however, is by way of guidance only.     It
provides as follows


       "6.   Deviations from individual guide lines are possible
       without necessarily detracting from the overall safety of
       the ground.   The variety of type, function and layout of
       sports grounds and the inter-relationship of the different
       parts of them means that a flexible approach should be
       maintained to take account of the particular circumstances
       at individual grounds".


Such flexibility is obviously highly desirable in relation to
some aspects of the guidance.     But flexibility can become
degraded.     Where a local authority has chosen to incorporate the
criteria of the Green Guide into a safety certificate there has
been scope for considerable deviation from provisions which ought
to command standard adherence.     Thus, for example, at
Hillsborough where the safety certificate required compliance
with certain Green Guide recommendations and a departure was
shown to have occurred, the defence was that the Guide expressly
provided for flexibility so that a deviation from its provisions
was a matter of legitimate discretion.


147.      In view of this and evidence I have received suggesting
that the Green Guide may not be followed as closely as is
desirable, I consider that when it is revised it needs to be
given more effect.    At present there is a risk of slackness
developing in the absence of any mandatory provisions.     There
would appear to be two alternative courses open.     It would be
possible to make the terms of the Green Guide mandatory
throughout.     However, I think that this could be too rigid and in
relation to some peripheral matters impractical.     The other
course is to make some of its provisions obligatory inclusions in
the safety certificate.     I prefer this.


148.      There are some requirements of such crucial importance
to safety that it should be mandatory for safety certificates to
specify them.     I consider those specified in the original section
2(2) of the 1975 Act fall into this category.     Moreover, so far
as the original section 2(2)(b) is concerned "shall" should be
substituted for "may".     This is critical to ensuring that no
discrete area becomes overcrowded.


149.      Accordingly, I recommend that the Secretary of State
exercise his specific powers under section 15A or his general
powers under section 6(2) by order or regulation to achieve this.
In specifying the requirements in the certificate, for a
particular ground, the local authority should follow the Green
Guide criteria;     but once that is done and the appropriate
figures and terms for that ground have been decided no room
should be left for flexibility.     By the stage when the local
authority has specified the requirements in the certificate,
flexibility has been exhausted.
150.         Where a local authority incorporates any other
provision of the Green Guide into the safety certificate it
should make it clear whether that provision is to be complied
with absolutely or with discretionary flexibility.      For example,
paragraph 88 of the Green Guide provides that a ramp subject to
heavy crowd flow should preferably not exceed a gradient of 1 in
10.    Should a local authority require in a Safety Certificate
that a club comply with a Green Guide recommendation as to
gradients it should make clear whether it restricts gradients to
a maximum of 1 in 10 or whether it leaves flexibility to the
discretion of the club.


151.         In putting the responsibility for the safety
certificate upon the local authority, Parliament no doubt had two
sound reasons;     first, since all sports grounds differ in their
layout and environs, local knowledge ought sensibly to be
utilised in laying down and monitoring terms and conditions;
secondly, a local body can respond quickly to any problem which
may arise.     Nevertheless, there are two aspects of such local
administration which can cause problems.


(i )   The Advisory Group


152.         The issue, review and enforcement of safety
certificates should be based upon efficient professional
inspection and opinion and should be conducted in a businesslike
manner.    In Sheffield, the safety certificate procedure both for
Hillsborough and for Sheffield United's ground at Bramall Lane
was unsatisfactory as I indicated in paragraphs 150 to 158 of my
Interim Report.     I hope that this was exceptional.   It is
important that there should be a safety team consisting of
appropriate members of the local authority's own staff,
representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services
and of the building authority.     What name is given to this group
does not in the end matter.     At Sheffield it began by being
called the Officer Working Party.     When Sheffield City Council
took over from South Yorkshire County Council, the name was
changed to the "Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group", or the
Advisory Group for short.     In my interim recommendations (Number
17) I said an Advisory Group should be set up.      I had in mind the
type of safety team already referred to.     Apparently, in some
quarters, it was thought that I was suggesting a second body
called an Advisory Group to advise the safety team.      This was not
so.    Also, in that recommendation, I suggested that
representatives of the club and of a recognised supporters1 club
should be members of the Advisory Group.      I have reconsidered
this in the light of evidence and advice received.      The
responsibility for the safety certificate is exclusively that of
the local authority.     I therefore think that the correct course
is that representatives of the club and of a recognised
supporters' organisation should be consulted, since they may have
relevant suggestions or criticisms to make, but they should not
be full members of the team.


153.       I repeat my recommendation that the Advisory Group's
terms of reference should encompass all matters concerned with
crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance at matches.    There should be a chairman from the local
authority, and an effective procedure.      Resolutions should be
recorded and regular written reports should be required for
consideration by the local authority.


(ii) A Review Body


154.       The other disadvantage of safety certificates being
issued locally is that different standards may be applied by
different authorities even in practically identical situations.
A safety team, or some very influential member of it, may be much
stricter in one place than the comparable authority elsewhere.        I
have had complaints that since Hillsborough measures appropriate
to a larger ground have been rigidly and inappropriately enforced
at grounds with negligible attendance.      Conversely, it is
possible that too indulgent or lax an approach may be adopted or
develop in a particular locality.      Again, simply left to solve
their own problems, there would be little opportunity for local
                                  61
authorities to learn from comparison with solutions adopted
elsewhere.     In these circumstances, it has been suggested that
there should be a National Forum in which local authority teams
could meet periodically to discuss and compare their procedures,
and that there should be a national overseeing and inspecting
body to monitor and review the consistent discharge by local
authorities of their certificating duties.     Having discussed this
with local authority representatives both in England and in
Scotland I am satisfied that two approaches are not necessary.
The better course is to have a National Inspectorate and Review
Body.   This is now provided for in the Football Spectators Act
1989 by section 13.     It is there laid down that the Football
Licensing Authority shall have the function of keeping under
review the discharge by local authorities of their functions
under the 1975 Act.    The FLA may, having consulted the local
authority and certain local officers, require terms and
conditions to be included in any safety certificate.     The section
empowers any inspector appointed by the FLA to make inspections
and inquiry as necessary.    The local authority may by notice be
required to furnish the FLA with information regarding its
discharge of its 1975 Act functions.


155.      I warmly welcome the appointment of a national body to
conduct these inspecting and reviewing functions.     Assuming it
successfully discharges those functions, the effect should be to
improve the efficiency and consistency of practice with regard to
the issue and review of safety certificates.     This would be
enhanced if the review body were to circulate, to all local
authorities from time to time, advice based upon their experience
of problems and solutions at various grounds.     (See also
Recommendation 16 of the report of the Technical Working Party at
Appendix 3).


156.      Because the Football Spectators Act 1989 applies only
to association football, the inspecting and reviewing role of the
FLA would be exercisable only in relation to Safety Certificates
at football grounds.    Nevertheless, this remit of the FLA should
be extended to cover all grounds designated under the 1975 Act
and indeed all grounds requiring Safety Certificates or licences
under Parts III and IV of the 1987 Act.      Should Part I of the
1989 Act either not be implemented or be substantially delayed,
the same functions should be given to another suitably
constituted body to cover all sports grounds.


157.        it has been suggested that the Health and Safety
Executive could fulfil this function if necessary or indeed that
it could monitor spectator safety under the provisions of the
Health and Safety at Work Etc Act 1974.      However, its resources
would need to be increased.     Moreover, until now the Health and
Safety Executive, being primarily concerned with the safety of
employees pursuant to the 1974 Act, has not extended its
surveillance to include spectators at football grounds.       The Home
Office evidence on this point is as follows:


       "The Health and Safety at Work Act could also be used
       to force general spectator safety at sports grounds.
       Section 3 of the Act is wide ranging in that it places
       a duty on an employer to conduct his undertaking in
       such a way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably
       practicable, that persons not in his employment may be
       affected thereby are not exposed to risks to their
       health or safety.   A sports or other entertainment
       "undertaking" would fall within this category.
       However, it is the stated policy of the Health and
       Safety Commission that, as a general principle, they
       and the Executive wish to avoid duplication of
       enforcement with other authorities.    The HSE would not
       therefore generally attempt to enforce the requirements
       of Section 3 of the 1974 Act when they overlap with
       duties imposed by other more specific legislation where
       other authorities have responsibility for policy and
       enforcement.   The Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975
       represents more specific legislation and the Health and
       Safety Executive does not enforce Section 3 of the 1974
       Act to secure the safety of spectators at sports
       grounds.   This arrangement is agreed between the Health
       and Safety Executive and the Home Office."


                                  63
                               CHAPTER 4
                        SUBSTANTIVE PROVISIONS



158.        Having considered the framework for safety provided by
the statutory provisions and the Green Guide, I must now deal
with certain key substantive provisions.


Capacity


159.         I accept the Technical Working Party's statement that
"the safe allowable capacity of any viewing area whether seated
or standing is the least of (i) its holding capacity,      (ii) the
number of persons who can leave through a normal exit system
within a prescribed time at the end of an event,      (iii) the number
of persons who can leave through an emergency exit system within
a prescribed time and (iv) the number of persons who can be
admitted through the turnstiles serving that area within one
hour."     The "prescribed time" for normal exit is said in
paragraph 230 of the Guide to be 8 minutes.      The "prescribed
time" for emergency exit is not definitively fixed in the Guide
as it will vary from area to area.      It will need to be determined
by the local authority on advice from the Advisory Group and
especially the fire service.


160.         Subject to factors (ii),   (iii) and (iv), where there is
a properly designed seating area, capacity is simply determined
by the number of seats.     Increasingly, therefore, problems of
maximum capacity will fade out as seating is phased in.       But, as
long as we have standing areas, grounds will be vulnerable to
overcrowding and maximum limits must be set and achieved.


161.        The Green Guide provides in paragraphs 221 and 222 for
a maximum density of 54 persons per 10 sq metres assuming a
terrace or viewing slope in good condition.      For some reason, not
easy to understand, the Guide also provides the lower figure of
27 persons per 10 sq metres when the slope or terrace "materially
deviates from the recommended guidelines so as to constitute a
possible hazard to individuals closely packed".       This might be
taken to imply that whatever the hazards there is no need to
reduce capacity below 27.     In the heading to Chapter 16, the
Green Guide emphasises that "account should be taken of the
features of the individual ground, its configuration, general
condition, use and any deviations from the Guide's provisions."


162.         It became clear from evidence before me at both stages
of this Inquiry that not only was the maximum of 54 per 10 sq
metres grossly exceeded at Hillsborough;       insufficient was being
done generally to ensure either by counting or by informed
assessment that the Green Guide criteria were observed.
Accordingly, I reaffirmed the advice in the Guide and recommended
that a reduction of 15% be made as an interim measure to improve
the safety margin.     The question now is what should be the final
recommendation on this difficult subject.


163.         I entirely agree with the Technical Working Party that
there is no benefit to be gained from retaining the lower figure
of 27 or any other minimum figure.       Indeed, it could be a
dangerous suggestion.     The scale of permissible density should be
from 0 up to the maximum figure applicable only in good
conditions.     I note the Technical Working Party's view that "a
uniformly distributed density of 5.4/m2 should be safe in static
conditions in full compliance with the Green Guide" .      However,
the words I have underlined are crucial to their view.       It is one
thing to place 54 docile people evenly in an area of 10 sq metres
on a terrace and say they should be safe.       It is quite another if
they are excited, if they sway or surge to and fro, if one end of
the area is a better viewing point than the other and if account
is taken of possible incidents in the crowd eg a scuffle or a
firework.     Any of those factors can cause bunching;   bunching can
quickly become crushing.


164.         Most clubs have responsibly applied the recommended 15%
reduction.     Some have jibbed at it;   understandably, in view of
its impact on revenue.     On the other hand, as I have already
observed, some Police Commanders expressed relief that numbers
have been reduced.    I must also point out that, even whilst the
reduction has been in force, events have shown how easy it is for
crushing to occur.


165.       At the start of the 1989/90 season, on 19 August,
Coventry were at home to Everton.     There were complaints
afterwards of congestion and     crushing before the match outside
the turnstiles and after the     match as spectators pressed to get
out.


166.       Even more worrying was an incident on 9 December at
Ayresome Park when Middlesbrough were     at home to Leeds. I have
not conducted a full inquiry      into the incident having no remit to
do so.   But I have received a full report from the police.       I
have also viewed more than once a video film of what happened.
It was horribly reminiscent of Hillsborough.


167.       The following facts are clear.    Leeds supporters had
been allocated, as a standing area, a wedge-shaped pen "D" at the
south east corner of the ground.     It was flanked by a narrow
sterile area on each side.     There was a broad gangway running
from top to bottom of pen "D".     The perimeter fencing at the
front of the pen was topped with spikes.     There was not a single
gate to the pitch.   The only way out for those at the front was
by a gate at each side into the sterile area and thence through
another gate to the pitch.     Those gates were closed during the
match.   The capacity of the pen in accordance with my interim
recommendation was 2108.     Leeds supporters were admitted to the
pen, families with very young children being put at the front.
The gangway was not kept clear.     Some Leeds supporters managed to
get tickets for the opposite home end of the ground causing
apprehension of trouble.     A number of them were taken out and
moved into pen "D" from the pitch side.     Other Leeds fans with
tickets for the wrong end were also allowed into pen "D" from the
back.    Shortly after the match started, there was distress among
those at the front of the pen.     After two surges down part of the
pen where there were no barriers from front to back, the police
had to assist in getting spectators, especially children, out of
the pen.     This was done principally over the fencing although the
side gates were opened and shut a number of times.     In the event,
14 people had to be treated for minor injuries in the ambulance
room.     Five spectators, three of them children aged 10, 11 and
12, were taken to hospital with chest injuries, lacerations and
bruising.


168.         The local authority, the police and the club were
clearly shocked by this incident and have taken prompt remedial
action.     Additional crush barriers are to be installed,
additional gates are to be provided including one for pen D, the
capacity of that pen is to be halved.     Admission to all parts of
the ground, save the visitors' section (pen D), is to be for
members only to prevent away supporters buying tickets for the
home end.     Finally, there is to be a phased programme which will
extend seating to all spectators by 1991/1992.


169.         This incident and its aftermath prompt the query:     does
there have to be a disaster or near-disaster at each ground to
trigger radical action?     I hope not.


170.         The permitted capacity of the pen was exceeded,
although it is not clear to what extent.     The police view is that
it was only by about 60 persons.     In a sense, the smaller the
excess the more the point is made that danger can occur very
quickly on a standing terrace even with moderate numbers.        Some
argue that reducing numbers and giving spectators more room
simply enables a surge to gather greater momentum;     that the
tighter people are packed together the less the scope for surging
or misbehaviour.     This was the philosophy which allowed excessive
numbers to be packed into pens prior to Hillsborough.        The only
sensible conclusion is that unless both numbers and terrace
layouts are strictly controlled, there will always be a risk of
crushing on a standing terrace.     The combination of numbers,
excitement and partisanship, even leaving aside misbehaviour, has
a potential for danger.


171          Comparison with criteria adopted abroad is instructive.
France and Belgium adopt the Green Guide figure of 5.4/m2.     But
in Holland, the maximum standing capacity is 4/m2.     In Italy, the
rule varies between municipalities.     In Milan the figure is 2/m2.
In Rome it is 4/m2.     But in Italy little difference is recognised
in principle between the figures permissible for standing and
those for sitting.


172.         Weighing all these factors I do not think it would be
right to recommend a substantial departure from the effect of the
15% interim reduction.     Now, rather than take a figure and deduct
a percentage from it, what is required is a specific figure for
maximum standing density when terrace conditions are good by
Green Guide criteria.     I recommend that that figure should be 47
per 10 sq metres and I would substitute 47 for the figure of 54
in the Green Guide.     The effect is approximately a 13% rather
than a 15% reduction from the former figure of 54.     I wish to
stress as forcefully as I can, however, that this figure is a
maximum and it is for the local authority acting on the
recommendation of its Advisory Group to make necessary and
realistic reductions from that figure in respect of any feature
of the terrace which deviates significantly from Green Guide
criteria or has any other significant shortcoming.


Counting Them In


173.         It is no use fixing a maximum capacity for a pen or
enclosure unless there are reliable means of ensuring it is not
exceeded.     I therefore repeat my recommendation that the number
of spectators entering each self-contained pen or other standing
area must be limited electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing
arrangement, by counting or otherwise.     The best arrangement is
one which makes all facilities for a single viewing area self-
contained;     access should be through turnstiles solely serving
that area via a concourse doing likewise with its own toilets and
refreshment points.     This point has already been clearly made in
paragraphs 101 and 206 of the Green Guide:-


       "Each section should ideally be self-contained and should be
       serviced by its own entrance/exits, refreshment facilities
       and toilets."


That way the numbers can be accurately recorded at the turnstiles
on entry and no extra spectators can get into the area from
elsewhere at half-time or after visiting common toilets or snack­
bars .


174.       Arrangements must be made to close off further access
to each pen or area when maximum capacity is about to be reached
and to close the turnstiles leading to the relevant area.


Gangways


175.       The Green Guide, in paragraphs 97 to 99, makes
recommendations as to gangways as follows:-


       "Spectators should be discouraged from standing in lateral
       gangways because this disrupts free movement about the
       ground (or within sections of it).   Also, spectators on the
       terrace steps behind the gangway may have their view
       obstructed, which will cause them to stretch and strain, and
       so generate dangerous pressures within the crowd.
       Spectators would be discouraged from standing in these
       gangways if they were sunk from 100mm to 200mm and if crush
       barriers were provided behind but not immediately in front
       of them.


       Similarly, spectators should be discouraged from standing in
       radial gangways.   These are relatively long and uncontrolled
       downward paths through terraces, and are difficult to keep
       clear, especially when sited in popular viewing areas, eg
       behind the goal area at a football ground.   It is helpful to
       sink them 150mm to 200mm and to interrupt an otherwise
       continuously descending gangway by turns along, say, lateral
       gangways.


       Where sinking gangways, lateral or radial, is not thought to
       be practical, their boundaries should be highlighted with
       paint and spectators advised by signs not to stand there.
       Stewards may be needed to enforce this instruction."


176. In my view these provisions need to be much tougher.        I
agree with the Technical Working Party that gangways should be
kept clear.     There is no point in having them, in calling them
gangways and in excluding them from the area used to calculate
capacity under paragraph 221 if spectators are allowed to stand
in them.     The whole point of crush barriers on terraces is to
prevent unrestrained movement of large masses of fans from back
to front down the terrace.       It they are allowed to stand in the
gangways where there are no barriers, such movement can occur
without inhibition.     The incident at Ayresome Park on 9 December
1989 involved just that.     Two surges causing crushing against the
fence came down the terrace unrestrained by barriers.


177.        Whilst paragraph 98 of the Guide notes the difficulty
of keeping radial gangways clear, it can be done.       One way is to
fix a radial rail on each side of the gangway and parallel to it,
inhibiting lateral movement into the gangway from the standing
areas.     Another surprisingly effective method which I saw used
successfully by Millwall is to put red and white tapes in the
same position to indicate the gangway as a no-go area for
standing.


178.        Gangways should be painted in a conspicuous colour
(yellow is used most commonly) whether they are sunk or not.         The
safety certificate should require that no standing is allowed in
gangways and that they be painted.


Fencing


179.        Perhaps the most emotive and disputed topic in this
field is what should be done about perimeter fences.       They were
installed at many grounds to prevent pitch invasions during the
1970s.     After Hillsborough there was a strong clamour to take
them down.     Some clubs did.   Within weeks of Hillsborough,
however, there were unruly incidents involving pitch invasions at
more than one ground, as I noted in paragraph 308 of my Interim
Report.     I deferred making any interim recommendation involving
structural alterations at the interim stage, confining myself to
saying that gates to the pitch ought to be kept fully open.


180.         Since then, whilst visiting grounds, I have seen a full
range of practices from one extreme to the other.      There is no
consensus.     At some grounds eg Highbury, there have never been
perimeter fences.     At others, like Anfield and White Hart Lane,
there were fences but they have been taken down.       At other
grounds the fences vary in height and design.      Some are fearsome
high structures with florid arrangements of spikes, redolent of
medieval weaponry.     They look more suited to a prison than a
sports ground.     Coming down the scale, there are high fences with
only vertical spikes and lower fences without spikes;        fences of
wire mesh and fences of strong metal;      fences with a good
provision of gates directly to the pitch, fences with only one
gate per large pen (like Hillsborough), and some with no gate at
all (as in pen D at Ayresome Park).     Again, some clubs have left
their gates to the pitch fully open as I recommended.        Some have
taken the gates out and left blank spaces;      some have opened the
gates but put red and white tape across the gap;      others have
kept the gates open during the match, but closed them towards its
conclusion to stop pitch invasions at the final whistle.        Others
again have kept the gates closed and bolted but manned
individually.     At Millwall's ground, an effective procedure is
followed before each match whereby it is announced over the
public address system that stewards will demonstrate the gates
affording escape to the pitch.     The stewards then do so in the
manner of an air stewardess demonstrating emergency procedures.
The gates are then closed to, but not locked.


181.         This wide variety of practices is surprising.      If a
club were concerned only with its own supporters, divergence of
practice would be readily understandable.     Club A might say:
"Our supporters can be trusted not to invade the pitch;         so no
fencing".     Club B might say:   "Some of our supporters have shown
                                   71
that given the chance they will invade the pitch, so we must have
high fences to stop them".       But all the clubs in any division,
including clubs of type A and B, visit each other;         so one has
fans of club B, used to being caged in at home, being given the
chance when visiting club A to invade the pitch.         They do not
seem to make a point of doing so with any frequency.         However
instances do occur, as I have mentioned;       they are unpredictable
and may happen at any time depending probably upon the occurrence
of some incident thought to be provocative.       When they occur,
they can cause serious danger.       There is risk of injury to
players, to the referee and to the police, quite apart from the
risk of injury through fighting between fans.        It is true, as is
often said, that so far no fatality has resulted from a pitch
invasion, whereas 95 people died against a fence installed to
prevent such invasion.       But if fighting between fans starts on
the pitch area, it is difficult to stop and injuries can be
caused.      At Selhurst Park on 13 May 1989, five police officers
and 16 supporters required hospital treatment.


182.          Since each club in a League division has to cope during
the season with at least some of the supporters of all the other
clubs in the division, the widely differing solutions to the
fencing problem must be due to different attitudes rather than
objectively different needs.       The different attitudes taken by
clubs or local authorities stem from the difficulty in balancing
or deciding the priority of three crucial considerations:


       i.     Fences, especially high, spiked fences, are
              intimidating, ugly and demoralising.


       ii.    Adequate measures must be taken to prevent pitch
              invasions for the reasons already given.


       iii. Whatever the measures taken to prevent pitch invasions,
              there must be adequate provision for escape in
              emergencies.


183.          At some grounds, point ii. has been regarded as
                                    72
paramount so that i. has had to give way.       At others, either
point i. or, especially after Hillsborough, point iii. have
carried greatest weight so as to remove or greatly reduce the
fencing.


184.         Is there any way      of achieving asatisfactory         balanceof
all three    considerations? I believe so:that it is possible          to
have sufficient obstacles to pitch invasion without prison-type
fences and also to provide for escape in emergency.         I deal with
the three considerations in turn.


i.      High Spiked Fences


185.         I agree with the      view that high,prison-type         fences
with spikes and overhanging sections should go.         The spectacle of
these huge cage-like fences is inconsistent with a sports ground
being for pleasure and recreation.       Moreover, I believe such
intimidatory fences have an adverse affect on both the morale and
the behaviour of fans.       They feel badly treated.    Having to stand
in a cage for your Saturday afternoon recreation inevitably
causes resentment.    Resentment often results in hostility to
those controlling the match.       A sour relationship develops and
continues between the fans and those in authority, making the job
of police and stewards much more difficult.       Being inside the
cage provokes some to hurl abuse or missiles at those outside,
rival fans, players or police.       The security of the fencing (in
that the rival fans cannot penetrate it) encourages bravado to
indulge in such activity.       The spiked fences imply an expectation
that trouble will or may occur.       They also hamper a clear view of
the game.    To remove them would signal the advent of a new future
for football and especially a new attitude from the authorities
to the spectators.    Accordingly, I consider that when perimeter
fencing is used it should not exceed a prescribed maximum height
and all spike arrangements and top sections angled inwards should
go.    This view is in accord with the recommendation of the
Technical Working Party (Appendix 3 paragraph 20).         But what
should be the prescribed maximum height?       That leads to
consideration ii.
ii•    Adequate Measures to Prevent Pitch Invasions


186.         UEFA regulation B6 of 1988 requires as follows
       "Protection of the playing field by means of


       (a)   a fence of at least 2.2 metres in height or a moat or
             else


       (b)   a barrier with adequate policing so as to make it
             impossible for spectators to enter the field of play.


       Fences must have sufficient security gates opening towards
       the playing field and in the case of moats or a combination
       of moats and fences adequate other security passages should
       be provided".


187.         Inquiries show that the figure of 2.2 metres was chosen
simply by reference to the height of existing fencing at various
grounds especially in West Germany and the need to choose a
height of fence which would amount to "a real obstruction" to
pitch invasion.       As to the word "impossible" similar inquiries
suggest that the intention was to leave it to the police
commander to decide what resources he might need.       Should a pitch
invasion occur, UEFA would consider all the circumstances before
deciding what if any action to take.


188.         In my view a fence should be of sufficient height to be
a serious obstacle to pitch invasion.       It should provide
sufficient obstruction to enable the police to take timely action
should pitch invasion be attempted without being so high as
seriously to interfere with vision or to give a feeling of
imprisonment.       Although I appreciate the UEFA regulation says "at
least 2.2 metres", these criteria lead me to recommend that
perimeter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 metres.          That
measurement I take from ground level at the front of the terrace
to the top of the fencing ie the 2.2 metres may consist entirely
of fencing or partly of wall and partly of fencing mounted on the
wall.   For example, at Ibrox Park the fencing is about 1.45
metres high but it is mounted on a wall and the total height of
wall and fence is 2.2 metres.


189.       In making this recommendation I am merely indicating a
maximum height should perimeter fencing be used.     I do not
suggest there must be such fencing or indeed any fencing.       Those
clubs which presently have no perimeter fencing may well think it
safe to continue that way.    Others may emulate them.   Still more
may consider that they can dispense with fencing or bring it to a
lower level than 2.2 metres in front of their family areas or
their seated areas.   As the seating areas increase it should
progressively be found possible to achieve a corresponding
reduction in   fencing.   These options, subject to the maximum
height of 2.2 metres which I have indicated, should be left to
the discretion of local authorities acting on the advice of their
Advisory Group which will have consulted the club and supporters.


190.       I should make clear that I have thus far referred only
to perimeter fencing at the pitch side of viewing areas.
Different considerations may well apply to the height of radial
fencing used to segregate rival fans.    The maximum height of such
fences should be a matter for locial decision and may depend for
example on whether there are sterile areas between pens of rival
fans;   but I still recommend that no spikes be used.


191.       Some may feel I am being naive or over-optimistic in
recommending that fencing be brought down to a lower level.
Hooligans may take advantage of this relaxation to have,
literally, a field day.   However, I draw attention to those
grounds where fences have already been brought down to or below
the level I recommend and others where there are none at all.       If
we wish to make progress, some initiative must surely be taken to
stop the cycle of bad behaviour met with repression inducing
worse behaviour.


192.       Besides, there are other ways of deterring pitch
invasions than by dauntingly fortified fences.     One is to balance
the lowering of the fences with a prohibition against going on to
the pitch without reasonable excuse.        I shall deal with that in
the next chapter.       The other is by alternative physical means.


Safety Corridors


193.        One      method has been adopted, so far    successfully,at
Anfield, Goodison Park and White Hart Lane.        It involves
reserving a safety corridor or dry moat between the front row of
standing spectators and a perimeter fence or wall of moderate
proportions.       The two photographs Appendix 6 illustrate the
Liverpool and Everton versions of it.        The front few steps of the
terrace are sacrificed as a viewing area and left as a sterile
strip.     Behind that area, the front row of crush barriers is
filled in and made continuous with no gaps.        The Everton version
has no fence above the perimeter wall.        At Anfield there is a low
red rail fence.       That arrangement does not absolutely prevent
pitch invasion, but it inhibits it.        Moreover, anyone or any
group minded to get to the pitch has first to get over the front
crush barrier, then cross the corridor, then get up the steps or
over the wall onto the perimeter track.        At White Hart Lane there
is finally a line of       advertising hoardings to     be scaled.     By that
time thepolice should be able to intervene.        At high risk
matches no doubt police could patrol the sterile area.


Moats


194.         The     safety corridor at these three grounds is not truly
a dry moat.        But I have seen examples both in Holland and Italy
of a concrete dry moat providing a total obstacle to pitch
invasion.     At Utrecht, there is a deep broad moat;     provision is
made to enable spectators to descend into the moat and use it as
a passageway for entrance and exit.        A photograph is at Appendix
7.     At the San Siro stadium in Milan, there is a similar moat at
one side of the ground which will be extended all round.          At
present there is no provision for access to it or across it to
the pitch but I was told in Rome that access to the pitch by
bridges will have to be provided to accord with the Italian
regulations.


195.         To interpose a full scale moat of the Utrecht or Milan
type between the spectators and the pitch requires considerable
space.    It is easier to provide it as an integral part of the
design of a new stadium than to introduce it as a modification      of
an old one.     At most UK grounds the space between pitch and
spectator^ is very limited and to introduce a moat would involve
a large loss of viewing area.     Nevertheless, it is a solution
worthy of consideration and especially so for a new stadium.        Its
advantage is that it effectively prevents pitch invasion without
impeding vision or importing a prison atmosphere.     A few rows
back from it, you are not even aware of its existence.      Its
disadvantage, apart from the space it requires, is the difficulty
of combining it with access to the pitch in emergencies.


(iii)        Emergency Escape


196.         Hillsborough showed conclusively that, if there are to
be perimeter fences, there must be sufficient gates to permit
escape to the pitch and they must be immediately available in an
emergency.     That lesson was reaffirmed by the recent incident at
Ayresome Park.     I know there is a school of thought opposed to
access to the pitch in any circumstances, preferring that
alternative evacuation routes should all be away from the pitch.
Thus, at some grounds (Hillsborough was one) emergency plans did
not require gates to the pitch or take any such existing gates
into account in calculating the time required for alternative
routes of evacuation.     At Hillsborough, evacuation was to be via
the central tunnel, or alternatively through the radial gates at
the back of the terrace and round the ends of the west stand.
But, if the emergency arises at the front of the terraces (as it
did) those alternative routes cannot and did not afford timely
relief.   Presently, although emergency access to the pitch could
readily be gained at both Anfield and Goodison Park, the plans do
not rely on     emergency evacuation in that direction.   The tragic
Bradford City disaster, in which fire swiftly engulfed a stand,
would have caused much greater loss of life had there not been
ready access to the pitch.     It can no doubt be argued that
inflammable stands with neglected underspaces should not recur,
that with modern stands constructed of non-inflammable materials
there should be no risk of another. Bradford, and that if
capacities and safety measures are observed no Hillsborough
situation should recur.     The solemn fact is that those two
disasters did occur.     One cannot predict what emergency may arise
to make evacuation away from the pitch either wholly impractical
or too slow.


197.         The UEFA regulation cited above recognises that where
there are fences access to the pitch should be preserved.         I
agree with that view and recommend that emergency access to the
pitch should be provided.


198.         How should this be done?   There is no significant
problem where there are either no fences or none higher than
crush barrier level.     At Anfield or Goodison Park, for example,
it would not be difficult to get over the front crush barrier
into the "dry moat" and thence to the pitch.        That arrangement
could be modified to include radial gangways at intervals running
straight down to the "dry moat" through gaps in the front
barrier.     This would give even readier access.     It must be for
local judgement to balance the need for ready access to the pitch
in emergencies with the need to deter such access otherwise.


199.         The more difficult problem arises at grounds where
fences of up to 2.2 metres are deemed necessary.        In such fences
there must, in my view, be sufficient gates not less than 1.1
metre in width as approved by the Green Guide.        It is no use
seeking to specify how many gates will be required by reference
to the length of fencing at the front of a given pen or other
enclosure.     The length of the frontage is only one factor.        Much
will depend on the depth of the terrace and the numbers it is
permitted to hold.     I prefer, in concurrence with the Technical
Working Party (Appendix 3 paragraph 22) to say that the gates
should be sufficient in number to enable the pen or other
enclosure to be evacuated in the time required for any other
emergency evacuation route.     Such gates should be evenly spaced
along the frontage of the pen to avoid congestion on exit.


The Gates at Nimes


200.         One solution to this problem is the system installed in
the new stadium at Nimes which I visited together with the
Assessors.     There, the fence consists of a number of electrically
operated panels which open as gates to the pitch, as shown in
Appendix 8.     There are six sections of the ground.     The fencing
in each section is governed by a trigger gate which may be
operated electrically or manually.     The post upon which it is
mounted has an electro-magnet which holds the mechanism inside
the post in a position keeping the gate shut.     When a button is
pressed, the magnet is de-activated, the gate descends in its
mounting and is free to swing towards the pitch.        As it does so,
it releases the next gate which is alfeo mounted on a swivelling
device within its post, operating by gravity to open the gate.
This domino effect continues throughout the section.        It can be
arrested by someone leaning against one of the gates from the
pitch side but how far anyone there could withstand substantial
crowd pressure is doubtful.     The trigger gate can be operated
manually but this seemed to require considerable force.        To shut
the gate again seemed to require considerable force and        a
lifting motion.     The gates are about nine inches higher than the
front floor of the terrace, but there is no sump such as often
exists in grounds in the UK.      The system could be adapted to UK
grounds but there are a number of factors upon which greater
reassurance might be required.     If the gates were fixed on top of
low walls such as that at Leppings Lane, there would be a danger
of crushing in the sump or at least of broken limbs as people
tried to get out.     The system has been in operation at Nimes for
only a few months and has not been severely tested to show that
it would be effective under crowd pressure.     Although a firm is
licensed to market the system in 34 countries worldwide, our
information is that so far they have been fitted only at Nimes
and Toulon although one or two other French clubs are interested.
In these circumstances the robustness of the fencing and the
effects of English weather upon it are as yet unproved.       At Nimes
the system operates with a level walkway on the spectators' side
of the fencing.     Apart from a very small step, the pitch is at
the same level.     To achieve this arrangement would require
considerable alteration to the layout of many UK grounds
involving in particular raising the lower part of terraces to
make them level with the pitch and with the bottom of the
fencing.


Gates Unlocked


201.        I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully
open when the pen or enclosure was occupied.        This was for three
stated reasons;     first, to afford instant access to the pitch;
secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after
Hillsborough that there was an escape route and thirdly, to keep
police and stewards alert to conditions inside the gateway.       I
also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for
structural change at that stage.       Along with reduced capacities,
provision of sufficient gates and lower fences, I must now
consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to leave
gates fully open.     I know that some Police Commanders have been
anxious that to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion;       hence
the practice at some grounds of closing the gates near the end of
the game or keeping them shut but not locked.       I would still hope
that gates would be left fully open wherever those in command
feel this can safely be done.     However, I recommend that whether
they be fully open, partially open or closed they be kept
unlocked throughout the period when the pen or enclosure is
occupied.   They should thus be easily available for emergency
exits and spectators should be confident of this.


202.        I repeat my interim recommendation that all gates in
radial and perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas
should be painted in a different colour from the rest of the
fences and marked "Emergency Exit".


                                  80
Authorising Access to the Pitch


203.        Interim recommendation number 9 provided as follows


       "*   9.   There should be in respect of each gate in a
       perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close
       together) a police officer authorised to decide whether or
       not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve
       overcrowding ..."


Despite the much greater alertness to the possibility of an
emergency which now exists, following Hillsborough, I still
believe it necessary to make a recommendation to ensure that
proper provision is made for swift action to authorise the
opening of gates in the event of an emergency.     However, it has
been drawn to my attention that strict observance of this interim
recommendation verges on the absurd where a pen contains only a
handful of spectators.     Moreover, to be bound to provide a police
officer at each gate or group of gates in all circumstances
involves a heavy commitment of police manpower which would be
even heavier with an increase in the number of gates.
Accordingly, I have decided to recommend that although each gate
should be manned when the enclosure is occupied, whether such
manning should be by a police officer or by a steward is for the
Police Commander to decide.     In either event plans should ensure
that the police can authorise access through gates to the pitch
immediately in the event of an emergency.


Monitoring Crowd Density


204.        It is convenient to mention a modification I think
sensible regarding interim recommendation 5.     That provided:-


       "*   5.   At each match, there should be on the perimeter
       track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced area, a
       steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
       officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is
       to check crowd conditions in that area for possible
       overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
       occupied by spectators.   Whoever is so appointed should be
       in addition to any other steward or police presence.     He
       should have ready access to the police officer authorised
       under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control
       room."


I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of wording to
achieve clarity) but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers
are small.      The recommendation need not be applied to any self-
contained pen or other standing area where the spectators
present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match
do not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity,
or 2,000, whichever is the lower.


Cutting Equipment


205.       In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I
recommended that suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should
be provided to enable spectators to be released from behind
perimeter fencing.      Assuming the recommended maximum capacities
are observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are
provided and left unlocked, cutting equipment should not be
necessary.      Something in these provisions would have to go badly
wrong for such equipment to be required.      Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.


Functions of Police and Stewards


206.       Which functions should be discharged by the police and
which by the club's stewards is one of the most vexed questions.
To describe the background to the argument I can do no better
than repeat what I said in my Interim Report at pages 28 and 29.


       "Who should Monitor the Terraces?


       161. Should it be the host club via its stewards?    Should it
       be both?    Or should it be by arrangements, depending upon
       the ground or section of the ground in question?
162. In principle, a football club which invites the public
to a match on its premises for reward is responsible for
securing safety at that event.     The Green Guide (1986)
provides:


     "23. The safety of the public inside the ground is the
     responsibility of those who stage the event and
     administer the ground in which it is held, ie the
     "management".     This responsibility applies in both
     normal and emergency situations...


     195.   ... there are five basic duties which stewards are
     called upon to carry out.     These are:


            (a)   controlling or directing members of the
            public who are entering or leaving the ground, to
            help achieve an even flow of people to the viewing
            areas and safe dispersal of spectators on the
            terraces or viewing slopes;


            (b)   patrolling the ground to deal with any
            emergencies, eg raising alarms or extinguishing
            fires;


            (c)   manning entrances, exits and other strategic
            points, especially exit doors and gates which are
            continuously open whilst the ground is in use;


            (d)   assisting police as appropriate or as
            requested with crowd control;   and


            (e)   undertaking specific duties in an emergency."


The Interim Popplewell Report


163. There was considerable controversy in the course of the
public inquiry held by Mr Justice Popplewell in 1985 as to
the responsibility of the club and the police.     In paragraph
3.6 of his interim report, Mr Justice Popplewell quoted from
a report produced for the Minister of Housing and Local
Government in 1969 as follows


     "The responsibility for controlling crowd behaviour is
     divided between the police and the club operating the
     ground.     The broad line of division being that police
     are responsible for movement of spectators in public
     thoroughfares and from public thoroughfares into the
     ground, while the club is responsible for the control
     of spectators once they are on the club's premises..."


Mr Justice Popplewell said he did not quarrel with that view
and went on to observe that in practice the police have to
take charge and be responsible for controlling crowd
behaviour.     He then said (paragraph 3.8):


     "It follows, therefore, that as a matter of practice,
     while the physical safety of the building and the
     maintenance and good housekeeping of the ground must
     always be the responsibility of the club, the police
     have to take the de facto responsibility of organising
     the crowd, with all that entails, during the game..."


Mr Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation of the
ground as a procedure in which only the police could bear
the responsibility of supervising the organisation of the
crowd.


The Final Popplewell Report


164. He harked back to this subject in chapter 4 of his
Final Report.     There, he came down more firmly in favour of
holding the club responsible for crowd safety.     At paragraph
4.13 he said "Because, as a matter of practice, police
officers have regularly attended in large numbers at
football grounds, it has somehow been assumed by the clubs
       that the responsibility for control of what goes on inside
       the ground has passed from them to the police.     A police
       presence is there to assist in the enforcement of law and
       order.     Those responsible for organising a private function,
       however, have the primary and continuing obligation and
       responsibility to ensure reasonable safety for those who are
       invited on to their premises."     Mr Justice Popplewell ended
       that section as follows:     "it cannot be too strongly
       emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier of the
       ground who is putting on the function, that the primary and
       continuing obligation rests."


       165. There remains, however, the question whether there are
       some     grounds or parts of grounds where the club may need to
       rely upon the police (whom they pay to attend) to control
       filling of pens and monitoring them for overcrowding.        In
       other words, whilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests
       upon the club, they may need, and by agreement be entitled,
       to employ the police to act as their agents in certain
       circumstances.     This very difficult and grey area as to club
       and police responsibility will need to be reviewed in
       greater depth at stage two of this Inquiry."


Since Hillsborough was concerned with a disaster on the terraces,
I headed that passage "Who should monitor the terraces?".        But
the wider question is:      who should control the entry of
spectators, their placing and movement whilst in the       ground and
their exit from it?       It is undisputed that the club, as a matter
of law, has a duty to take reasonable care for the safety of the
spectators invited to its premises.       There have, however, been
two practical difficulties about the club, rather than the
police, being de facto in charge.


207.          First, the club discharges its duty through stewards.
They are part-time employees or assistants whose duties are
confined to match days.       Many of them are seasoned supporters of
the club and some tend to be elderly:       others are keen young
supporters.      Due either to age or youth,   many therefore lack the
physique to cope with awkward customers.     They are usually not
well paid, part of their "remuneration" (indeed all of it at some
clubs) consisting of the opportunity to see the game.      As the
submission from the Association of Chief Police Officers of
England, Wales and Northern Ireland (ACPO) puts it:


       "(Stewards) are at best casual workers (usually working one
       day in two weeks), they are probably not people who have a
       supervisory role in ordinary life and are not always
       equipped or used to giving directions or facing obstruction.
       Many are retired people and pay is not so attractive as to
       guarantee commitment."


Whilst there are exceptions, I have frequently been told that the
stewards presently employed at many clubs are of limited capacity
and reliability.


208.        Secondly, there has to be a police presence at a match
to maintain law and order.      Police are trained to give and
enforce instructions.    This, together with the uniform they wear
and the respect for and fear of the law which the majority of
spectators have, gives the police far more authority than
stewards.    Moreover, if trouble arises, whether from misbehaviour
or from any other cause, the police will inevitably be drawn into
assuming control.    They have all the means to do so at their
disposal - the control room, the CCTV, the planned deployment of
serials of officers round the ground, a communications system to
co-ordinate them and reserves on call.      The submission from ACPO
suggests that in these circumstances, and to avoid confusion, the
police ought to accept prime responsibility for controlling the
crowd.    I quote two passages from their argument:


       "It may be that the ambiguous position of the police is part
       of the problem - that is acknowledging the club's
       responsibility for safety on the one hand, whilst routinely
       assuming all those tasks of stewarding which the stewards
       cannot do, either because of the truculence of supporters or
       the limited talents of the stewards themselves, on the
           other.     It has to be said that the present lack of clarity
           in these arrangements can lead to something of a 'dog's
           dinner'.     In some clubs the police actively control the
           stewards, in others the stewards are quite independent and,
           despite some improvements, standards of stewarding vary
           considerably with many being too old or simply unreliable...


           ... It may be better to acknowledge that if trouble is
           anticipated or if crowd control is going to test the ground
           capacities then, in the interests of public safety, police
           should take control over the stewards through their
           supervisory chain".


           "As to the question of 'responsibility', the matter of civil
           liability should not cause us to resile from our decisions
           if they are necessary.    Dual responsibility for safety is a
           recipe for confusion.    The police are always going to seize
           the initiative in a crisis;       crowd control is always going
           to be inextricably linked to criminal hooliganism:       the
           police are never going to accept direction from stewards;
           stewarding will never (at least not in the foreseeable
           future) be able to cope without some law enforcement backup;
           and finally police do 'own' most of the means of control.
           In these circumstances the police must accept a leading role
           and, despite the requirements and civil liabilities of
           football clubs, themselves take on supervision of the
           overall conduct of events wherever crowd safety is an
           issue."


    209.        The question is one of balance.      Carrying delegation to
    its ultimate, clubs could lean back and leave it to the police to
    take over the management of spectators from street to terraces
    and back again, with stewards performing a minimal role.         This
    would involve a very heavy police commitment and indeed the
    commitment at present is very substantial.        As already indicated,
    some 5,000 officers or more are deployed every Saturday at
    football matches.


                                        87




1
Costs of Police and Stewards


210.        The temptation to the clubs to leave it all to the
police is stronger if they are not required to make realistic
payment for police services.     No charge is made for officers
outside the ground since maintaining law and order in the streets
is a normal public function of the police.     At the present time,
the practice as to recovering costs of policing inside the
grounds from clubs varies greatly from place to place, different
formulae being used.    In some areas, the charge made is the
actual cost of the officers attending in the ground.     At others,
it is made on a sliding scale dependent on whether the match is
category A (high-risk) B or C.     At others it is dependent on the
size of the crowd attending.     At some, it appears to be entirely
arbitrary and at one ground it is said to be nil.     In my view a
more consistent and businesslike approach should be made to such
charges.    If clubs were to find it more economical to recruit
efficient stewards than to delegate duties to the police, there
could be a significant reduction in the number of police deployed
at football grounds to the benefit of the community at large.         If
this is to happen, stewards must be fit, active and robust.       I
would suggest they should be between the ages of 18 and 55.       They
must also be fully trained.     Some clubs presently have efficient
stewards whom they recruit individually and train fully with the
assistance of the police.     Others hire security firms to bring in
a well-trained team of stewards.


Division of Functions


211.        There are clearly many aspects of crowd control and
management which are capable of being carried out by efficient
stewards.    Manning gates, directing spectators to the correct
areas and to their seats, keeping gangways clear, monitoring the
density of packing in pens or enclosures - indeed, the duties
specified in paragraph 195 of the Green Guide, as already quoted.
At most grounds, and in most parts of each ground, these duties
ought to be capable of being performed by properly trained
stewards.    Where that is so, clubs should require stewards to
perform the duties and should not take the option of leaving all
to the police.


212.      However, I accept that there may well be particular
areas of a ground, perhaps on visitors' terraces and particularly
at high-risk matches, which call for the greater authority and
resilience of the police.     What the division of functions should
be must be a matter for local decision and in the last resort for
the Police Commander to determine.


Written Statement of Intent


213.     I therefore repeat my recommendation that there should
be a written document setting out the respective functions of
club and police for crowd safety and control "and in particular
for the filling of each self-contained pen or other terraced area
and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to
avoid overcrowding."   (Interim recommendation 4).    The aim should
be for the club through its stewards to perform all those
functions of controlling spectators of which they are capable
having regard to the quality of the stewards, the layout of the
ground and the nature of the match.     Where they are not able to
discharge any such function the police should perform it.     As the
proportion of seating at grounds increases, control by stewards
should become the norm.


214.     In making interim recommendation 4, I used the phrase
"written agreement".   This led to anxiety that what was required
was a binding legal contract which would deprive the police of
any flexibility in response to circumstances of the day.     My
intention was not to shackle either party by a binding contract;
it was simply to have a document setting out how functions were
to be divided so that no misunderstanding could arise whereby one
party thought the other had undertaken some duty and vice versa.
I am content that the document be referred to simply as a
"statement of intent", so that it can be subject to alteration
without breach of contract should circumstances so demand.


                                  89
Police Commanders


215.      The ultimate control at any match must be that of the
Police Commander.   He has authority to decide how many officers
he needs and to deploy them in and outside the ground.    He has,
if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-off, to
stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it.       Police
Commanders tend to remain in post for lengthy periods.     They thus
acquire skill, experience and special knowledge of the problems
at their particular ground.    However, there must come a time for
change.   It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions
and the problems of policing peculiar to the ground.     Training
for such functions should be the subject of a specific course to
be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do so.    Such a course would give
induction training in the basic strategy of policing football
matches and would also give opportunity for the pooling of
experience and the solution of common problems.


Rate of Admission


216.      An important causative factor at Hillsborough was the
congestion which built up outside the turnstiles in the last 20
minutes before kick-off.    Twenty-three turnstiles were required
to admit 24,256 spectators;    only seven turnstiles were available
to admit the 10,100 with tickets for the west terraces.     Much was
made in evidence of the late arrival of the Liverpool fans.
However, further evidence at stage two of the Inquiry suggests
that the late arrival of large numbers is a common feature at
many grounds.    Apart from those wishing to drink as long as
possible (whom I consider in the next chapter) there are many who
do not care to stand or even sit for a long period in addition to
the 90 minutes of the match.    Moreover, at all-ticket matches or
to those with tickets in seated areas, there seems little reason
to arrive early since places are assured.    The absence of any
attractive pre-match entertainment is a further disincentive to
early arrival.    Whilst measures should be taken to encourage
earlier entry to the ground, it is essential that turnstiles or
other entrances can cope safely and efficiently with spectators
as and when they arrive.     To do this requires sufficient
turnstiles or other entrances to admit, if necessary, a large
late influx without dangerous congestion.     That involves
assessing the rate of flow through turnstiles or gates and the
time within which they should be capable of admitting all the
spectators they are intended to serve.


217.      I accept the view of the Technical Working Party that
the Green Guide figure of 750 persons per hour is too optimistic
a turnstile flow-rate.     It may be achieved or even bettered in
ideal conditions.     But as soon as there is a build-up, the flow-
rate will diminish.     There are also delays caused by those with
no tickets, those with wrong tickets or other problems.       I accept
the recommendation that 660 should be the maximum notional rate.
The Green Guide should be amended accordingly.


218.      I repeat my interim recommendation that the turnstiles
serving a discrete area should be capable of admitting its
holding capacity within one hour.     Unless this can be done, there
will be a risk of serious congestion in the last half or quarter
of an hour.   If it cannot be done, the permitted capacity of the
area must be reduced accordingly.     This recommendation relates to
one of the crucial matters contained in the original section
2(2)(c)(i) of the 1975 Act and should therefore be a requirement
of the Safety Certificate.


Communications


219.     The efficient deployment and co-ordination of police
and stewards depend upon effective systems of communication.
Radio systems are susceptible to two problems;     excessive air
traffic on the channels in use and the volume of noise from the
crowd.


220.     If large numbers of officers are issued with radios and
are all entitled to use the same channel, confusion may result
should a major incident occur.     In such an event, many officers
may wish to speak simultaneously.      Especially if the channel is
used on "talk-through" (whereby all officers including those in
control give and receive messages without priority) the Commander
in the police room may be unable effectively to issue orders.
Again, if the level of crowd noise is high, as it often is, an
officer on the perimeter track may have great difficulty in
hearing messages.     Although ear pieces are of some assistance,
they are not totally successful in excluding crowd noise and are
not usually issued to every officer carrying a radio.


221.      Mr Justice Popplewell in his Interim Report recommended
that "early attention should be given by the Home Office
Directorate of Telecommunications to consider the practicality of
producing a more suitable personal radio for the police".      In his
Final Report, he returned to the subject at paragraphs 4.102-104.
By that time, he reported that "a detailed study is being
commissioned by the Home Office Directorate of Telecommunications
into the problem of personal radios".


222.      The Directorate produced an upgraded specification.         As
a result, supplies of two new models have been made available.
They are the Philips PFX and the Motorola MT600E.      These radios
have greater range and clarity than those previously used.      They
also give access to many more channels.      To take advantage of
this, the police have been allocated eight additional UHF
frequencies.


223.      Police Commanders have told me that, in addition to any
other channel or channels in use, there should always be a
command channel reserved solely for the Police Commander to
communicate with his senior officers round the ground.      This is
of the first importance since it enables the Commander to use the
information coming to him in the control room to deploy his
forces promptly and effectively at any part of the ground without
radio interruption.     I recommend this should be done.


224.      As suggested by the Technical Working Party, I repeat
                                  92
the recommendations I made in my Interim Report as to
communications, with one exception.     A sentence in one
recommendation suggested that "consideration should also be given
to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to
indicate to the control room the existence of certain emergencies
or requirements."      I am persuaded by evidence from the police
that the use of hand signals could create a risk of confusion and
I do not therefore repeat that suggestion.


Other Topics in the Green Guide


225.         I have in this chapter considered specifically a number
of key safety factors covered by the Green Guide.     I have
suggested respects in which the Guide should be strengthened or
amended.     In addition to those topics, the Technical Working
Party considered a number of further aspects of safety - crush
barriers, stands, ingress and egress, stairways and ramps,
inspections and testing, fire safety, emergency power and
disabled spectators.     I accept and adopt the Technical Working
Party's Report and recommendations on those matters (Appendix 3).
Without repeating them in this text, I add only a few additional
comments.


226.        As to crush barriers, paragraphs 25 to 28 of their
report recommend a simpler and clearer test procedure than that
in the current Guide.     In particular, the values to be achieved
by way of percentage recovery after the required loading test
will depend upon the material from which the barrier is
constructed eg concrete, steel or wrought iron.     When the Guide
is revised, acceptable values for various materials should be
specified.


227.        The Green Guide does, in paragraph 6 of Annex C, refer
to the possibility of doubts arising as to the safety of a
barrier "for any reason (including such matters as cracking of
the terracing or distortion of connections)".     It does not,
however, presently make any special mention of the need to
inspect crush barriers for possible corrosion.     The evidence from
                                  93
the Health and Safety Executive after their inspection of
barriers at Hillsborough suggests that corrosion is a serious
threat to the safety of metal barriers.       When the Green Guide is
revised, the need to inspect for possible corrosion should be
specifically mentioned and emphasised.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services


228.    It is vital that adequate provision should be made for
possible emergencies arising from fire or accident and from
illness or injuries however caused.       I repeat the recommendations
I made in my Interim Report regarding co-ordination of the
emergency services.       In addition, although it is mentioned in
paragraph 176 of the Green Guide, I emphasise that "joint
consultation between management, police, fire, ambulance and
other emergency services should take place in order to produce
agreed plans of action for all foreseeable types of emergency."
Such plans should include, for example, contingency arrangements
for admissions to particular hospitals in the event of a number
of casualties and consideration of possible casualty clearing
areas at the sports ground.       Lines of communication, whether by
telephone or by radio, from the police control room to the local
headquarters of all emergency services should be maintained at
all times so that emergency calls can be made instantly.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances


229.           The scale of available medical facilities has been the
subject of controversy.       After Hillsborough, there were
complaints of insufficient basic equipment such as stretchers.          I
repeat what I said in my Interim Report at paragraphs 298 and
299.


       "298.        It would be unreasonable to expect, at any sports
       stadium, medical facilities capable of dealing with a major
       disaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the
       ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, other equipment
       and medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100
        casualties is not practicable.


        299.        What is required is a basic level of provision for
        first aid, for professional medical attention and for
        ambulance attendance, together with a system of co­
        ordination with the emergency services which will bring them
        to the scene swiftly in whatever numbers are required.    What
        will amount to an appropriate basic provision for the future
        eg the equipment in a first aid room, requires expert
        evaluation and advice".


230.           The Scottish ambulance service has developed a "major
incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up
to 50 casualties.       It is packed with 50 stretchers, blankets, and
medical supplies and is in effect a travelling storehouse for
such equipment.       A vehicle of that type is deployed in addition
to other ambulance attendance at matches with crowds over 25,000.
This provision goes a long way towards meeting the criticism
raised after Hillsborough and I recommend that it be adopted
                                  \

elsewhere.


231 .          I repeat the Interim Recommendations I made under this
heading subject to two variations.       First, it has been sensibly
urged that it is unreasonable to require a medical practitioner
to be present throughout a match where attendance is very small.
At such a match it is suggested that to have a medical
practitioner on call would be sufficient.       I agree with this and
recommend that the full-time presence of a doctor should not be
required where there is no reasonable expectation of more than
2,000 spectators attending.


232.           Secondly, some clubs have told me that they can secure
private ambulance services more economically than those from the
appropriate ambulance authority.       They accordingly wish to have
freedom to choose.       I modify my Interim Recommendation in
deference to this argument by requiring at least one fully
equipped ambulance from, or approved b v . the appropriate
ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with
an expected crowd of 5,000 or more*


Status of the Green Guide


233.      I have recommended that some safety factors covered by
the Guide should be made mandatory requirements in Safety
Certificates.    Those apart, I consider the Guide should remain a
non-mandatory set of guidelines.    Sports grounds vary greatly in
their layout and fixtures.    It must be open to a local authority
to judge the propriety of deviating in some respect from the
Green Guide recommendations at a particular ground.     However, I
agree with the Technical Working Party that where there is a
departure from a specific recommendation of the Guide, the local
authority should be aware of it and should be satisfied that such
departure is justified for good reason.


Revision of the Green Guide


234.      Neither I nor the Technical Working Party have sought
to revise or redraft the specific wording of the Guide.      We have
simply indicated where and to what effect it should be altered.
Detailed consideration of the revision must be for a suitably
qualified body to be set up by the Home Office for the purpose.
The Technical Working Party, in addition to their report, have
prepared detailed supplementary notes on some aspects of the
Guide which will be available and I am sure useful to those
revising it.    Accordingly, I recommend that the Home Office set
up a body to revise the Green Guide as a matter of urgency.


Sports Grounds Within Part    III of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987


235.      This Part    of the 1987 Act applies in   relation to a
sports ground which    is not a designated sports   ground        but which
provides covered accommodation in stands for spectators.      A
Safety Certificate is required where such a stand provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators.     By section
27(1) the Safety Certificate:-
       "shall contain such terms and conditions as the local
       authority consider necessary or expedient to secure
       reasonable safety in the stand when it is in use for viewing
       the specified activity or activities at the ground, and the
       terms and conditions may be such as to involve alterations
       or additions to the stand or any installations in or serving
       the stand."


236.       These provisions apply to a variety of sports such as
tennis, golf, horseracing, greyhound racing or motor racing.


237.       I have received a number of   complaints that local
authorities, perhaps in response to Hillsborough, have sought to
apply the full rigour of my Interim Recommendations to sports
grounds requiring a Safety Certificate under these provisions,
not being designated sports grounds under the 1975 Act.      On
occasion this has been done without regard to the Green Guide or
to Home Office guidance.     Examples given are requirements in
relation to greyhound stadia regarding the presence of a medical
practitioner, the size of a first aid room, and capacity of parts
of the stadium other than the covered stand itself.


238.       The Green Guide provides at   paragraph 5 as follows


       "The Guide is intended to cover grounds where sporting
       events of all kinds are held and where the gathering of
       large crowds is likely to present a safety problem.
       However, much of the guidance has particular application to
       football stadia and this should be borne in mind when
       applying the Guide to grounds used for other sports and
       modifications may prove necessary, because the measures to
       meet problems of stadia used for Association Football may
       not always be necessary at other grounds used for other
       types of sports.   For example, if a ground has no terraced
       or sloped viewing areas, crush barrier requirements are
       unlikely to be of concern".


                                  97
A similar approach is appropriate in relation to my Final
Recommendations.    They are essentially directed towards
designated sports grounds.     Many are relevant to other sports
grounds but will need to be applied with due regard to the
different circumstances at those other sports grounds.


239.        One appropriate function of the inspecting and
reviewing body, which I propose should cover all certificating
and licensing of sports grounds, would be to ensure that
recommendations in the Green Guide and those made in this Report
are applied sensibly across the varied range of sports grounds.


Sports Grounds Within Part IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987


240.        This Part of the 1987 Act relates to indoor sports
licences.    It introduced amendments to the London Government Act
1963 and the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982
requiring a licence to be granted by the relevant local authority
where premises are to be used for "any entertainment which
consists of any sporting event to which the public are invited as
spectators" (a "sports entertainment").


241.        Under this legislation, the relevant local authority


       "may grant to any applicant, and from time to time renew, a
       licence for the use of any premises specified in it for any
       sports entertainment on such terms and conditions and
       subject to such restrictions as may be so specified".


242.        I have received evidence from a number of bodies
complaining that the procedure followed in pursuance of these
provisions often requires different applications to be made by
different applicants for different "sports entertainments" at the
same premises.     Apart from the expenditure of time and effort,
such multiple applications tend to be expensive to amateur sports
organisations which are often impecunious.     The suggestion is
made that a procedure should be available whereby a licence for a
                                  98
range of "sports entertainments" at the same premises could be
obtained by a single operator periodically.   This matter merits
review by the appropriate authorities.




                               99
                PART III - CROWD CONTROL AND HOOLIGANISM


                               CHAPTER 5
                      POLICE PLANNING AND CONTROL



243.      The role of the police is crucial to crowd control.        In
my findings as to what happened at Hillsborough and why, I
criticised the police operation on the day and especially some
senior officers.     I did, however, recognise that the South
Yorkshire Police had a good record, that day apart, for handling
difficult crowd problems successfully.       I also commended many
junior officers for their efforts to rescue and assist those
crushed or trapped at Hillsborough.


244.      i should like here to pay tribute to police forces
generally for their invaluable work in maintaining order at
sports events and especially in and outside football stadia,
Saturday after Saturday.     Without them, sports events would be
chaotic and indeed many could not be permitted to take place.
Their service is often thankless and not infrequently they are
subjected to abuse and worse from those they are there to serve.


245.      They would be superhuman if on occasions they did not
react, at any rate verbally, to the stress and provocation they
have to endure.     This leads many fans to feel the police are
against them.     Moreover, it is often difficult in the confusion
of a crowded scene for firm police action against miscreants not
to impinge also, or focus by mistake, on the innocent.       The
latter then feel aggrieved and others become aggrieved on their
behalf.


246.      it is therefore vital that police discipline and self-
control be of the highest standard and that friendly relations
with supporters are cultivated.     I know and have myself seen that
this is achieved at many grounds.       But there are reports that, at
some places, some police treat supporters, especially away
                                  100
supporters, with a measure of contempt.     When this happens it
unfortunately sours the attitude of the supporters towards all
police.


247.       Accordingly, Police Commanders should in their
briefings stress the need to balance firm control with good
humour and patience.


248.       As to the planning of police operations and the
techniques to be considered, I repeat my interim recommendations
(numbers 6 and 26 to 30) which are now recommendations 16, 44 to
46, 49 and 51.


Police Control Room


249.       It is essential to   efficient police operations that
their control room inside the ground should be well placed, of
sufficient size and well equipped.      A number I have seen have
been very good.    Some are too small, however.    There should be
room for at least the Commander, his deputy and enough officers
to man the radios, telephones and CCTV screens.      The room should
leave space for others who may need from time to time to vis.it
the room eg other senior officers, club management or a member of
the emergency services.     The room should command a good view of
the whole pitch and of the spectator areas surrounding it.      It
should where necessary be sound-proofed against excessive crowd
noise.    Failure to provide the police with a satisfactory control
room is misguided thrift.




                                  101
                               CHAPTER 6
                                ALCOHOL


250.       There can be no doubt that excessive drinking by fans
significantly aggravates problems of crowd control.     Because
alcohol tends to remove inhibitions and self control, those who
have drunk too much may become aggressive and even violent
especially when provoked.     Short of this, however, alcohol can
make fans resistant to sensible and reasonable instructions, more
impatient and less considerate of others.     All of this increases
the problems for police and stewards in managing large numbers
which is difficult enough even with co-operation.


Legislation


251.       In Scotland, serious crowd misbehaviour, much of it
drink-related, led to the appointment in 1976 of the Working
Group chaired by Mr Frank McElhone MP.     The recommendations of
his report were followed in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act
1980 which made it an offence to be in, or to attempt to enter, a
designated ground while in possession of alcohol or to be in, or
to attempt to enter, the ground whilst drunk.     It also banned the
possession of alcoholic liquor on public service vehicles
carrying passengers to or from a designated sporting event and by
amendment this ban was extended to vehicles adapted to carry nine
or more passengers.


252.       I am in no doubt after discussions with senior Scottish
police officers that this measure has greatly reduced the problem
of misbehaviour at Scottish football grounds.     Sectarian violence
still has to be contained, especially at Rangers and Celtic
matches.      There is still trouble from the "new hooligan" groups,
known in Scotland as "casuals".     But much of the misbehaviour of
groups II and III in the Popplewell classification has abated due
to the firm enforcement of the 1980 Act by the Scottish police.


253.       In England and Wales this lead was followed in the
Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 which made
similar provisions.


254.      There is, however, an important difference between      the
Scottish provisions and those applying in England and Wales.       In
Scotland, the ban on alcohol is absolute.    No sales of alcoholic
drink are permitted in the ground.     In England and Wales, section
3 of the 1985 Act permits Licensing Justices to grant exemption
from the ban on sales in the ground.    This is subject to alcohol
not being sold or consumed at any part of the ground from which
the sporting event may be directly viewed and to other conditions
imposed by the Justices.     It is open to the Justices to revoke or
vary an order and the police have power to shut down the sale of
alcohol at a particular event if they consider it would be
detrimental to orderly conduct or safety.


Alcohol Sales in Grounds?


255.      It is against this background that I must consider      the
submission of the FA and others that sale of alcoholic drink in
football grounds should be generally permitted without need to
obtain an exemption order.    The argument is that the ban on such
sales does not prevent fans from drinking.     It merely drives them
to drink in public houses until a short time before the match.
They then arrive late, often inebriated and truculent, thereby
causing congestion and other problems at entrances.     Far better,
it is said, to make alcoholic drink available at the ground so as
to bring them in earlier.     Since service of drink inside the
ground is slow and selling points are crowded it is argued that
the visitor will be lucky to buy more than one round.     He is
therefore unlikely to become drunk from drinking inside the
ground.


256.      Ideally I accept that people attending a football match
should be able to buy refreshments including alcoholic drink just
as they can at the theatre or other places of entertainment.       I
hope, in halcyon days ahead, a better atmosphere at football
grounds may justify bans being relaxed.     I do not, however, think
the present time is ripe for such relaxation.


257.        I have mentioned the great improvement of crowd
behaviour in Scotland where the ban is absolute and has been in
force now for nearly 10 years.    No doubt other factors such as
increased seating have played their part in this.       The
improvement has been recognised by the Government, and is the
main reason why the Football Spectators Act 1989 has not been
applied to Scotland.    Thus Mr Moynihan, the Minister for Sport,
said on the Third Day of the Committee Stage (Official Report,
column 83):


       "There has been a marked improvement in the behaviour of
       football crowds in Scotland, which is accepted by all
       parties and the Scottish Football Association.     The Scottish
       Office is monitoring development closely and ... it does not
       believe that it is necessary to legislate for a national
       membership scheme in Scotland.   However, it will be able to
       take action in the future should the position deteriorate".


In England and Wales, the ban has had only four and a half years
to operate and is watered down by the availability of exemptions.
Where it is thought appropriate, there is nothing to prevent
clubs from applying to their local justices for an exemption.
There may regrettably be places where the local circumstances,
known to the justices, warrant refusal of an exemption.       At many
others, it will be granted as indeed it has been already at a
number of grounds.


258.        When such exemptions exist, there is no clear evidence
to suggest that late arrivals are greatly reduced.       Indeed, the
argument that no-one can get drunk in the ground because of the
problems of getting served or because only low alcohol beer is
available, seems to me contradictory to the main argument.       Those
who wish to drink full strength beer in quantity will not be much
attracted by the service offered inside the ground.


259.        In these circumstances I consider it would be a
retrograde or at least premature step at this time to restore a
blanket licence to sell alcohol at designated sports events.        I
do not go so far as to suggest that the total ban applicable in
Scotland should be extended to England and Wales ie that no
exemptions should be available.     But I do not believe it
appropriate to relax the present restrictions.


260.         Are there other steps which could and should be taken
to reduce problems from excessive drinking?


Arrests


261.         I have referred to the provision in Section 2 of the
1985 Act making it an offence to be in, or to attempt to enter, a
designated sports ground whilst drunk or in possession of
intoxicating liquor.     The impact of these provisions clearly
depends upon enforcement.     Here again there is a contrast between
Scotland and England.     In England, although arrests are made,
there is a tendency to eject many offenders without arresting
them.     In Scotland the police take a firm line.   They do not
eject offenders;     they arrest them.   The English approach may
partly be due to a commendable desire not to be seen as hostile
to football spectators.     However, it is also a matter of
expediency.     Making an arrest requires the arresting officer to
take the offender to a police room and go through the prescribed
procedure and paperwork.     This takes the officer away from his
post for a minimum of a quarter of an hour.      At some grounds
(Hillsborough was one) evidence suggests a much lengthier absence
is common.     Clearly, if a serial of eight officers is posted to a
bank of turnstiles, three or four arrests may greatly reduce the
team for a significant period.     There is a tendency, therefore,
to avoid making arrests save in the worst cases.      I do not wish
to advocate repressive measures which would be counter to all I
have said about the need for a new attitude towards spectators.
On the other hand, it cannot be a good ground for declining to
make an arrest that one cannot spare an officer to do it.      I
therefore recommend that consideration be given to streamlining
arrest procedures so as to divert an arresting officer from his
post for the minimum time.     One method I have seen adopted is for
the officer to give only basic details of the arrest and be
photographed with the offender before resuming his duties.        He
can then return after the match to complete the documentation.


Closing Bars


262.       In some areas, bars in the vicinity of the ground are
closed either throughout a match day or between certain hours.
This may be required by the justices or it may be the result of
agreement between police and publicans.     Such a measure may
however have limited effect.    To close the pubs in a radius of
one or two miles of the ground simply diverts drinkers to bars
outside that range and may aggravate late arrival.     Moreover,
beer from shops with off-licences probably accounts for as much
pre-match drinking as that bought in bars.    This said, it may
well be sensible to limit the availability of alcohol especially
before a high-risk match.    How effective the measure can be
depends on the locality.     In London or other large cities it
could have little impact;     in a more isolated town it could be
very effective.


Early Kick-Offs


263.      Traditionally, kick-off at football matches has been at
three o'clock.    That may formerly have been to accommodate those
who worked on Saturday mornings.    By another tradition, permitted
hours in pubs led to a recognised drinking period from mid­
morning until three o'clock.    The combination of these two
traditions often brings fans to a match with too much drink on
board.   There is therefore much to be said for an early kick-off
especially in a high-risk match.     It gives less opportunity for
prolonged drinking sessions immediately before the game.       A mid­
day kick-off gives time for away supporters to reach the ground
but less time for early arrivals to kick their heels and lift
their elbows in bars.


264.       It is true that an early kick-off will discharge the
fans earlier at the end of the match. Some anxiety has been
expressed as to whether drunkenness avoided before and during the
match may have more hours to build-up after the game causing
problems for the police and the local community in the evening.
This could be so, but there are two moderating factors.     First,
drunken behaviour in the town, although a problem for the police,
is less likely to cause serious danger to many people than at a
match where it may be compounded by excitement, partisanship and
incidents of the game and where large numbers are in a confined
space.   Secondly, the segregation exercise often results in the
bulk of away supporters being escorted back to their road or      rail
transport as soon as the match is over rather than lingering      in
the town.


Sunday Matches


265.        Sunday matches ought also to be a considered option.
On a Sunday, there is less traffic, especially commercial
traffic, to compete with those arriving for the match.    Arrival,
parking and departure are therefore easier for them in private
coaches and cars.    It is true that public transport generally on
a Sunday is less plentiful but special arrangements are often
made for major events.    Again, bars and indeed many places of
entertainment being closed on Sundays, there is less incentive to
have a night on the town after a Sunday game.




                                 107
                                  CHAPTER 7
                              TICKETS AND TOUTS



     Information on Tickets and Signs


     266.      It is vital to good crowd control that those attending
     a sports event should have clear directions where to go.      It
     makes for confusion and hence added problems for stewards and
     police if spectators are milling about looking for their
••




     appropriate entrances.   The congestion at Hillsborough was
     aggravated by poor information on the tickets and poor
     signposting outside and inside the turnstiles.     I therefore
     repeat my recommendations that tickets and signs should provide
     simple, clear and consistent information to spectators.


     267.      All available measures should be taken in the printing
     of tickets to prevent forgeries being produced.


     Computer Record of Tickets


     268.      It would greatly help to defeat forgery and theft of
     tickets as well as assisting in the apprehension of those
     misbehaving in the ground, if clubs maintained a record on
     computer of ticket sales.    This is done in Italy where season
     tickets and tickets for all-ticket matches in seated areas are
     numbered and a record is maintained of the names and addresses of
     purchasers.   Such information is of great value to the police in
     identifying forgeries and tracing offenders.     Clearly, season
     tickets for seats could be made attractive if favourable terms
     were offered (especially to young supporters).     This would enable
     the authorities to know for a whole season who was occupying a
     particular seat.   As seating accommodation increases this would
     give greater information and control.




                                      108



                              *
Fans Without Tickets


269.       One problem which creates difficulties for the police
is the arrival of would-be spectators without tickets at an all­
ticket match.     Although I found there was not a large body of
such fans at Hillsborough there undoubtedly were some.        At other
matches the numbers have not only been large;      they have been
determined to gain entrance by one means or another.         If they
could not acquire tickets at the ground they have created so much
trouble that the police have judged it best to let them in.
Sometimes this has been for payment;     on occasions, even free.
The rationale has been that it is better to have troublemakers
inside the ground where they can be monitored than roaming round
the town at large.     Obviously,   the practice of admitting fans
without tickets has a bad knock-on effect.      Bands of fans unable
to get tickets believe that if they turn up and create sufficient
clamour the police will admit them.


Police Policy


270.       This must not be allowed to continue.     It is
intolerable that those with no tickets should be able to
blackmail their way into a ground.      "If you don't let us in we'll
force the gates or wreck your town", is not a threat to which a
police force should submit.     The policy of admitting such people
is also unfair to those who have taken the trouble and spent
money to buy tickets.     It further involves, at a capacity match,
letting in fans for whom there may be insufficient space.         It may
also create problems of segregation.     Above all, it is allowing
the mob to rule.


271.       True, I held that in the crisis which developed at the
Leppings Lane turnstiles on 15 April 1989, opening gate C was
justified since life would otherwise have been at risk outside
the ground.     However, that was a matter of life and death.      It
arose because of inadequate facilities and inadequate crowd
control.   I would hope such a situation will never recur.        If
anything like it should recur, preservation of life must clearly
be paramount.     But when the police have an option to let fans
without tickets in or keep them out, their policy must clearly be
to exclude them.     Unless that rule is firmly and universally
applied and known the problem will grow.


All-ticket Matches


272.         All the evidence I have received suggests that great
caution should be exercised before making a match all-ticket.         To
do so can assist in achieving segregation.     In general, it should
however be done only where a capacity or near capacity crowd is
expected.     There should then be little difficulty in selling all
the tickets in advance.     The point of making such a match all­
ticket is to prevent the arrival of greater numbers than the
ground can accommodate.     However, if a less popular match is made
all-ticket, it may turn out that only a modest proportion of the
tickets is sold in advance.     If then fans arrive without tickets,
they will be aggrieved at being turned away when there is space
available.     Moreover, the club will be tempted to give in to them
and sell tickets on the day.     This discredits the all-ticket
policy and may cause breaches of the segregation strategy.        I
therefore recommend that all-ticket matches should be confined to
those at which a capacity or near capacity crowd is expected and
that, having so designated them, clubs maintain a firm policy of
not selling tickets at the match.


Touts


273.         The recommendations in the last two paragraphs are
designed to deter those without tickets from turning up at
matches and so obviating any trouble they may be tempted to
cause.   However, many fans without tickets turn up at the ground
in the hope of buying them from touts.


274.         During my visits to sports grounds I have found
universal condemnation of touts by all involved in organising and
managing large stadium events.     Apart from the obstruction they
themselves cause, touts attract fans without tickets to attend at
grounds in the hope of getting in.       Moreover, they sell tickets
to all comers regardless of their allegiance.        Thus tickets for
the home area at a soccer match fall into the hands of away
supporters and vice versa.     The result is to frustrate the
efforts of clubs and police to achieve peaceful segregation.
Pockets of alien affiliation     planted amongst home supporters
form a focus for hostility and often violence results.        Apart
from these objections, voiced by the FA, the FL, the police and
the clubs, most supporters also detest touts because they often
corner the market for a popular match and offer tickets at
grossly excessive prices.


275.       From all these quarters the plea is to take positive
action against ticket touts at football matches.        I am mindful of
the need for caution before advocating a law limiting liberty to
conduct oneself and one's business freely and according to
established practice.     I likewise accept that market forces
should, in general, operate freely in the commercial field.
Nevertheless, I am satisfied from what I have read, heard and
seen that outside football grounds the presence and activities of
touts have a grossly anti-social effect leading both directly and
indirectly to disorder.     Directly, through obstruction and the
attraction of numbers without tickets.        Indirectly, because of
trouble from those so attracted who, in the end, cannot or do not
buy tickets and from those who buy their way into an opposition
enclave.


276.       Touts operate, of course, at places other than football
grounds.   They are to be found, for example, at national rugby
stadia, at the All England Tennis Club at Wimbledon and at
countless other sporting events.        Depending on how one defines
"touting", the activity could include selling unwanted tickets
for the opera, the theatre or concert halls.        Touting usually
means, however, not just selling at face value a ticket you
cannot use, but selling numbers of tickets at an inflated price
as a commercial venture.     There is a clear distinction between
the impact of touting at football grounds and elsewhere.
Football is the only sport at which segregation is practised to
                                  111
prevent violence.    This is because it is the sport where violence
inside and outside the ground is, at present, most prevalent.
There are therefore strong grounds for regarding football as a
special case as the Government has recognised by promoting the
Football Spectators Act.


277.        Whatever the policy merits of freedom to trade and
market forces, they must surely yield to the maintenance of
safety and the prevention of disorder.    Touts at football matches
put both at risk.    At other sports and in other leisure fields
the tout does not endanger safety or order to the same extent.
Accordingly, whether one finds him attractive or not, he can be
left to ply his trade there.    But. so far as football is
concerned, in my view touting should be made unlawful.       The fast
buck should stop here.


278.        At present, police can deal with touts only by somewhat
strained and stretched use of existing laws.    They arrest them
for obstruction even if the physical obstruction caused is
minimal.    Alternatively, they make an arrest on the grounds that
they suspect the tout of carrying forged tickets, although the
suspicion of forgery may merely be convenient conjecture.       After
holding the tout during the match the police release him and the
now valueless but genuine tickets are returned to him.       Growing
wise to this, many touts now carry only two or three tickets at a
time, relying on a runner to bring up more from a "banker"
standing off with perhaps hundreds of tickets in his possession.
If the salesman is arrested the merchandise is not all lost.
Police should not have to stretch the law to deal with a public
mischief.    There should be a specific prohibition which police
can then enforce.


279.        How to formulate a prohibition against touting at
football grounds will require careful consideration and drafting.
It could be made an offence to sell tickets for and on the day of
a football match without authority from the home club to do so.
Another way would be to prohibit such sales within a specified
radius of the ground on the day of the match.    Yet another would
                                 112
be to prohibit sales of tickets for a football match at more than
face value.   This third alternative would permit any genuine
purchaser of a ticket who found he could not use it to recoup his
outlay by selling his ticket outside the match.     Its disadvantage
would be the difficulty of proving a tout had sold at more than
face value;   ways would also be devised to evade the prohibition.
I tend to favour the first alternative which is simple and
capable of easy proof.     The genuine ticket holder, finding
himself unable on the day to use his ticket, and not permitted to
sell it outside the ground, should be permitted to return it to
the club and recover his money.     Clubs should be prepared to
accept such tickets in the interests of fairness and of having a
law which defeats touts.     If touting outside the ground is
banned, fans with no tickets for an all-ticket match could have
no excuse for turning up outside hoping to get in.
                               CHAPTER 8
                  POLICE STRATEGIES AGAINST HOOLIGANS


Cautious Optimism


280.        I turn now to ways of curbing misbehaviour and dealing
with hooligans.     At the outset, I must record that there are
grounds for cautious optimism about misbehaviour inside football
grounds although the same cannot be said of behaviour outside and
en route.    Evidence I have received from various police forces,
from ACPO, from the football authorities and from the clubs
suggests that measures taken in the last couple of years have
reduced incidents of violence misbehaviour inside grounds.        Also,
for the first time for decades, there has been a small but steady
increase in attendances at matches in each of the last three
years.   This has occurred despite reductions in capacity.     It is
attributed by police and football authorities and by supporters'
organisations to greater confidence by the decent majority of
spectators that violence in the ground is under control.


281.        These welcome signs must be seen in perspective.
Disorder in the ground has been, for the most part, controlled
not eliminated.     There have still been occasional outbursts of
violence in recent months.    All that can be said with confidence
is that the police are now much better equipped and informed to
deal with hooligans than they were three years ago and their
operations have been more successful in controlling disorder.


CCTV


282.        In particular, the installation of CCTV has greatly
improved police surveillance of the crowd both inside the ground
and at the turnstiles.


283.        In 1985, after the Bradford Disaster, the Football
Trust made funds available to install CCTV at all first and
second division football grounds.    Unfortunately, the systems
initially installed, although the best available at the time,
proved to be of inadequate quality for identification purposes.
Moreover, operators initially lacked the training and expertise
necessary to make effective use of the equipment.


284.        A number of clubs now have better equipment and most of
the remainder of the 92 clubs in the League have applied to the
Football Trust for funding to enable them to do likewise.      The
Football Trust, not unnaturally, wish to be sure the money will
be well spent.     They have therefore asked that an agreed
specification should be laid down as to the quality of the CCTV
to be installed.     ACPO hope to provide this as soon as possible.


285.        In the two years ending June 1989, about 200 operators
were trained in the use of CCTV at matches.     A training video is
also available to all police forces.


286.        Already, CCTV has had a major impact on the hooligan
problem inside football grounds as well as proving extremely
useful to monitor safety measures.     If any trouble appears on the
screen or is reported from any quarter of the ground, the CCTV
can zoom in on the incident.     The police can then record what
occurs on colour video and on hard copy prints.     Individuals can
be picked out by facial appearance and the colour of their
clothing.    The evidential effect of such a video recording has
proved formidable.     It has persuaded hooligans, who would
previously have sought to challenge oral evidence of
identification, to plead guilty.     Hooligans know cameras are
keeping a roving watch and their activities in the ground are
inhibited by that knowledge.     Police evidence suggest that as a
result of CCTV surveillance and the police strategies it
facilitates, the more committed hooligans now concentrate their
activities outside the ground, attacking opposing fans on their
way to or from matches.


National Football Intelligence Unit


287.        ACPO have for some years encouraged the development of
an intelligence network nationwide.          A national index of football
liaison officers was set up to collect, record and pass on
information about the behaviour, past and anticipated, of club
supporters, especially the hooligan element.          Thus, before a
match, the police responsible for it can receive information from
the football liaison officer in the visiting club's area as to
the propensities of the visiting supporters and any known plans
any element among them may have.          Although this scheme has proved
useful, the need was recognised for a central unit equipped with
a computer to gather, record and disseminate intelligence.          ACPO,
in their written submission, say:-


       "Hooligan gangs operate across a wide area and may of course
       be involved in criminal escapades in any town between their
       point of departure and the venue of the fixture.
       Furthermore, in recent times there is good evidence that
       they will often plan criminal violence which has nothing
       whatever to do with football.        There is a need to overview
       such events to identify patterns and recognise what is
       behind seemingly unconnected events."


288.        The National Football Intelligence Unit has now been
set up.    It is based in London;     staff are in post;     the Unit is
being funded by the Home Office.          It is hoped the computer will
be installed shortly.    The Unit will then be of great value in
dealing not only with domestic football-related crime but also
with hooligans travelling to matches abroad.




                                    116
                                  CHAPTER 9
                         OFFENCES IN THE GROUND



289.         Although incidents of physical violence inside grounds
are now much fewer, there remains an undercurrent of unruly
behaviour which can and occasionally does result in disorder.
Three activities in particular have this potential.        (i) throwing
coins and other missiles (ii) chanting obscene or racialist abuse
(iii) going onto the pitch without reasonable excuse.


       i.    There can be no possible excuse for hurling missiles at
             a sports ground.     It is not only dangerous in itself.
             It may and often does incite others to do likewise;
             that may and often does provoke retaliation.     Violence
             may then escalate.


       ii.   No-one could expect that verbal exchanges on the
             terraces would be as polite as those at a vicarage tea
             party.   But shouting or chanting gross obscenities or
             racialist abuse ought not to be permitted.     If one
             starts, others join in, and to the majority of
             reasonable supporters, as well as to those abused, the
             sound of such chants from numbers in unison is
             offensive and provocative.


       iii. Running on the pitch often provokes and is the prelude
             to disorder.   This is not just because it interrupts
             the game or because it invades the hallowed turf.       It
             is often done with the intention of attacking someone.
             Even if the invasion is not with intent to attack the
             referee, a player or opposing fans, it tempts others to
             follow suit.   If rival fans come onto the pitch
             violence will probably break out.     Even if they do not,
             there may well be violent exchanges with police seeking
             to repel the invaders.    A fan may run onto the pitch
             merely to congratulate a goal scorer.     But his action
               could well provoke opposing fans (displeased by the
               goal anyway) to invade the pitch with less benign
               intent.


290.           Ought not these activities therefore to be made
criminal offences?       This has been raised before.     Mr Justice
Popplewell considered the same three activities.          After
discussing whether they should be made separate offences, he
concluded, on analogy with the Scottish "breach of the peace",
that a simple offence of disorderly conduct at a sports ground
would sweep up not only the three activities mentioned above but
other disorderly activities too.          He concluded, at paragraph 4.74
of his Final Report, as follows:


       "4.74        Quite clearly a new offence in England and Wales
       of disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the lines of
       the Scottish common law offence, would be of substantial
       assistance in dealing with hooliganism.        It would avoid the
       problem of trying to define all the different types of
       behaviour which give rise to disorder at football matches
       and would undoubtedly enable the police to take action much
       earlier than they can under the present law.        This offence
       should be confined to sports grounds where the disorderly
       conduct is likely to have such a devastating effect on crowd
       safety.     Disorderly conduct would clearly include throwing a
       missile, running onto the pitch, seeking to climb over or to
       pull down a perimeter fence, shining a mirror towards a
       batsman, throwing bottles or cans onto the field of play, or
       interfering with a greyhound or horse race.        I suggest that
       it should be triable summarily and there should be a power
       of arrest.     I recommend, therefore, that consideration
       should be given to creating an offence of disorderly conduct
       at a sports ground."


291.           This recommendation was not taken up.     At the time Mr
Justice Popplewell reported, the Public Order Act 1986 was in
preparation.       It created new offences relating to public order
but none specifically related to conduct inside sports grounds.
                                    118
Evidence from the Home Office gives two reasons for this.            First,
it was thought wrong in principle to treat football or sports
grounds as a special case.         Secondly, it was apparently thought
that the provisions of the 1986 Act, especially section 5,
sufficiently covered the field.


292.           As to the first reason, one must surely look at the
nature of the mischief.         The three specified activities would, of
course, be an anti-social nuisance anywhere.         But at a designated
sports ground they are fraught with potential disorderly
consequences.         There is good reason therefore to treat as a
special case the prohibition of these activities at such grounds.
By analogy, having alcohol in one's blood over a fixed limit has
been made an offence only in relation to driving, because it is
dangerous to the public in that special context.


293.           The second reason requires an examination of sections
4(1) and 5(1) of the 1986 Act.         So far as is relevant, these
provide as follows:-


       "4(1 )         A person is guilty of an offence if he -


               a)     uses towards another person threatening, abusive
                      or insulting words or behaviour...
                      with intent to cause that person to believe that
                      immediate unlawful violence will be used against
                      him or another by any person, or to provoke the
                      immediate use of unlawful violence by that person
                      or another, or whereby that person is likely to
                      believe that such violence will be used or it is
                      likely that such violence will be provoked...


       5(1 )          A person is guilty of an offence if he -


                (a)   uses threatening, abusive of insulting words or
                      behaviour, or disorderly behaviour...
                      within the hearing or sight of a person likely to
                      be caused harassment, alarm or distress thereby".
                                      119
294.         Throwing missiles could only be caught under section 5
as "disorderly behaviour" if the additional element were proved
that it was "within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be
caused harassment, alarm or distress thereby".       To adduce
evidence of this last element may be very difficult indeed.          It
should surely be sufficient to show that the accused threw a
missile at a football match.


295.         As to obscene or racialist chanting similar
difficulties arise.       Although the chanting may be proved abusive
or insulting it would also have to be shown, under section 4,
that it was used "towards another person ... with intent to cause
that person to believe that immediate unlawful violence will be
used against him etc".       Proof of those elements may not be
possible.


296.         Under section 5, whilst again the chanting may be
proved to have contained "abusive or insulting words", it may be
difficult to show that this was done "within the hearing or sight
of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress
thereby".       The words may cause nothing other than disgust.


297.         Nor does section 18 of the Act help.   Under the     heading
"Acts intended or likely to stir up racial hatred", the section
provides as follows so far as is relevant:-


       "18(1)       A person who uses threatening, abusive or
       insulting words or behaviour... is guilty of an offence if -


       (a)   he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or


       (b)   having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
             likely to be stirred up thereby".


298.         Racialist abuse of the kind chanted at football      matches
is probably not intended to stir up racial hatred.       Nor could it
readily be proved that racial hatred was likely to be stirred up.
The effect of such chanting is to give cheap and ignoble
amusement to those participating whilst causing offence and
embarrassment to those abused and to the decent majority of fans.


299.      For these reasons, I do not consider that the
activities which Mr Justice Popplewell concluded should be the
subject of a criminal offence are covered by the 1986 Act.        He
set out the arguments for and against legislation to prohibit
them at paragraphs 4.42 to 4.74 of his Final Report.       I do not
rehearse those arguments.   I agree with his conclusion that on
balance, despite the difficulties of drafting and enforcement,
these activities should be prohibited.   Mr Justice popplewell
concluded that a "catch-all" offence of disorderly conduct at a
sports ground should be considered.   I appreciate the force of
his reasoning.   However, I would prefer to see separate offences
in respect of each of the three activities I have mentioned.           The
object of the legislation must be not merely to prosecute
offences when they occur but to deter them.   If there is a
specific offence of throwing missiles at a designated sports
ground, a separate specific offence of chanting obscene or
racialist abuse there and a third specific offence of going on
the pitch without reasonable excuse there and, if full publicity
is given to the legislation, hooligans will know precisely what
is prohibited and that they do those things at their peril.


300.      As to going on the pitch, I have a reason for
recommending prohibition additional to those which convinced Mr
Justice Popplewell.   I have recommended lowering the level of
fences and removing spikes and overhanging sections.       That
relaxation is made in the interests of the decent majority of
supporters who have no yen to invade the pitch.     To back up the
lesser deterrent effect of lower fences I think it prudent to
have a criminal sanction against pitch invasion.


301.      I appreciate that at some sports grounds there is a
tradition of running onto the pitch when the game is over simply
from joie de vivre or to pat players on the back.     At
Murrayfield, for example, schoolboys sit on forms on the pitch
                                121
side of the perimeter fencing and run on harmlessly at the end of
the game.   Again, going onto the pitch to escape some hazard on
the terraces in an emergency should, of course, be legitimate.
Accordingly, the offence should be aimed at prohibiting invasion
of the pitch without good reason or reasonable excuse.   The
police will in this as in many other situations have to exercise
sensible discretion and judgment.
                              CHAPTER 10
                   CLUB STRATEGIES AGAINST HOOLIGANS


302.         Various club schemes to exclude hooligans have been
undertaken or suggested.


Luton


303.         In March 1985, Millwall visited Luton with a large
contingent of "supporters".     Widespread disorder broke out
causing injuries to both fans and police.     Serious damage was
also done in and outside the ground as well as to trains
returning to London.


304.         Following this episode, Luton FC decided to adopt a
Home Only Supporters Scheme excluding away supporters and
allowing only Luton members and their guests to attend matches.
I am grateful to the management of Luton FC and to the
Bedfordshire police who explained to me the history, operation
and merits of this scheme.


305.         Applicants for membership normally reside within 25
miles of Luton.     Those further away must justify why they wish to
join.   A membership card entitles the member to buy a ticket for
entry, either in advance or on the day, and to bring in with him
up to three guests.     The card has a bar-coding and must be
presented to obtain a ticket in advance.     To buy a ticket on the
day, the card is "swiped" through a computerised reader by the
member at an outer set of turnstiles at the Kenilworth Road end
of the ground.     Payment for a ticket is then made at another
inner set of turnstiles.     Those members who misbehave are
deprived of membership.     A banned list is maintained on the
computer.     It consisted, at the time I received evidence, of only
six names.     If entry is attempted by using a banned card, a red
light shows and the turnstile will not open.     A steward then
escorts the holder to an office outside the turnstiles where the
problem is investigated.
306.         The scheme started in August 1986.    The equipment
installed initially proved unsatisfactory.        Some of the problems
were:    failure through condensation, delay whilst the reader
checked the card's validity, and the fact that a Barclaycard
could do the trick.     After a number of attempts at rectification,
this equipment was abandoned and a different firm of suppliers
was engaged.     I should mention that equipment from the first
source was installed at Plymouth where it also failed after a
number of attempts and the experiment was not pursued further.


307.         The second system at Luton has proved effective after
some teething troubles.     It has been working satisfactorily now
for nearly two seasons.


Benefits of the Scheme


308.         Both the club and the police are happy with the effects
of the scheme.     The exclusion of away supporters naturally
excludes the hooligan element which they would have included.
But it also removes the focus for the aggression of any home
hooligans.     With no visitors to attack or bait, it is said that
the hooligan elements in Luton have faded away.        They have not
sought to join the scheme, nor do they seem to travel to away
games.    The town has also benefitted.   Shops which previously had
to board up their windows now enjoy a peaceful Saturday trade
which has increased by 40%.     Arrests at matches have dropped from
over 100 per season before the scheme to nil.        Police costs have
been greatly reduced.     The club accepts that initially there was
a fall in attendances, but claims they are rising again.        In
1985/6, average attendance was 11,100, in 1986/7 it was 10,300,
in 1987/8 it was 8,038 and in 1988/9 it was 10,039.


309.         The list of benefits is impressive and there can be no
doubt that the scheme has been a success for Luton.        But would it
be successful elsewhere?


310.         Luton is, in the football context, somewhat isolated
geographically from other clubs, their fans and their catchment
areas.     In this, its situation differs greatly from, for example,
London clubs or those on Merseyside, Greater Manchester or the
Midlands.    Hence the assumption that those within 25 miles of
Luton are likely to be natural Luton supporters.        Luton also
differs from clubs in the larger conurbations by size of crowds,
their average numbers being only about one-quarter of those at
large clubs.     The banned list is tiny.     An important feature of
the Luton scheme is the use of outer and inner turnstiles for
which the ground has ample room.        Many other grounds do not.


311.        At Luton, the card-holder himself "swipes" his card
through.    The club and the police acknowledge that, if the card
had to be passed to a turnstile operator to "swipe" it through,
entry would be considerably retarded.       They also accept that the
essential feature of Luton's success has been the ban on away
supporters rather than the membership card scheme itself.


Ban All Awav Supporters?


312.        If this is the touchstone of success in eliminating
hooliganism, why not introduce it generally and have no away
supporters at any football matches nationwide?        This has been
considered before and rejected.     Mr Justice Popplewell in his
Interim Report recommended that:


       "Urgent consideration should be given to introducing a
       membership system in England and Wales so as to exclude
       visiting fans".


However, in his Final Report he modified this and recommended
that:


       "Consideration should continue to be given to some form of
       membership scheme for Football League clubs in England and
       Wales".


313.        Clearly the Government has rejected the idea of a ban
                                  125
on all away supporters which forms no part of the scheme of the
Football Spectators Act 1989.


314.        To exclude all away support would be a draconian step.
It would halve the number of matches fans could attend.      It would
seriously diminish clubs' revenue and deprive football grounds of
a healthy atmosphere of rivalry, which some say is a casualty of
the Luton scheme.     But perhaps the conclusive point is that it
would be impractical and possibly counter-productive in the
campaign against hooliganism.


315.        To exclude away supporters from Luton is   one thing.
Those excluded can at least go at present to any other match
instead.     But to exclude all away supporters from all matches and
especially to exclude them from "local derby" matches or matches
in large cities could cause serious disorder.     If Manchester City
supporters could not go to Old Trafford when their team plays
there, or Chelsea supporters follow their team to Highbury or to
their neighbours Queens Park Rangers, trouble could result.
There would be attempts and devices to defeat the scheme and get
into the ground in defiance of it.     There could well be disorder
outside grounds.     The more fanatical supporters and the hooligans
would be unlikely to stay home and play patience.


Awav Members Only


316.        There is a halfway house between freedom   for all comers
and a ban on all away supporters.    This is to make   entry to
sections of the ground for away supporters by ticket only;
tickets to be allocated strictly to members of the away team's
travel club and no tickets to be available on the day of the
match.     This scheme builds on an existing practice adopted at
some grounds for key matches, for example the Liverpool v Arsenal
match in May 1989 to decide the championship.     It also builds
upon existing club membership schemes.     Most clubs have a club
membership scheme of some sort following an agreement between the
football authorities and the Government in February 1987, whereby
all clubs were to introduce schemes covering at least 50% of each
ground's capacity by the beginning of the 1987/8 season.
Compliance was patchy and varied from a membership of over 40,000
at Manchester United to one or two clubs which did nothing at
all.


317.       The away members only solution encourages the promotion
of membership schemes offering discounts, favourable travel
facilities and other benefits.     It aims to limit away supporters
to those, in effect, vouched for by the away club.      Misbehaviour
would result in loss of membership and thus exclusion from future
away matches as well as loss of other membership privileges.         The
scheme has the unanimous approval of the 48 third and fourth
division clubs, given at their annual general meeting in June
1989.


318.       As with any proposed solution to the hooligan problem,
this scheme cannot be watertight.     It has to be recognised that
any membership scheme is vulnerable to abuse arising from the
loss or theft of cards and from the determined activities of
those who, for whatever reason, do not possess them.      The away
members only scheme does at least hold out good prospects of
improving behaviour in the away supporters1 enclosure since only
those vetted by the away club will be allocated tickets there.
That may deter others from travelling but there may still be some
who are determined to travel and get in.     On occasion, the FA has
ordered that a club's supporters having a bad record for causing
disorder can be admitted at away matches only if they are
accredited members of their own club.     Leeds United is an
example.   This has, on the whole, proved beneficial.       However, on
occasions, Leeds non-member supporters - perhaps those living
near the ground Leeds United are due to visit - manage to get
tickets intended for home supporters at or from the ground.        They
then get into the wrong end and cause trouble.     This seems to be
what happened at Ayresome Park on 9 December 1989.      Much
therefore depends upon the care and scrutiny given to ticket
allocation by the home club.     Often it is too easy for
segregation plans to be thwarted by ready availability to all of
tickets from the home club whether at the box office or even by
credit card over the telephone.     I appreciate the difficulty of
identifying surely home and away supporters but clubs should
review their procedures with a view to tightening them.


319.      Despite its imperfections, I consider the away members
only solution has some merit both in excluding undesirables from
away supporters' enclosures and in encouraging the growth of club
membership schemes conferring real benefits on members.     It
should be given further consideration.




                                  128
                              CHAPTER 11
             OTHER POSSIBLE MEASURES AGAINST HOOLIGANS


Exclusion Orders


320.       At present, pursuant to Part IV of the Public Order Act
1986, a court, on convicting a person of an offence connected
with football has power, in addition to imposing a sentence,
making a probation order or discharging him, to make an exclusion
order prohibiting him from entering premises to attend any
football match.    The exclusion order must be for not less than
three months.     If a breach is proved, the offender is liable to
imprisonment for one month, to a fine or to both.


321.       This provision has not made much impact.      It has not
been greatly used by the courts.        When orders have been made they
have tended to be for too short a period.        On one occasion,
absurdly, Justices imposed a three month exclusion order on an
offender appearing before them in Mayi        A great weakness of a
bare exclusion order is the difficulty of discovering whether it
is being obeyed or flouted.


322.       By section 27(5) of the Football Spectators Act 1989,
the provisions of the Public Order Act 1986 relating to exclusion
orders shall cease to have effect when the Secretary of State, by
Statutory Instrument, brings the 1989 Act into effect.        So
exclusion orders will go, to be replaced by expulsion from the
national membership scheme under Part I of the 1989 Act and
restriction orders under Part II, as I shall explain in the next
Chapter.


Enforcing Exclusion by Attendance Centre Order


323.       Were exclusion orders to be retained and used more
realistically there are two additional measures which could be
taken to enforce them.    First, there could be provision for
attaching to an exclusion order a requirement to attend at an
                                  129
appointed centre on the occasions of designated football matches.
Failure to attend would immediately be detected and would render
the absentee liable to further penalties including imprisonment.


324.           Such a measure would have a number of merits.    A mere
ban on entering grounds may be flouted without detection and in
any event does not ban presence near the ground.       An attendance
centre order would provide a means not merely to ban a hooligan
from entry to a ground but to keep him physically from going
there.       He would thus be prevented from causing trouble outside
or near the ground as well as inside it.       This would be achieved
without adding to the prison population, unless he defaulted, and
without any elaborate scheme impinging on spectators generally.
The provision would be the logical counterpart in the domestic
scene to the provisions of Part II of the 1989 Act relating to
foreign matches.


Is it Practicable?


325.          I appreciate that detaining convicted hooligans during
designated matches in the domestic football programme is a bigger
undertaking and would impose a more restrictive penalty than
requiring them merely to report on the occasions of English
matches abroad.       It is necessary, therefore, to consider the
present structure of attendance centres, what extension of it
might be necessary, the resource implications and the fairness of
such a measure.


Attendance Centres


326.          At present section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982
empowers courts to make attendance centre orders for young people
under 21 who:


       (a)    have been convicted of an imprisonable offence;


       (b)    have defaulted on payment of their fines etc;     or
       (c)   have failed to comply with the requirements of a
             probation or supervision order.


Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
previously been given a custodial sentence except in special
(undefined) circumstances.     The minimum length of an order is 12
hours, except for those under 14.     The maximum is 24 hours under
17, and 36 hours for those aged 17 to 20.


327.         At present there are 137 centres:      111 junior centres
for those aged under 17, and 26 senior centres for those aged 17
to 20 (males only).     The senior centres are, for the most part,
in the larger connurbations.     The Home Office has recently
reviewed the use of the junior centres and some with low
attendance figures are being closed.


328.         Most centres are in school premises.     They are normally
open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
usually, but not invariably, in the afternoon.        Each centre is
staffed by an officer in charge, normally an off-duty or retired
police officer, assisted by other instructors.        Regimes include
physical education and at least one other activity.


329.         Subject to these factors, attendance centre orders can
be made at present against those convicted of football related
offences.     They cannot however be imposed on anyone over 21, or
anyone who has had a custodial sentence.


330.         Effectively to exclude the offender from football
grounds, it would be necessary to have the centre open at least
on every Saturday afternoon during the season.         To try to include
week-day evening matches would create difficulties in making
centres available and might be thought too oppressive on the
offender.     If power to make orders were extended to cover those
over 21 and those who have served a custodial sentence, the
centre would have to provide for a more challenging type of
offender.     It would probably be thought inappropriate to mix 17
to 20 year old attenders with more hardened hooligans.
Resource Implications


331.       Such an extension would probably involve an increase in
the number and calibre of staff.    Presently, as indicated
earlier, staff include retired and off-duty police officers.
More such personnel would be required.    However, such increases
might be modest in comparison with the police resources likely to
be required to implement the national membership scheme (see
paragraphs 420 to 423 infra).


Fairness


332.       I would not suggest that the imposition of an
attendance order should be a mandatory accompaniment to an
exclusion order.     It would be a discretionary power available to
the courts to be used in accordance with the same criteria as
apply in Part II of the 1989 Act, ie no such order could be made
unless the court was satisfied that making it in relation to the
accused would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in
connection with designated football matches (cf section 15(2) of
the 1989 Act).     This would enable the courts to keep the numbers
of orders within manageable limits and to apply them only in
serious cases where the offender might otherwise be in danger of
a custodial sentence.


333.       In such situations, if the offender were judged by the
court to be a committed football hooligan, and were required to
attend for say two hours each Saturday in the football season, to
a maximum of 36 hours (ie nearly half a season) or even 72 hours,
he could not surely have any just grievance.     The order would be
less harsh than even the shortest prison sentence and, from the
public's point of view, much more effective.


334.       I recognise the practical difficulties in implementing
extended attendance centre orders but, if those difficulties can
be overcome, the scheme would have considerable merits.       I
accordingly recommend that consideration be given to implementing
it.
                                  132
Tagging


335.        A second possible measure to enforce exclusion from the
ground and its environs is electronic monitoring or tagging.
This device is used successfully in the United States.      Pilot
schemes are presently being run here by the Home Office.       Accused
persons on remand are kept under supervision using anklets with
small radio transmitters linked to a central computer.      Despite
reports of some difficulty with the pilot schemes, Mr John Patten
in an answer to a Parliamentary Question on 10 January 1989
stated:-


       "it is already clear that the technology can be put to
       practical use and that the procedures for fitting the
       equipment and monitoring defendants are practicable.     It
       would now be desirable to test the use of electronic
       monitoring on a trial basis in an area in which substantial
       numbers are likely to be eligible for its application as a
       condition of bail."


Moreover, you are reported as having said to the Bow Group on 11
December 1989:-


            "There is a need for courts to have powers to make
            curfew orders, confining offenders to their homes at
            certain times.   This should not be a 24 hour house
            arrest.   They need to be able to go to work if they
            have a job, attend training courses or probation
            centres, or receive treatment for alcohol or drug
            misuse.   But some types of crime - pub brawls, for
            example, or car thefts - could be reduced by curfew
            orders.   I very much hope that our experiments with
            electronic monitoring will enable it to be extended
            from defendants on remand to sentenced offenders, so as
            to make a curfew order properly enforceable".


336.        If the experiments do enable the tagging to be extended
to sentenced offenders, it would be a most useful and effective
way of ordering convicted hooligans, excluded from grounds, to
remain at home during designated matches.   Their obedience to the
orders could be monitored without excessive resource
requirements.


337.      I therefore recommend that consideration be given to
using this technology in the sentencing of offenders convicted of
football-related offences.




                               134
                PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989


                                CHAPTER 12
                     OBJECT AND PROVISIONS OF THE ACT


338.           The principal object of the Football Spectators Act is
to break the link between football and hooliganism.       It aims to
do this by a national membership scheme requiring spectators to
purchase and hold membership cards without which they will not
gain admission.       Those who commit relevant offences or otherwise
misbehave in a football context will be deprived of membership
and thus be excluded from attending matches.       It is hoped that by
this strategy hooligan activity will be eliminated both inside
and outside football grounds.       Thus, Mr Ridley, then Secretary of
State for the Environment, said at the launch of the Bill on 17
January 1989:-


       "For the first time, there will be an effective and
       comprehensive procedure to keep hooligans away from football
       matches.     Of course there will be attempts to abuse the
       system but if the scheme is effective, those attempts will
       fail.     We believe that it offers the real prospect of ending
       football hooliganism both inside and outside grounds.        If
       hooligans know that they will not be allowed into football
       matches, they will have no incentive to travel to them.           The
       link between football and hooliganism will be broken and
       football will cease to be a focus for violence."


Provisions of Part I


339.           The Statute is an enabling Act and permits the
Secretary of State to make an order by Statutory Instrument to
bring it into operation (section 27(2)).       I do not propose to set
out all the provisions of the Act in every detail.       In the
broadest terms, however, Part I of the Act is to the following
effect.
340.       Section 1(5) provides for a national membership scheme
("the scheme") to restrict "the generality of spectators
attending designated football matches to persons who are members
of the scheme".   Section 1(2) gives the Secretary of State power
to designate football matches or an individual match.


341.      Two new bodies are to be appointed by the Secretary of
State.   The first is the Football Membership Authority (FMA), a
corporate body with articles of association.    The FMA is to be
responsible initially for drafting the scheme (section 4(1)).
The Secretary of State is empowered to approve the scheme, again
by Statutory Instrument (section 4(3)).    The FMA is then to be
responsible for the administration of the scheme (section 3(1)).
Section 7 disqualifies from becoming or continuing to be a member
of the scheme anyone subject to an exclusion order under section
30 of the Public Order Act 1986 (after conviction of an offence
connected with football) whilst he is so subject.     Also, anyone
convicted of a relevant offence, being one of those listed in
Schedule 1 to the new Act, is likewise disqualified.     Anyone so
convicted is disqualified for five years if he receives an
immediate prison sentence and for two years if not.


342.      The second body is a quango to be called the Football
Licensing Authority (FLA) (section 8).    The FLA is to be
responsible for the grant (section 10(1)) or refusal (section
10(3)) of a licence to admit spectators to any premises to watch
any designated football match there.     It has power to impose
conditions on the licence (section 10(4) to (7)), to make
inspections and inquiries (section 10(8)) and to vary a licence
(section 10(10)), suspend or revoke it (section 12).     In making
decisions under section 10, the FLA is to have regard to whether
the equipment, the premises and the responsible persons there are
such as to secure compliance with the scheme.


343.       The FLA also has ancillary functions, as noted earlier;
first, to include in a licence, if the Secretary of State so
directs, a condition as to seating (section 11);     secondly, to
keep under review and oversee the discharge by local authorities
of their 1975 Act functions regarding football grounds and Safety
Certificates (section 13).


Contents of the Scheme


344.         Section 5(2) prescribes as follows


       "The scheme must include provision -


       (a) securing that the only spectators permitted      to attend
             at designated football matches areauthorised
             spectators;


       (b)   providing for temporary membership of the scheme,
             including (in particular) the temporary membership of
             football club guests;


       (c)   providing for the admission as spectators at designated
             football matches, without their being members of the
             scheme, of -


                  (i)   disabled persons, and
                  (ii) accompanied children,


             in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as
             are specified in the scheme;


       (d)   securing that persons who are disqualified under
             section 7 below are excluded from membership while so
             disqualified;


       (e)   providing for the exclusion from membership, for an
             appropriate period not exceeding two years determined
             under the scheme, of persons who are, by reference to
             circumstances specified in the scheme, determined under
             the scheme to be unfit for membership and for notifying
             persons who are excluded from membership of the grounds
             for the exclusion;
(f)   imposing pecuniary penalties on any persons having
      functions under the scheme for failure to discharge
      those functions;


(g)   imposing requirements as respects the procedure to be
      followed in dealing with applications for membership of
      the scheme and requiring that in Wales any application
      form for membership of the scheme shall also be
      available in Welsh;


(h)   imposing requirements on responsible persons as
      respects the procedure to be followed and equipment to
      be used in relation to any designated football match to
      secure that, except in an emergency, the only
      spectators admitted to and permitted to remain on the
      premises are authorised spectators;


(i)   to such effect, in relation to the admission of
      spectators to the premises, as the Secretary of State
      may specify in writing;


(j)   establishing and maintaining a central register   of
      members of the scheme;


(k)   regulating the form and contents of membership cards;
      and


(1)   establishing procedures for the making and
      consideration of representations against decisions made
      under the scheme refusing or withdrawing membership of
      it and for the independent review of the decisions in
      the light of the representations;


and in this subsection "accompanied children" means persons
under the age of 10 years in the charge of an authorised
spectator."


                            138
345.        Section 5(3) prescribes, inter alia, that the scheme
may make provision for the imposition of charges for membership
cards (section 5(3)(b) and by section 5(3)(c))


       "for the admission as spectators at designated football
       matches, without their being members of the scheme, of
       descriptions of person specified in the scheme in such
       circumstances and subject to such conditions as are so
       specified".


346.       My short summary of Part I omits a number of provisions
eg the constitution of the FMA and of the FLA, details of
offences, defences to them and appeals, Data Protection Act 1984
implications etc.


Provisions of Part II


347.       Before proceeding to discuss the implications of Part I
of the Act, which are highly controversial, I should refer to the
provisions of Part II which are not.    Although I assume my remit
is limited to sports events within the jurisdiction to which Part
I applies, the scheme of Part II is, I think, relevant.


348.        The aim of Part II is to prevent convicted hooligans
from travelling to matches abroad including matches in Scotland
and there by misbehaviour causing trouble and damaging our
national reputation.


349.        The scheme, again stated in broad terms, is to give
courts power to make a restriction order after a conviction for a
relevant offence, in addition to any other sentence (section 15).
Such an order is to be for five years if it accompanies an
immediate sentence of imprisonment;    otherwise for two years
(section 16(1)).     It imposes a duty to report at a police station
(unless exempted) on the occasion of designated football matches
abroad.    Failure so to report is an offence punishable on summary
conviction by up to one month's imprisonment, by a fine or by
both (section 16(5)).    There is provision in section 22 for
making restriction orders consequent upon convictions in
countries other than England and Wales for "corresponding
offences" to those listed in Schedule 1.


350.      Even those implacably hostile to the provisions of Part
I are mostly in favour of Part II.   In my view it is a sensible
and practicable measure to take against a persistent mischief
practised by a small minority but with national repercussions.
To adapt a famous dictum, never in the field of sport has so much
odium been brought upon so many by so few.   The scheme is aimed
directly and solely at the few whose misbehaviour abroad brings
such odium upon English football supporters generally.     I welcome
it.




                               140
                              CHAPTER 13
                    THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME



351.         Returning to Part I, it is crucial to a full evaluation
of its likely impact to know the terms of the scheme to be
approved.     At present there is no approved scheme, nor even a
draft scheme, since the FMA has not yet been appointed, although
the FA and FL have been offered "first refusal" for appointment
as such.     I do not know therefore how and in what terms such a
scheme would comply with the requirements of section 5 set out
above.


352.         The only guide presently available is the Invitation To
Tender (ITT) and the Statement Of Requirements (SOR) prepared by
Ernst & Young, Management Consultants, in conjunction with the
Department of the Environment.     This document is directed to
companies which have shown interest in tendering for the contract
to supply the relevant technology.     The ITT was dated 1 December
1989 and required tenderers to respond by 19 January 1990.        As I
write this report that date is still ahead and so the response is
not known.     Presently there are seven potential tenderers.


General Requirements of the ITT and SOR


353.         The successful tenderer will be required to set up,
manage and operate a company, the "scheme operating company"
(SOC) to run the entire scheme.     It will work under the overall
policy, supervision and control of the FMA.      At the outset of the
ITT, certain key objectives have been identified as follows


       "1.   Minimise the turnstile process time and the queuing
       problems that might occur in large crowds close to kick-off
       and keep them within acceptable limits.


       2.    Fund the scheme, taking account of its costs and also
       the possible disincentive effect to supporters of paying
       membership fees.


       3.   Ensure the application process, card production and
       issue procedures meet the requirements within acceptable
       turnaround times to spectators.


       4.   Deal with invalid card holders at entry points and
       ensure that offenders against the membership rules are dealt
       with fairly and that any punishment can be enforced.


       5.   Keep within manageable limits the size of the referral
       file containing banned members to ensure that speed of
       access to it is acceptable and still have sufficient
       protection against the use of lost, stolen, forged cards and
       pass-backs on match days."


354.        The SOR provides as follows:-


       "Apart from ensuring financial integrity and acceptability
       of the marketing strategy, the FMA will be concerned to
       ensure that:


       1.   the number of supporters is maximised while recovering
            the cost of the scheme


       2.   the scheme does not add to problems outside grounds


       3.   the scheme assists in reducing hooliganism."


That the scheme must be self-funding is further stressed in the
ITT as follows:-


       "The Football Membership Scheme will be self-funding, that
       is, the SOC will be responsible for all costs and expenses
       (including set-up costs) incurred in carrying out its
       obligations under the contract and shall reimburse the FMA
       for expenditure incurred by the FMA both on the SOC's behalf
       relating to the scheme and in respect of the FMA fulfilling
       the requirements of the Act.


       The costs of running the FMA will also need to be recovered
       from the income generated by the SOC.


       The levels of membership fees including any variations over
       the period of the contract, will be subject to the prior
       approval of the FMA".


Ground Modifications


355.        As to the cost of ground modifications, the ITT notes:


       "It is anticipated that there could be a significant cost
       involved in accommodating the membership validation system
       at some grounds.   Therefore any modifications to be made to
       the existing turnstile equipment and the inclusion of any
       new turnstiles should be entered against this item."


Applications for Membership


356.        Applications for membership of the scheme must be made
in person, not by post, using a standard application form.         The
form will include personal particulars and the type of
application.    This may be for adult membership, renewal,
replacement, change of details, temporary, junior or senior
membership.    The form will state the membership period (normally
two seasons), the applicant's nominated club allegiance, second
club allegiance and national allegiance.       It will include a box
to allow exclusion from any mailing lists.      The Post Office and
the clubs will act as collection points for handling applications
and carrying out an initial verification process.      This will
require the applicant to produce evidence to prove identity and
one or more passport standard photographs.      The collecting agent
will be responsible for checking the form, the acceptability of
the photographs and their general likeness to the applicant as
well as the other evidence of identification.      He will also
accept the fee.
357.        The SOR provides:-


       "Vetting of applications at the point of presentation in a
       collection agency must be consistent and methods to ensure
       that vetting procedures are followed must be employed.      The
       integrity of the system as an anti-hooligan measure will
       depend on this vetting procedure."


358.       The SOR states that the major problem in handling the
application will be to ensure that the attached photographs are
linked to the application details to enable the subsequent
correct printing of membership cards.


Validation Procedures


359.       I concentrate on applications for adult, junior or
senior membership.     In these cases, the SOR provides two basic
validation procedures which must be followed.     The first is a
"person check", explained as follows


       "The purpose of this check is to stop supporters getting
       more than one membership card.   The reason being that a ban
       on one membership registration would still leave the
       supporter in possession of another membership card.
       Therefore there will be both a name and an address check
       against the membership registration database (postcoding of
       all addresses will obviously make this procedure a lot
       faster and it may be necessary to insist upon postcodes from
       the start).   Also it is not sufficient to undertake a
       straight name and address check due to different ways to
       spell names and addresses.   The prime contractor should
       propose methods to ensure that adequate checking is
       undertaken against deliberate multiple applications."


360.        Secondly, there must be a "referral file check".      The
referral file will contain particulars of the following:


                                  144
             persons banned from membership (existing members)


             persons who are considered to be undesirable due to
             their past record who have    not yet applied for
             membership (this will include those with existing
             exclusion orders against them)


             lost/stolen membership cards either by direct
             notification or due to an application for a replacement
             card


             fraudulent copies."


Provision and Updating of Information to Clubs


361.     The national referral list        will be communicated to all
92League clubs.     Moreover, the   list   will have to be updated
weekly during the football season to add fresh instances of any
of the four categories of exclusion mentioned in the last
paragraph;     also, to remove from the list those no longer
excluded eg after a successful appeal.


362.     Each club will also be given the names of those
successful applicants who have claimed allegiance to the club.
From this information the club will be required to keep a
register of its own members.


Exploitation of the System


363.     The ITT provides for the FMA by itself or a designated
agent to be responsible for approving and co-ordinating the SOC's
commercial exploitation of the National Membership File and
extracts from that file.     This is said to be "in order to protect
and promote the reputation of football to avoid any possible
conflict with existing and future commercial activities at a club
and national level".     The FMA may also licence clubs to use data
relating to members who express allegiance to that club on terms
and conditions to be agreed.
Membership Cards


364.        It is mandatory that the membership card must carry a
photograph of the member, the member's name, full membership
number, the expiry date, club allegiance if any and national
allegiance.    The membership number must be in a "machine readable
form on the card as it is the only method of rapidly enough
matching the card against the national referral file".


365.        The card will need to meet standards for size and
durability;    it will need to last for more than the normal
membership period (two years) as this may be increased later.


366.        The security level must ensure that:


            cards are not forgeable


            photographs cannot be replaced


            machine readable membership numbers cannot be changed


            printed details on the cards cannot be changed


            supplies of blank cards are held in a secure
            environment."


All of this assumes that the membership cards "will be the
'plastic credit-card' type".


Entry Checking Procedures


367.        I now come to requirements having a critical bearing    on
safety and crowd control.     They concern the checks and procedures
at turnstiles.     The following six provisions are mandatory:


       i.   A spectator must present a valid current membership
            card to the turnstile operator.
       ii.   "A spectator must be authorised to hold the membership
             card and be permitted to attend the designated match.
             (Note:    it has been accepted that the turnstile
             operator will not be able to compare the photograph on
             the card with the person presenting the card as well as
             undertaking electronic checking)."


       iii. The card must not be "present on the referral file" and


       iv.   can only be used "once per designated match."


       v.    "The turnstile operator must not let any person into
             the match without them (sic) producing a membership
             card and validating that card using the procedures and
             equipment provided."


       vi.   "The system should be capable of directing members into
             their permitted sections of the ground, using the
             primary and secondary club allegiance field (unless
             playing each other) in the membership number to
             determine through which entry points the member may
             pass."


Turnstile Alarm


368.         If a card fails any of the six basic checks summarised
above, the system must alert the officials (stewards and/or
police).     It must also be capable of alerting the turnstile
operator but not alerting the spectator while in the turnstile.


369.         Three types of failure are envisaged.


       (1)   Referral file check shows the card is subject to a ban;
             card notified as lost or as stolen;     alternatively, the
             card has been used previously at that match (pass-
             back) .


       (2)   Equipment/card malfunction, membership expired,
             temporary card not valid for match.


       (3)   Card being presented at the "wrong" turnstile or no
             card at all.


Detection


370.         The procedure to be followed in relation to each of
these three types of failure is mandatory and important in the
evaluation of the scheme for safety and crowd control.


371.         If the failure is of type (1):—


       "The suspect should be apprehended and taken to an
       investigation area either inside or outside the ground.
       These will be situated at convenient places around the
       ground.   It is anticipated that there will need to be one
       investigation area on each side of the ground, although this
       is likely to depend on ground conditions".


If the failure is of type (2):-


       "The card will be retained at the entry point and a receipt
       for the card given to the spectator.    This receipt will
       contain either the membership number or some method to
       identify the retained card later.   The spectator will be
       advised to contact the club after the match when the problem
       may have been resolved".


If the failure is of type (3):-


       "The spectator is turned back from the entry point".


System Contingency


372.         Systems at turnstiles must be capable of operating "a
degraded service" in the event of system malfunction.       This must
include replacement of any malfunctioning unit within five
                                  148
minutes and alternative power supplies if the system relies on
external power.    If cabling is used it must be tamper proof and
more than one route must be provided between "every turnstile
installed unit" and the processing unit.     Turnstile systems must
not depend on a single club computer system.


Performance and Environmental Conditions


373.       Finally, two mandatory provisions are laid down which
are of great importance to safety and crowd control.


374.        As to performance the SOR provides


       "It is critical that the conducting of the six basic checks
       and any follow-up procedures described in this and the next
       section must give rise to no significant delays to ground
       entry at turnstiles.   The maximum additional time which will
       be considered will be no more than 1 second per entry to the
       normal ground entry rate for a particular turnstile and
       ground configuration at all times".


375.       As to environmental conditions, the provision is:-


       "Any systems installed at turnstile locations will have to
       operate reliably in the conditions experienced in an
       outdoor, all-weather, all-year environment.   Power supplies
       to turnstiles will be unreliable."


Summary


376.       As with my analysis of the statutory provisions, this
summary of the contents of the ITT and SOR is not exhaustive.       It
seeks only to indicate how the scheme is intended to work and
what is expected of it.




                                  149
                                  CHAPTER 14
                ARGUMENTS RAISED BY CRITICS OF THE SCHEME



377.          Having summarised the intended objects and benefits of
the scheme and the means by which it is required to achieve them,
I turn now to the arguments against the scheme raised by its
critics.


       (i )        Disproportionate?


              First, it is said that the scheme with all its complex
              ramifications is out of proportion to the problem.
              Setting up the technology and maintaining it secure and
              in working order;     adapting grounds to install it;
              dealing with millions of applications swiftly;      issuing
              millions of cards, renewing them, coping with lost and
              stolen cards;    setting up a referral list, distributing
              it and updating it;     training staff;   coping with
              banned cards and other failures at the turnstile;
              processing offenders;    dealing fairly with appellants -
              these, and other ancillary measures, amount to an
              enormous undertaking.     It is aimed principally at
              keeping hooligans out of the ground, but, so it is
              said, the problem inside grounds is less than it was
              and could be met by other less complex and less
              ambitious strategies.


       (ii)        Unfair?


              In aiming to exclude a minority of hooligans from the
              football scene, it is complained that the huge majority
              of decent spectators are to be put by the scheme to
              trouble and expense.    Each fan will have to go through
              the application procedures, presenting his form,
              proving his identity, purchasing and producing
              photographs.    He will have to pay between £4 and £10 a
        year to join the scheme in addition to paying for match
        tickets.     He will have to keep his card, remember it on
        match days, guard it from loss and theft, and renew it
        from time to time for further payments.        Should he
        forget it, or lose it, should it be stolen or become
        damaged, he will be put to trouble to replace it and to
        gain entry to matches meanwhile.     It is argued that
        measures against hooligans should target the hooligans
        only, not inconvenience millions of spectators in the
        hope     of weeding out a few.


(iii)            Casual Spectators


        There is anxiety that the scheme will, in effect,
        exclude from football the spectator who attends only on
        a casual basis or for a rare match which takes his
        fancy.     Such a spectator, it is argued, would not go to
        the expense or trouble (especially the latter) of
        buying a membership card simply to attend an occasional
        match.     This category of spectator is thought possibly
        to account for some 20% of present attendances -
        sizeable numbers to be deprived of their present
        freedom to watch football.


(iv)             Diminished Club Revenue


        Taking these lost casual visitors together with former
        regular attenders who may also find the scheme a
        disincentive, the clubs fear their revenue will be
        severely reduced.     For this reason, inter alia, they
        have     been strongly opposed tothe scheme.


(v)              Danger of Congestion andDisorder


        There is concern that the ambitious technology, which
        is yet to be produced and tested, may fail.
        Alternatively, that even if, by persistence and through
        trial and error, it could in the end be made to
                                151
                function reliably, there may be serious failures in the
                teething period.     In either of these events the fear is
                that congestion at the turnstiles could cause serious
                danger or disorder.


       (v i )         Will the Scheme Defeat Hooligans?


                Even if the technology works according to plan, will it
                (a)   exclude determined hooligans from inside the ground
                and (b) also induce them to stay away from the environs
                of the ground?     The criticism is that it may do neither
                of these things, especially not the latter.


       (vii)          Police Resources


                There is concern, especially from the police
                themselves, as to the numbers of police to be deployed
                and the facilities they will need at the ground to cope
                with problems arising from the scheme at the
                turnstiles.   These will involve banned cards, lost
                cards, stolen cards, unreadable cards and determined
                hooligans trying by various means to buck the system.


In short, critics say the scheme proposes a sledgehammer to crack
a nut;     a sledgehammer which may not swing at all but, if it
does, may not swing safely or even reach the nut.


Arguments Relevant to this Inquiry


378.            Of the seven arguments I have just briefly summarised,
the first four do not bear directly upon safety or crowd control.
They may have considerable force and (ii) and (iii) do bear upon
matters considered in Part I of this Report (especially better
treatment of spectators).          However, they raise issues of policy
which are essentially for Parliament.          Accordingly, I say no more
as to those four points.


379.            On the other hand, arguments (v), (vi) and (vii) do
bear very relevantly upon safety and crowd control.   They are
therefore within my remit and I shall explore them in turn.




                               153
                              CHAPTER 15
                   DANGER OF CONGESTION OR DISORDER



Present Risk of Congestion


380.        Congestion outside turnstiles and consequent injuries
or disorder are already recognised risks.     Those risks are
aggravated by the limited number of turnstiles available and the
limited scope for increasing them at many old grounds.     They are
also increased by the late arrival of a large proportion of the
crowd, which is a common occurrence.


381.        During the last busy 20 minutes before kick-off,
queues, or sometimes a phalanx, of waiting spectators, tend to
build up.    If the delivery through the turnstiles is delayed or
slowed down, that build-up grows and its pressure further retards
the turnstile operation.     The next stage is that those waiting
become restive, fearing they will not get in for the kick-off.
Crowd noise from the ground, denoting that the teams are out,
increases impatience.    There is then real danger of pressure
towards the turnstiles causing injuries and panic causing
disorder.    This is what happened at Hillsborough.   It is said
that it nearly happened again, despite Hillsborough and the
interim recommendations, at Coventry on the first day of the new
season.


Additional Time to Check Cards


382.        These risks have existed even without a national
membership scheme.    Since the scheme requires that all spectators
passing through the turnstiles must produce their membership
cards for checking, it is inevitable that some additional time
will be taken for each spectator.


383.        in realistic acknowledgement of the risk this might
create, the ITT states as its first key objective:-
                                  154
       "Minimise the turnstile process time and the queuing
       problems that might occur in large crowds close to kick-off
       and keep them within acceptable limits".


The SOR likewise requires the FMA to ensure


       "The scheme does not add to problems outside grounds".


More specifically, I repeat the mandatory provision of the SOR as
follows:-


       "it is critical that the conducting of the six basic checks
       and any follow-up procedures ... must give rise to no
       significant delays to ground entry at turnstiles.     The
       maximum additional time which will be considered will be no
       more than 1 second per entry to the normal ground entry rate
       for a particular turnstile and ground configuration at all
       times".


384.          Even if this is achieved, it would reduce the numbers
per hour admissible through a turnstile from the norm of 500
(mentioned in Appendix 3 at paragraph 33) to about 436.


385.          But can it be achieved?   This depends upon two factors:
(i)    what has to be done at the turnstile;     (ii)   whether the
technology can achieve the required rate;       not only in favourable
conditions but in real life and despite attempts to defeat it.


       (i )   Procedures at the Turnstiles


386.          The six entry checks which have to be undertaken at the
turnstile (see supra paragraph 367) require the spectator to
"present a valid current membership card to the turnstile
operator".      So, in the normal case, there will be a passing of
the card to the operator, a validation of it by him, and a return
of the card to the holder - all of this to be additional to
buying a ticket or (at an all-ticket match) presenting a ticket
and having the stub returned.
387.      The system as prescribed in the ITT depends upon the
operator getting possession of the card because it has to be
"retained" at the turnstile if there is a failure of type (2) eg
malfunction or card expired.    This requirement is significant
when one is dealing with a time factor not to exceed 1 second.
The scheme is unlike that at Luton, for example, which must be
quicker since   (a) there are two sets of turnstiles with an
operator only at the inner set and     (b) the member swipes his own
card through at the outer turnstile.     If the ITT were to be
changed to follow the Luton example, however, what would happen
at grounds where there is insufficient space for two sets of
turnstiles and how would the operator get possession of the card
so as to "retain" it if there were a malfunction?


388.      If the turnstile alarm alerts the operator to a failure
of type (1) - a banned, lost or stolen card or pass-back - the
suspect is to be apprehended.     The turnstile operator will
therefore have no more to do with him;     but how long it will take
to have the suspect apprehended inside or outside the turnstile
will depend on the police presence to which I shall turn later.


389.      If the failure is of type (2), apart from retaining the
card, the operator is required to give the holder a receipt for
it which "will contain either the membership number or some other
method to identify the retained card later".     Since the operator
will be unable to anticipate the card numbers of those which fail
for a type (2) reason, he cannot have a receipt ready in advance.
If he has to make one out, hand it to the entrant and explain the
procedure for redeeming the card later, the exercise would take
considerably longer than 1 second - especially if, as would be
likely, there is some backchat.


390.      It is true that the SOR requirement that the scheme
must add no more than 1 second to the turnstile time, although
said to be mandatory and critical, could be changed.     However, in
my view the authors of the SOR were right to choose 1 second as
"the maximum additional time which will be considered".     At 500
per hour, each entrant has 7.2 seconds to go through the
turnstile.    Any additional time could cause difficulty;      1 second
is an addition of nearly 14% to the existing 7.2 seconds and more
than 1 second would, as the SOR says, be unacceptable.


391.         If the failure is of type (3) - wrong turnstile:     no
card - the ITT requires that "the spectator is turned back from
the entry point".     The evidence I heard at Sheffield from many
police witnesses, and all I have seen and read since, makes it
clear that where there are queues, let alone a phalanx, trying to
get someone who is wedged in the narrows of a turnstile back
through those waiting is at best a slow, laborious and unpopular
exercise.     At Hillsborough, the crush made it impossible.


       (ii) The Technology


392.        It has yet to be shown that a computerised system can
be produced which is capable, even in favourable conditions, of
achieving reliably the requirements of the ITT.       So far as I am
aware, nowhere has a computerised system been installed to cope
with the massive numbers of people, in the short period of time
and in the all-weather context which will be required by this
scheme, quite apart from the added problems of attempted
disruption.     The scheme therefore invites tenderers to break new
ground.     The fact that it has not been done before does not, of
course, show that it cannot be done.       But it does require greater
caution and a more extensive testing procedure than if there were
a successful precedent.


393.        The only comparable exercise which has been attempted
was a Football Identity Card Scheme in Holland.       That failed in
its early stages and has been shelved.       However, I should stress
that the Dutch scheme was very different from that proposed under
the 1989 Act.     It involved only five clubs with a bad history of
hooliganism and it applied only to the away matches of those
clubs.    Only 25,000 cards were issued.    Much depended on careful
control of ticket sales.       The scheme was introduced at the start
of the 1989/90 season.       Unfortunately, the opening matches of the
season featured two of the five clubs hosting two of the others.
Ticket sales were not controlled effectively, the clubs were
hostile to the scheme, away supporters were admitted without
tickets and supporters on both sides combined to defeat the
experiment.


394.      In these circumstances, I do not think that the failure
of the Dutch scheme can found a fair argument against the totally
different scheme proposed in the 1989 Act.    What it does show is
the need to make any such scheme proof against wrecking tactics.


Demonstration


395.      One of the seven potential tenderers gave a
demonstration to a Parliamentary group using a laboratory
prototype to show the technology they could deploy.     That being
so, a similar demonstration was arranged for me and my Assessors.
We were shown a "smart-card" and how it could be programmed and
used as a football membership card.    Each "smart-card" contains
its own mini-computer.   Much information can be stored inside it.
The demonstration showed the holder passing the card over a
reader and the possible responses of red, amber or green light,
depending on whether the card was valid, doubtful or invalid.
Advertising possibilities and other packages of benefits were
also explained and illustrated.


396.      I was extremely impressed by what we were shown.
However, this was a single card, at a single simulated    turnstile,
in warm, dry,   indoor conditions, without a large national
referral file to be searched and without anyone trying    to
circumvent or wreck the system.


Police Apprehensions


397.      I quote from the written evidence submitted by ACPO:-


          "The question, however, which most concerns police
          officers relates to the efficacy of the technology.
          The (Act) naturally does not detail how it will work or
          what is required of it but, it is clear that, unless it
          is robust and virtually trouble-free, it will be
          counter-productive.    In the worst case it could be
          massively counter-productive.    At the least each
          turnstile must have access to a national database and
          must be able to survey that database almost
          instantaneously.    The machine itself must be durable
          against sabotage ... and must work without persistent
          fault. ...


          All our experience to date has been that computer
          salesmen have offered much and delivered little.        The
          police feel that they must be involved in the
          specification for any technology and would need to be
          satisfied that it works before support could be given
          to this scheme.    The consequences of repeated failure,
          hostile queues, interminable delays and the rest, are
          unthinkable".


Computer Reliability


398.      The concern expressed in that passage about computer
performance is not unduly cynical.    Many people have personal
experience of computer failures in one field or another.       The
computer "going down" at an airport causing delays at check-in,
computer errors in banks, problems with computerised entrances to
the London Underground, and, recently, computer "viruses", are
merely a few examples.    These problems continue to occur from
time to time even with computer systems which have been
thoroughly tested, which are widely used and have long ago passed
through what was thought to be the teething period.     In many
cases such failures cause delay or annoyance but not danger.         The
technology for the present scheme, however, has not yet been
through the stage of teething troubles.    Moreover, the scheme
could cause dangerous build-ups if the technology either failed
wholly or failed to work at the stipulated rate.    In the London
Underground, where build-ups were occurring, a manned entrance
channel has had to be provided at many stations alongside those
which are computerised, as a safety valve.     To have to open extra
non-computerised entrances at football grounds would (unlike the
Underground) scupper the system.     Its whole and sole point is to
exclude hooligans by computer checking.


399.         in fact, the Act seems to leave it open to the FMA to
include in the scheme power for a person in authority to open
gates and let spectators in, whether they have membership cards
or not, should an emergency arise (section 2(2), section 5(2)(h),
section 5(3)(c) and section 10(12)(a).)     If the exercise of that
power should have to be considered, all the problems which arose
outside Hillsborough would arise again -deciding whether the
power should be exercised or not;     if so, at what moment and by
whom;    making a clear decision and communicating it;     coping with
the in-rush and the loss of control and of segregation it may
cause.    If the power had to be exercised, the scheme would be
discredited at that place on that day and perhaps generally.


Relaxation in an Emergency


400.         I said in the last paragraph that the Act "seems to
include power" to relax the turnstile requirements in an
emergency.    But the power is only to be inferred by implication
from the four sub-sections I have cited.     Nowhere is the power
expressly given;    nor is it said who shall exercise it or how "an
emergency" is to be interpreted.     The admission of authorised
spectators only, and only by production of their membership
cards, seems to be fundamental to the scheme.     Yet there is no
stipulation in the Act that cards have to be produced.       No doubt
this could be provided for in the approved scheme.       But since
anyone other than an authorised spectator commits a criminal
offence by entering the ground, admitting a non-authorised
spectator is a serious matter and could amount to aiding and
abetting a criminal offence.     It is therefore surprising that
the Act does not indicate who is to have power to declare an
emergency so as to admit all and sundry and in what
circumstances.
Tests


401.          What testing is envisaged?     The ITT provides for a
"system testing strategy".         This is divided into "laboratory"
prototypes and pilot system tests.          Two clubs have volunteered
and been accepted to be the pilot sites for the latter form of
testing.      They are Derby County and Reading.      It is envisaged
that at least four different levels of test will be carried out
at each of the two clubs.         These four levels are likely to be:


        i.    issue membership cards to existing members;


        ii.   issue cards to all home or away supporters;


        iii. small all-ticket match (home and away supporters);


        iv.   large (near capacity) all-ticket match.


402.          The ITT provides:


              "Each test will try to simulate as close (sic) as
              possible the live situation with problem cards being
              used at random".


403.          I foresee two problems which beset this testing
procedure.      First, the difficulty of making the test conditions
truly simulate those which will obtain when the scheme is working
nationwide.      For example, only two clubs are to be used for the
tests "with problem cards being used at random".          Unless the
computers at the two clubs have to search a referral list
(whether real or simulated) as long as the national referral list
may turn out to be, they will not have been adequately tested for
capacity and speed.      The estimated volume of "banned" cards,
according to the SOR, is between 5,000 and 20,000 per annum.             The
estimate of stolen and lost cards is between 20,000 and 80,000
per annum.      It is not clear whether "per annum" refers to the
numbers on the referral file in any given year or to the number
                                      161
of fresh bannings, losses and thefts each year.     Taking the more
conservative approach, however, they could jointly amount to
100,000 per annum.     Accordingly, for a realistic test, the
computers at the two clubs would have to be able swiftly to pick
out the "problem cards" from a list of up to 100,000 - somewhat
different from the Luton list of six.


404.         The size of the referral list may have an important
bearing on the speed at which the technology can work.        I repeat
that key objective number 5 in the ITT stipulates


       "Keep within manageable limits the size of the referral file
       containing banned members to ensure that speed of access to
       it is acceptable etc".


How is the referral file to be kept "within manageable limits"?
Its size will surely depend upon the number of cards banned, lost
or stolen.     There can be no management control of the numbers
lost and stolen and the number banned will depend on the number
of convictions or acts of misbehaviour meriting a ban.        The only
way of keeping the number banned "within manageable limits" would
be not to ban all those who may deserve it, which would bring the
scheme into disrepute.


405.         The SOR estimates that the number of cards which are
unreadable or otherwise require investigation may be up        to 3% of
the cards being checked.     So at a capacity match with 50,000
present, the test would require 1,500 malfunctioning cards to be
randomly issued.     Presumably, the number of unreadable cards
would tend to grow during the first two years of the scheme as
the first issue of cards accumulates damage from rough treatment.



406.         Again, with pilot tests at only two clubs, the
hooligans' response will be unpredictable.     They may try to
sabotage the scheme at the pilot clubs which would really put the
technology to the test.     They may, however, prefer to misbehave
at some other ground where no tests are in progress.     When the
scheme is implemented generally, they will be unable to go to any
such "other ground" and may only then make their attempts to
sabotage the scheme.


Human Guinea-pigs


407.      The second problem is that tests can only be carried
out by using real spectators.    Bank computers and other computer
technologies can be tested by putting through figures, data and
print-outs.    This system can only be tested by putting through
people.   So in the very testing of whether the system may cause
danger, danger may be caused.


Disruption and Sabotage


408.      The whole raison d'etre of the scheme is the perceived
need to eliminate from football a hooligan element so
substantial, and so determined to make trouble, as to justify
this enormous undertaking.    Since the scheme seeks to defeat such
determined hooligans, it must be assumed that the hooligans will
seek to defeat the scheme.   They will see it as a challenge.
Wrecking or circumventing it will add a new piquancy to the
perverse pleasure they derive from their activities.    Mr Ridley
recognised this on the launch of the Bill, in the passage I have
quoted, when he said:-


           "Of course there will be attempts to abuse the system
          but if the scheme is effective, those attempts will
          fail".


409.      Accordingly, the technology will not only have to be
capable of fulfilling the requirements of the scheme without
malfunction, in all weathers and at the stipulated speed.     It
will also have to be resistant to the ingenuity and determination
of those who may seek to sabotage it or find a way round it.       It
will need to do these things not just most of the time, but all
of the time.   This is a very tall order, and for the reasons I
have set out above, I have the gravest doubts if it can be met.
                                 163
Should it not be met in full, the safety implications would be
serious indeed.




                               164
                              CHAPTER 16
                  WILL THE SCHEME WEED OUT HOOLIGANS?



410.        Even assuming that the technology can be made to work
reliably and is not disrupted or sabotaged, two questions still
arise on whether the scheme is likely to achieve its objects.
(i)    Will the scheme in fact weed hooligans out of the ground and
(ii) will they also be deterred from        causing trouble outside the
ground or at places en route?


(i )   Exclusion From the Ground


411.        The strategy depends first upon the court banning the
hooligan after conviction of a relevant offence or the FMA
banning him after some misbehaviour.         But to impose a ban is one
thing;     to enforce it is another.    True, the   banned hooligan will
not lawfully be able to enter by presenting a valid membership
card of his own, once he is on the referral list.        But he may
still enter by other means.


412.        A serious defect in the scheme is the acceptance that
the entry procedure will not involve checking the photograph on
the card against its presenter.        Such checking is precluded by
the need for speed.     But the main rationale of having a
photograph of the member on his card is defeated if it cannot be
relied upon to exclude someone else from using the card and will
be checked only should the user later be apprehended for an
offence.     So if a banned hooligan can get hold of a valid card he
could gain entry.     Not being scrupulous by nature, he may steal
one, borrow one or even buy one, for it is not unlikely that a
black market in cards will develop.       Despite requirements in the
ITT to prevent such abuses, multiple applications and forgeries
may also be successfully made.


413.         It is nothing to the point to say that if a banned
hooligan enters the ground by using a stolen or borrowed card and
is there arrested for an assault, he will have committed not one
but two offences, the assault and the unlawful entry.       He could
be charged with the assault even without the 1989 Act, and
without his commission of the assault, the unlawful entry is
likely to go undetected.       Nor does it seem sound to say that if
he so enters and is not seen to commit an offence in the ground,
all is well.       At the very least, the system is brought into
disrepute when he brags to his mates that he has beaten it.
Police evidence suggests, moreover, that the more sinister
members of hooligan gangs often do not use violence themselves,
but, from a vantage point in the ground, direct the activities of
others.


414.         I refer again to the submission from ACPO, a body with
special knowledge of the hooligan problem and of how hooligans
are likely to react


       "The success of the proposals will eventually be judged at
       two levels.


       First, there is the question as to whether this legislation
       will:-


       (a)   progressively remove hooligans from the football
             grounds and


       (b)   deter the allegiance of those who are involved in
             trouble and violence but do not necessarily attend
             matches.


       Second, and in a sense more fundamentally, the question
       remains whether or not the simple mechanics of processing
       membership cards through turnstiles can actually be
       achieved.


       The police view over a long period of time has been that
       these provisions are, to a great extent, marginal to the
       problem, if for no other reason than they cannot exclude the
       possibility of fraud by people who are, by definition, hell
       bent upon defeating the system, and because it will take a
       very long time before a significant number of potential
       hooligans are excluded by the scheme.    There are some
       countervailing advantages:


       (i)    the deterrent effect may be considerable;


       (ii)   the club disciplinary system may well be able   to take
               strong action on the evidence of CCTV alone;


       (iii) the game will be able to exclude many of thevery
              worst offenders.


       Nonetheless, the police view is that many of the measures
       that we have already taken ... are having a significant
       effect and are far more critical to the problem of
       hooliganism".


(ii) Elimination from the Area and Routes Near the Ground


415.          I have already noted that hooliganism inside the ground
has been reduced, largely by CCTV, but has been transferred
outside the ground.      I refer again to the submission of ACPO:


       "Two aspects of control have done much to change the nature
       of hooliganism.    The legislation which prevented the general
       supply of alcohol in transit and the universality of CCTV
       have made a major impact.    Taken together the effect has
       been that displays of wild aggression from hordes of drunken
       supporters are much less frequent.    The hooligan has moved
       out of the camera's range and in a word, there has been
       "displacement" away from the terraces to the darker confines
       of the stadium or to other venues such as public houses and
       to the transit system".


416.          This, together with other police evidence I have
received, shows that although football generally and a match in
particular provide the occasion and the focal point for hooligan
activity, many hooligans do not regard it as essential to be able
to enter the ground.     They need the converging crowds and the
inter-club rivalry or enmity of a match to set the scene for
their violence.    They do not need the football itself.   Mr
Ridley, in his observations quoted above (paragraph 338) said:-


       "If hooligans know that they will not be allowed into
       football matches, they will have no incentive to travel to
       them".


However, exclusion from the ground does not necessarily remove
the incentive for hooligans to turn up there.


417.       I fear it may be merely wishful thinking to assume that
football hooligans, banned from inside grounds, will not, if they
are free to do so, turn up and cause trouble outside, in public
houses or in the town.     It would be surprising if hooligans of Mr
Justice Popplewell's group I (paragraph 48 supra) were totally to
abandon their activities of attacking and baiting away supporters
just because they could not themselves get into the ground.


418.       It is argued by advocates of the scheme that
eliminating hooligans from outside the ground, as well as inside
it, has been achieved at Luton.     However, the success at Luton
does not in my view bear directly upon the likely outcome of the
national scheme.    The main factor in Luton's success has been the
ban on away supporters which removes the focus for violence.
There are also the other factors already noted, the geographical
position of Luton, the comparatively small attendances and the
fact that the Luton scheme has operated at only one club.


419.       I therefore have grave doubts whether the scheme will
achieve its object of eliminating hooligans from inside the
ground.    I have even stronger doubts as to whether it will
achieve its further object of ending football hooliganism outside
grounds.    Indeed, I do not think it will.   I fear that, in the
short term at least, it may actually increase trouble outside
grounds.
                              CHAPTER 17
                           POLICE RESOURCES



420.         The scheme envisages that the checking procedure at
turnstiles will let valid card holders through but will produce
the three types of failure already described.        Each of those
three types of failure may involve an offence by the person
presenting the card and the first type is quite likely to do so.
There will therefore have to be police present to apprehend the
suspect, investigate the circumstances and, it may be, make an
arrest.   I have already quoted the estimated failures of       types
(1) and (2) anticipated in the SOR.       Even assuming the estimates
are correct for the grounds as a whole, there will be no means of
knowing how many "problem cards" will be presented at any
particular bank of turnstiles.     There will need to be enough
police to be able to monitor each turnstile throughout the
admission period.     If a banned card is presented, the entrant
will need to be taken by an officer to "an investigation area".
The SOR anticipates there will need to be one investigation area
at each side of the ground.     Presumably, staff there will be
equipped with the means to investigate the problem card fully.
It may then be necessary for the suspect to be arrested and
processed.    Whilst the officer who has apprehended him is away
from the turnstile through which the suspect came, further card
holders should be coming through the same turnstile at a rate of
about 1 per 8 seconds or faster.        There will therefore need to be
enough officers to cope with further problem cards.        Even if the
apprehending officer merely takes the suspect to an investigation
room and hands him over to officers stationed there before
returning to his post, the turnover rate at the turnstiles would
need a substantial number of officers.        Requiring stewards to do
the job may be inappropriate since arrests may have to be made.
Again, if the suspect realises he may be about to be arrested, he
may seek to rush off and lose himself in the crowd.        So dealing
with presenters of "problem cards" may have to be done solely by
the police.     If the scheme showed, after an initial period, that
                                  170
the incidence of "problem cards" had settled down to a modest
number, the police commitment could be reduced.      But initially,
considerable numbers will be needed to perform these functions in
addition to those habitually undertaken.


421.          Police anxiety about this commitment of resources is
summarised as follows by ACPO:


       "The second level at which the technology causes concern
       relates to procedures following a "red light" at the
       turnstiles.    Policing at turnstiles at present is very
       selective and the Police Service could not countenance
       providing the sort of cover which would allow for a quick
       response to each turnstile in the event of a problem.      The
       only powers conferred in the Bill are on the police and on
       the face of it every attempt to enter which activates a "red
       light" suggests an offence is being committed.    At
       Manchester United for example 30,000 people will pass
       through the turnstiles in just over 20 minutes before kick-
       off.    There are about 100 turnstiles and the prospects of
       policing this system are absolutely daunting".


422.          The example of Manchester United in that passage is
confirmed by the club itself in a paper on the national
membership scheme entitled "A United Perspective".      At page 3,
the club says:


       "We have yet to be shown the computer hardware that will do
       the work successfully.    Manchester United has run a
       computerised box office for more than 15 years now and it is
       well known that what is promised by computer companies
       rarely, if ever, performs to anything like its supposed
       potential in "real" situations where they may have had no
       experience.   Average attendances at Old Trafford are around
       40,000 but on occasions this figure can go as high as
       56,000.    Experience shows that around 50% arrive in the last
       30 minutes before kick-off and this number increases
       substantially for evening matches."
423.      There is a risk therefore that, at big matches, police
control of procedures at the turnstiles during the last 20
minutes before kick-off, in addition to their present duties, may
create serious problems.   Apart from the numbers of officers
needed, space will have to be found for investigation rooms.     It
is doubtful whether one "investigation area" at each side of a
ground like Old Trafford will suffice.   I therefore have strong
doubts about the practicality of policing the scheme effectively.




                                172
                                 CHAPTER 18
              STRATEGIES AGAINST HOOLIGANISM - CONCLUSIONS



424.         I fully understand and respect the reasons which
prompted the promotion and enactment of the Football Spectators
Act 1989.     However, it follows from my comments in the last three
chapters that I have grave doubts about the feasibility of the
national membership scheme and serious misgivings about its
likely impact on safety.        I also have grave doubts about the
chances of its achieving its purposes and am very anxious about
its potential impact on police commitments and control of
spectators.        For these reasons, I cannot support the
implementation of Part I of the Act.


Suggested Strategy


425.         As has been said many times, there is no single measure
which will defeat football hooliganism and even a package of
measures will take time to have effect.


426.          That said, the strategy I would suggest is     to consider
relying upon a combination of all or some of the following
measures:-


       (i)   Developing the detection and evidential potential of
             CCTV and the new National Football Intelligence Unit;


       (ii) Prohibiting, by creating criminal offences, three
             specific activities in the ground:


             (a)    throwing a missile;


             (b)    chanting obscene or racialist abuse;


             (c)     going on the pitch without reasonable excuse;
       (iii) Extending the courts' power to make attendance centre
           orders, in conjunction with exclusion orders, for
           football related offences on occasions of specified
           matches so as to keep hooligans away from football
           grounds;


       (iv) Using electronic monitoring (tagging) for the same
           purpose.


427.       These four measures are all aimed solely at the
hooligans and will impinge only on them.   Moreover,   (iii) and
(iv) are the only measures, other than imprisonment, aimed not
only at banning hooligans from the ground but also at preventing
them from getting into it or near it during matches.     Put
together with progress towards all-seating, improved
accommodation, better facilities, improved arrangements for crowd
control and better training of police and stewards to achieve it,
I believe these measures would give the best chance of
eliminating or minimising football hooliganism.




                                174
                                                               #




                   PART V - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS


All-Seated Accommodation


1.   The Secretary of State should ensure that spectators are
admitted only to seated accommodation at matches played at sports
grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in
accordance with the timing set out in Recommendations 2 to 4
below.


2.   Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of
     1993/4 season at high risk matches as defined under the UEFA
Regulations set out in paragraph 82 above.


3.   Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 above
should apply with effect from the start of the 1994/5 season to
all matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the
Football League, the Premier Division of the Scottish Football
League, and at national stadia, subject to a reasonable extension
of time in the case of a club promoted to the second division of
the Football League or the Premier Division of the Scottish
Football League.   Standing accommodation at these grounds should
be reduced annually by 20% of the present standing capacity (such
present standing capacity to be calculated according to
Recommendation 8 below), the first 20% deduction being effective
from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1994.


4.   Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 should
apply with effect from the start of the 1999/2000 season to all
matches at all other grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975.   Standing accommodation at these grounds
should be reduced annually by 10% of the present standing
capacity (such present standing capacity to be calculated
according to Recommendation 8 below),   the first 10% deduction
being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by
August 1999.


                                175
Advisory Design Council


5.   The Football Association and the Football League should
establish an Advisory Design Council whose functions should be


     (a)   to conduct and marshal research into the improvement
           and design of football stadia;


     (b)   to disseminate regularly such information and expertise
           as they acquire in this field to members of the
           Football League and, on request, to other football and
           sports clubs in England, Wales and Scotland.


National Inspectorate and Review Body


6.   (a)   If Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989 is
implemented, section 13 should be brought into force giving the
Football Licensing Authority the functions and powers therein
specified (power to review the discharge of functions by local
authorities).     If Part I of the Act is not implemented or is
substantially delayed, other arrangements should be made for the
discharge of the functions and powers in section 13 of the Act by
the appointment of a body to exercise them.


     (b)          In either event, the body exercising those functions
and powers in relation to association football should also be
entrusted with similar functions and powers regarding the
discharge by local authorities of their certifying and licensing
functions in relation to other sports grounds and sports
entertainments pursuant to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
and Parts III and IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
Sport Act 1987.


Maximum Capacities for Terraces


7.   Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which
are self-contained, the Safety Certificate should specify the
maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or
area.


A pen or area is to be deemed "self-contained" notwithstanding
that it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or
area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.


8.      Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in
accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide
figure") subject to the following qualifications:-


        (a)   the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and
              222 of the Green Guide (when the terrace or viewing
              slope is in good condition) should be 47 not 54.


        (b)   the minimum figure specified in paragraph 221 and 222
              (when the terrace or viewing slope materially deviates
              from the recommended guidelines, so as to constitute a
              possible hazard to individuals closely packed) should
              be 0 not 27;


        (c)   in arriving at "the Green Guide figure", proper and
              realistic allowance must be made for all factors which
              should reduce the permissible density including those
              specified in paragraphs 220 to 224 inclusive of the
              Green Guide;


9.      Arrangements should be made:-


        (a)   to limit the number of spectators entering each self-
              contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure
              assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
              either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing
              arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and


        (b)   to close off further access to such pen or area when
              its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


10.     The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass
           through a turnstile should be 660 persons per hour, not 750 per
           hour as stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide.    The maximum
           rate for any particular turnstile must take full account of all
           circumstances including those given as examples in paragraph 47.



           Filling and Monitoring Terraces


           11.   There should be a written statement of intent, agreed
           between the club and the police, setting out their respective
           functions as to crowd safety and control and in particular as to
 #         the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and
           the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid
           overcrowding.    Any variation of the document in respect of an
           individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.


           12.   (a)   At each match, there should be on the perimeter track,
-2^q C|.   for each self-contained pen or other standing area (subject to
           (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a
           police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty
           is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible
           overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
           occupied by spectators.    Whoever is so appointed should be in
           addition to any other steward or police presence.    He should have
           ready access to a police officer who can authorise access through
           gates to the pitch under Recommendation 20 below.


                 (b)        This Recommendation need not be applied to any self-
  l o <v   contained pen or other standing area where the spectators
           present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match
           do not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity,
           or 2,000, whichever is the lower.


           Gangways


           13.   Gangways should be kept clear, in accordance with paragraphs
           97 to 99 of the Green Guide.    Gangways should be painted in a
           conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not.     The Safety
                                             178
        Certificate should require that no standing is allowed in
        gangways and that they be painted.


        Fences and Gates


        14.   All spikes or similar constructions on perimeter or radial
        fences, and any sections overhanging or returning inwards towards
        spectators, should be removed.


        15.   Perimeter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 metres,
        measured from the top of the fence to the lowest point at which
        spectators may stand, and including any wall or other foundations
        forming part of the perimeter boundary.


        16.   All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to
        the standing areas and especially those with duties under
        Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed and trained with
        regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition
        of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics.   Training should
        include demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to
        enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd
        densities.


        17.   There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or
        other self-contained area sufficient gates of a minimum width of
t<n     1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to be evacuated onto the
        pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of that
v°n     pen or area.


        18.   All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other
        self-contained areas should be painted in a different colour from
2jD2_
        the rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit".


        19.   Where there is a perimeter fence in front of a pen or
        enclosure, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open
l o l   during the period when spectators are in the pen or enclosure,
        wherever those in command feel that this can safely be done.
        Whether they be fully open, partially open or closed, they should
                                         179
be kept unlocked throughout the period when the pen or enclosure
is occupied.


20.   Each gate in a perimeter fence affording access to the pitch
from a pen or enclosure should be manned by a steward or by a
police officer when the pen or enclosure is occupied.     Whether
such manning should be by a police officer or by a steward should
be decided by the Police Commander.     In either event, the Police
Commander should appoint one or more police officers with power
to authorise access through gates to the pitch immediately in the
event of an emergency.


21.   Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided
by the club at each ground where there are perimeter fences to
permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers
of spectators if necessary.     Agreement should be reached as to
whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade
or stewards.     Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so.
Whether to use it should be a decision of     a nominated senior
police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers


22.   All crush barriers should be visually inspected each year
for signs of corrosion.     Any barrier found to be affected by a
significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.


23.   The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should
be reviewed immediately (if this has not already been done
following the Interim Report) to ensure that it complies with the
criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.     If it does
not, the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen
or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 8 above,
should reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates


24.   The Secretary of State should exercise his powers under
either section 6(2) or section 15(A) of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 so as to make mandatory in Safety Certificates
those conditions specified in the original section 2(2) of the
1975 Act.     So far as the original section 2(2)(b) is concerned
"shall" should be substituted for "may".


25.   In assessing these mandatory requirements in the Certificate
for a particular ground, the local authority should follow the
Green Guide criteria.    Once that is done, the resultant figures
and terms for that ground should be specified in the Safety
Certificate and no variation from them should be permitted other
than by formal revision.


26.   Where a local authority incorporates any provision of the
Green Guide into the Safety Certificate, other than one within
the scope of Recommendation 25 above, it should make clear
whether that provision is to be complied with absolutely or with
discretionary flexibility.


27.   There should be an immediate review of each Safety
Certificate (if this has not already been done following the
Interim Report) by the responsible local authority, which should
consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued,
the police, the fire service, the ambulance service and the
building authority.     Such a review should include an inspection
of the stadium.     Its object should be to ensure that the
operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to
add or substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter
of urgency following the findings and Recommendations in this
report.


28.   Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports
ground designated under the 1975 Act for which no Safety
Certificate    has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to
remedy the situation.


29.   Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local
authority at least once annually and each Certificate should
        require to be renewed annually.


        30.   Each local authority should review its arrangements for
        issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing
        Safety Certificates (if this has not already been done following
        the Interim Report).     Such review should require that there
        exists or is provided an accountable administrative structure
        whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
        effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and
1   R   decisions are properly taken in accordance with the local
        authority's rules.


        31.   To assist the local authority in exercising its functions,
I       it should set up an Advisory Group (if this has not already been
        done) consisting of appropriate members of its own staff,
IS 3
        representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services
        and of the building authority.     The Advisory Group should consult
        representatives of the club and of a recognised supporters1
        organisation on a regular basis.        The Advisory Group's terms of
        reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd
        safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
        attendance at matches.    The Advisory Group should have a chairman
        from the local authority, and an effective procedure.        Its
        resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to
        produce regular written reports for consideration by the local
        authority.


        Duties of Each Football Club


        32.   Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of
        flow measured (if this has not already been done following the
        Interim Report).     Thereafter, regular inspections should be made
        to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting
        spectators at the rate anticipated.


        33.   The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and
        the turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all
        the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can
                                          182
pass through the turnstiles within one hour.   If that cannot be
done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
accordingly.   Since this recommendation includes terms and
conditions within the scope of the original section 2(2)(c)(i) of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 it should be given effect
in the Safety Certificate (see Recommendation 24 above).


34.   Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of
the area served by them is about to be reached and arrangements
should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with
turnstile operators for this purpose.


35.   Closed circuit television should be so installed as to
enable crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas
and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and
throughout a match.


36.   All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the
ground should be comprehensively reviewed (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report).   It should, in
relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye­
catching, simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the
rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing areas.
Any redundant signs should be removed.


37.   Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and
clear and should correlate absolutely with the information
provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the
ground.   Retained ticket stubs should contain information
necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.


38.   Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in
position by a particular time should be reviewed (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report) by clubs in
conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with
the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.


39.   Clubs should consider maintaining a record on computer of
                                183
ticket sales before the day of the match, for season tickets and
tickets for all-ticket matches for seated areas, containing the
names and addresses of those purchasing tickets.


40.   All-ticket matches should be confined to those at which a
capacity or near capacity crowd is expected.     When a match has
been designated all-ticket, clubs should not sell tickets at the
match and should take steps to advise the spectators of both
clubs accordingly.


41.   Each club should consult with a recognised supporters1 club
as to the provision of pre-match entertainment aimed at
attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


42.   Clubs should recruit and retain sufficient competent
stewards. They should be fit, active and robust, and preferably
between the ages of 18 and 55.     Clubs should ensure that stewards
are fully trained, aware of their duties under Annex B of the
Green Guide and under the Statement of Intent (see Recommendation
11) and able to perform them.


43.   The club should provide a police control room which is:-


      (a)   well placed, so as to command a good view of the    whole
            pitch and of the spectator area surrounding it;


      (b)   of sufficient size for the commander, his deputy    and
            enough officers to operate the radios, telephones and
            CCTV screens.   There should be space for others who may
            need from time to time to visit the room eg other
            senior officers, club management or a member of the
            emergency services;


      (c)   well equipped with CCTV, radio and telephone facilities
            and, where necessary, sound-proofed against excessive
            crowd noise.


It should be the duty of the club to provide a room and equipment
to the satisfaction of the chief officer nominated under
Recommendation 44 below.


Police Planning


44.   The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there
is one designated sports ground or more should nominate a chief
officer to liaise with the management of each football club and
local authority concerned in respect of the safety and control of
crowds.


45.   The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports
ground, and the pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there,
should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any
overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking appropriate steps
to remedy it.


46.   The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports
ground should enable the police to cope with any foreseeable
pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their
departure.   It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable
rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or
outside the ground.


47.   Police planning should provide that ticketless fans should
not be allowed to enter a designated sports ground except in an
emergency.


48.   Arrest procedures inside and outside designated sports
grounds should be reviewed so as to keep to the minimum the
period during which an arresting officer is away from his post.


49.   The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion
of the officer in command at the ground.   Crowd safety should be
the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.


50.   Consideration in consultation with the club should be given,
especially for high-risk matches, to the possibility of an early
kick-off or a Sunday fixture.
           51.   There should be available in the police control room the
           results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
           inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical
           counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any
           area of the ground.   Officers in the control room should be
           skilled in the interpretation and use of these data.


           52.   Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific
           training course for senior officers presently acting as Police
           Commanders and those in line to do so.       Such a course should
•'S        include training in the basic strategy of policing football
           matches.


           53.          Police authorities should review the charges they make to
           clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so as to ensure
2\0        that realistic charges are made.       The Home Office should take
           steps to ensure consistency of practice, subject to local
           discretion and the need to have regard to local circumstances.


           Communications


           54.   There should be sufficient operators in the police control
           room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
           and answered.    The radio system should be such as to give
           operators in the control room priority over, and the capacity to
           override, others using the same channel.       Additional channels
           should be used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the
           airwaves.


           55.   There should always be a command channel reserved solely for
           the Police Commander to communicate with his senior officers
H     i
           round the ground.


           56.         To complement radio communications, there should be a
 "2'2.4~   completely separate system of land lines with telephone links
           between the control room and key points at the ground.


                                            186
57.   Within the control room, there should be a public address
system to communicate with individual areas outside and inside
the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground.
Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to
catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in
the ground.     This arrangement should be prominently advertised on
every programme sold for every match.


58.   Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising
boards to address the crowd.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services


59.   The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain
through senior nominated officers regular liaison concerning
crowd safety at each designated sports ground.


60.   Before each match at a designated sports ground the police
should ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are
given full details about the event, including its venue, its
timing, the number of spectators expected, their likely routes of
entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
concerning the control or movement of the crowd.     Such details
should be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
emergency services.


61.   Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio,
from the police control room to the local headquarters of all
emergency services should be maintained at all times so that
emergency calls can be made instantly.


62.   Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated sports
ground of emergency vehicles from all three services should be
reviewed.     They should include routes of access, rendezvous
points, and accessibility within the ground itself.


63.   Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should
be briefed as to the contingency plans for the     arrival of
                                  187
emergency services and should be informed when such services are
called as to where and why they are required.


First Aid. Medical Facilities and Ambulances


64.   There should be ateach sports ground at each     match at least
one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.    The   club should
have the responsibility for securing such attendance.


65.   There should be ateach designated sports ground one or more
first aid rooms.    The number of such rooms and the   equipment to
be maintained within them should be specified by the local
authority after taking professional medical advice and should be
made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.


66.   (a)   At every match where the number of spectators is
expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a medical
practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical
exigency at the ground.    He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid.    He should be present at the ground at least
an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour
after the end of the match.    His whereabouts should be known to
those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable.


      (b)        At any match where the number of spectators is not
expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make arrangements to
enable a medical practitioner to be summoned immediately to deal
with any medical exigency at the ground.    He should be trained
and competent in advanced first aid.    The arrangements made
should be known to those in the police control room.


67.   At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by
the appropriate ambulance authority should be in attendance at
all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.


68.   The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches
where larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local
authority after consultation with the ambulance service and
should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.


69.   A "major incident equipment vehicle", designed and equipped
to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be deployed in addition
to other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess
of 25,000 is expected.


Offences and Penalties


70.   Consideration should be given to creating an offence of
selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
authority from the home club to do so.


71.   Each of the following activities at a designated sports
ground should be made a specific offence


      i.     throwing a missile;


      ii.    chanting obscene or racialist abuse;


      iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.


72.   Consideration should be given to extending the courts'
powers      to make attendance centre orders for football related
offences on occasions of designated football matches.      The
provision should be capable of imposition on an offender aged 21
or over and subject to a maximum of 72 hours in the case of an
offender aged 17 or over.


73.   Consideration should be given to the use of electronic
monitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders convicted of
football related offences.


Green Guide


74.   As a matter of urgency, the Home Office should set up a body
to revise the Green Guide in accordance with this Report, these
      Recommendations and the Report of the Technical Working Party
      (Appendix 3).


      75.   In any revision of the Green Guide, the values to be
      achieved by way of percentage recovery after the required loading
lit   tests on crush barriers should be specified.   Acceptable values
      for various materials should be specified.


      76.   When the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush
111
      barriers for possible corrosion should be specifically mentioned
      and emphasised.




                                      190
APPENDICES
                                                       APPENDIX 1
        ORGANISATIONS SUBMITTING EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY


Abbott Mead Vickers PLC
Access Committee for England
ADT Check-In Limited
Amateur Athletic Association
Associate Member Clubs of the Football League
Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
Association of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales & Northern
     Ireland
Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland)
Association of County Councils
Association of District Councils
Association of London Authorities
Association of Metropolitan Authorities
Association of Scottish Police Superintendents
B J Auditorium Design
Ballast Nedam
Bath City FC
BBT Gargini
Bechtel Limited
Bedfordshire County Council (Fire & Rescue Service)
Bettersound Systems
Blackburn Rovers FC
Bradford Metropolitan Council
British Amateur Athletic Board
British Constructional Steelwork Association Limited
British Greyhound Racing Board
British Sports and Allied Industries Federation
Building Research Establishment
Professor David Canter
Central Council of Physical Recreation
Ceresco Ltd
Chelsea FC
Chief & Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
Christian Science Committee on Publication for South Yorkshire
Cleveland Constabulary
Convention of Scottish Local Authorities
Cremer & Warner
Department of the Environment
Derby County FC
Derbyshire County Council
DES Electrical Systems Ltd
Ernst & Young
Feedback
Fire Brigades Union
Football Association
Football Grounds Improvement Trust
Football League
Football Supporters' Association
Football Trust
Football Writers' Association
Foster & Partners Ltd
Gwent Ambulance Service
Health & Safety Executive
Hellmuth Obata & Kassabaum Inc Sports Facilities Group
Hercules Security Fabrications Ltd
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Hillsborough Steering Committee
Home Office
Institute of Building Control
Institute for Consumer Ergonomics
Institution of Structural Engineers
Intermediate Treatment Fund
Intracard
Jockey Club
John Leighton Consultancy
Keith Monks Limited
Kenrick & Company
Kent Institute of Art & Design
Kerrypak Limited
Kolara Limited
Lancashire County Council
Lancashire County Cricket Club
Larne Branch, Liverpool FC Supporters' Club
Lawn Tennis Association
Leeds United AFC
Liverpool City Council
Local Government Review
London Borough of Brent
London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham
London Borough of Richmond upon Thames
London Boroughs Association
London District Surveyors Association
London Fire and Civil Defence Authority
Lothian Regional Council
Luton Town FC
Ma&if International
Maidstone United FC
Manchester United FC
McGregor Associates
Medics at Hillsborough Working Party (University of Liverpool)
Merseyside Area Student Organisation
Merseyside Pensioners Association
Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
National Association of Fire Officers
National Council for Civil Liberties
National Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs
National Union of Public Employees
NGRC Racecourse Promoters Ltd
Norfolk County Council
Order of St John
Parliamentary All-Party Football Committee
Police Federation of England & Wales
Police Superintendents' Association of England and Wales
Pool Promoters Association
Queens Park Rangers FC
RAC Motors Sports Association
RAN International
RDS Technology Ltd
Recreation and Leisure Trades Association
Regional Ambulance Officers' Group
Royal & Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews
Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation
Royal Institute of British Architects
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents
Royal Town Planning Institute
Rugby Football League
Rugby Football Union
S & P Safety
Saltcoats Branch of the Labour Party
Scottish Education Department
Scottish Football Association
Scottish Football League
Scottish Police Federation
Scottish Rugby Union
Scottish Sports Council
Selhurst Park Stadium
Sheffield City Council
Sheffield Trades Union Council
Simmons PR Communications Design Ltd
Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football Research
Sound & Communications Industries Federation
South Yorkshire County Fire Service
Southend United FC
Southwark Borough Council
Spectacor Management Group International
Sports Council
Sports Council for Wales
Sports Writers and Commentators
St Andrew's Ambulance Association
St William's Foundation
Stadiasafe
Stadium Technology International Ltd
Strathclyde Police
Summit Group pic (with The General Electric Company pic)
Synchro Systems Ltd
Tavistock Institute of Human Relations
TC Team Consult AG
Thorburn Associates
Tottenham Hotspur FC
Trent Regional Health Authority
Union of Shop, Distributive & Allied Workers
University of Oxford, Centre for Criminological Research
Welsh Office
Welsh Rugby Union
Welsh Sports Association
Wembley Stadium Ltd
West Yorkshire Fire Service
York City FC
88-Consult bv (io)



Discussions were also held with representatives of Government
Departments, municipalities, police, sporting authorities, the
managers of sports stadia and football clubs, architects and
stadium designers in France, Holland and Italy.   Additionally,
the Consular Department of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
obtained information about sports stadia and sporting events from
British Consular officials in Canada, West Germany, Portugal,
Spain and the United States.


Some 90 letters were received from Members of the House of
Commons and three from Members of the House of Lords.   Some 1610
letters were received from the general public.
                                                APPENDIX

                       SPORTS GROUNDS VISITED


Football

Arsenal
Blackburn Rovers
Blackpool
Chelsea
Liverpool
Manchester City
Manchester United
Middlesborough
Millwall
Newcastle United
Preston North End
Sheffield Wednesday
Sunderland
Tottenham Hotspur

Glasgow Celtic
Glasgow Rangers
St Johnstone

International Stadia

Hampden Park
Wembley Stadium

Overseas Stadia

Stade des Costieres, Nimes
Stadion Galgenwaard, Utrecht
Stadio Flaminio, Rome
Stadio Olimpico, Rome
Stadio San Siro, Milan

Cricket

The Oval

Golf

The Belfry, Sutton Coldfield

Lawn Tennis

Wimbledon

Rugby League

Salford

Rugby Union

Cardiff Arms Park
Murrayfield
Twickenham
                                                          APPENDIX 3


                 REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY




                                                22 December 1989




Dear Sir Peter

You invited the Technical Working Party "to review technical
aspects of the guide to Safety at Sports Grounds;  identify areas
requiring clarification or amendment;  and recommend
accordingly." I have pleasure in submitting its Report, which
has been agreed by all members. Detailed supplementary notes
dealing with certain of the technical features will be available
for your use in due course.

We note that the Guide is not confined to football grounds and
stadia but includes guidance on all sports grounds, and we have
borne this in mind in our considerations. Although not within
our terms of reference, and for that reason not addressed in our
Report, we recognise that efficient and effective stewarding is
an integral element of crowd control and safety. Our
recommendations complement, rather than supplant, the need for
such stewarding.

The Technical Working Party met first on 18 October and held five
formal day-long meetings supplemented by many working papers and
informal discussions during the period available for report. The
heavy pressures of the timetable could not have been accommodated
without the fullest co-operation of those concerned, and I record
my thanks to all members of the Technical Working Party and to
its Secretary for the integrity, commitment and enthusiasm with
which they approached the task.




                                          PROFESSOR L MAUNDER
              REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY


The Green Guide

1.   The Technical    Working   Party   recognises  the valuable
contributions of successive editions of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds, commonly known as the Green Guide.  Its scope and
status are described in its introduction as follows:        "This
booklet provides guidance to ground management, local authorities
and technical specialists such as engineers on measures for
improving spectator safety at existing sports grounds. It is a
voluntary guide and has no legal force".

2.   In view of the variability of existing sports grounds in
function and in scale,      there are serious difficulties in
establishing comprehensive and general regulations, backed by
legal force, to cover all the       complex details of  design and
construction.    Adherence to the standards set by Building
Regulations should provide a measure of uniformity in respect of
new work at sports grounds.   Nevertheless, the Technical Working
Party is strongly of the opinion that a much higher degree of
standardisation than presently     prevails should be   sought in
practice.

3.   It considers that a revised issue of the Green Guide should
form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is certified
by the certifying authority, and recommends that any departures
from its guidance on technical provisions that may arise from
local circumstances should be fully defined and should be subject
to approval in writing by the certifying authority.

A Centre of Expertise

4.   The Green Guide covers a wide range of material, much of
which concerns the physical characteristics of grounds.         Its
successive issues have been published in response to a number of
serious accidents at football grounds.    This process has led to
incremental advances in the Guide as experience has      grown, but
the Technical Working Party does   not believe thatsucha process,
although essential, is by itself sufficient to cope with present-
day requirements.

5.   Many British football grounds were first constructed a long
time ago, and improvements have been introduced largely on an
individual basis.  A central body of knowledge applicable to the
complex design of such grounds has been conspicuously absent
although a start has now been made.   As a result, progress has
been piecemeal.

6.   The Technical Working Party considers that this is a serious
defect.   A continuous and expanding body of public knowledge,
drawn from the relevant professional fields, is required to
provide a basis for good individual designs at modern standards.
At a time when substantial improvements are under consideration,
including a higher proportion of seated accommodation, it is
imperative to establish and to disseminate rigorous standards of
design if expectations are to be fulfilled.         The work of
organisations in other countries, including the Comitato Olimpico
Nazionale Italiano (CONI), can provide a valuable reference. The
Technical Working Party recognises, too, the important work
undertaken in this country by the Sports Council.      Its recent
guide to the planning, design and management of indoor arenas is
a noteworthy attempt to draw together a considerable body of
research and practical experience.     Similarly, other work on
outdoor stadia has taken place and is currently proceeding under
the Council's aegis.  It is important that resulting publications
should be widely disseminated and that any guidance on outdoor
stadia should make particular reference to the structural aspects
of safety, comfort and crowd control.

7.   The Technical    Working Party therefore recommends the
formation of a central body, under a title such as The Advisory
Council for Sports Grounds, to provide an authoritative source of
knowledge for all those involved in the design and construction
of outdoor stadia. A detailed specification of its structure and
funding is not proposed at this stage but, as envisaged, its
members would be drawn from the relevant professional fields and
would commission specialist advice when necessary.    It would be
independent of any Inspectorate. The relationship of such a body
to other organisations is a matter for further discussion, but it
is suggested that the Football Association and the Sports Council
might wish to play leading roles.

Seating and Standing

8.   The Technical Working Party notes that FIFA has agreed
regulations on seating for certain classes of football matches,
and that the regulations are to be imposed within a short time-
scale.  It also recognises that the British tradition of standing
on terraces runs counter to these international requirements.

9.      It is clear that if British Clubs are to continue within the
international community, they will be obliged to close their
standing accommodation for matches that fall within the FIFA
definition.         For other matches, the Technical Working Party
re c o g n i s e s that,  whilst  standing  accommodation    is  not
intrinsically unsafe, the benefits to spectator comfort and crowd
control brought about by all-seater stadia are likely to
accelerate the move towards such venues.       The Technical Working
Party accepts, however, that although the introduction of all-
seater stadia for leading, well-supported football clubs may be
both beneficial and practical, clubs in the lower divisions may
find it less so and the removal of all standing accommodation at
these grounds may affect their viability. Alterations to seating
from standing arrangements at existing grounds may have both
design and cost implications through the impact on such matters
as spectator sight-lines and crowd density.

10. In addition, it must be recognised that there are many
sports (horse, greyhound, motor racing and car rallying for
example) where the nature of the sport favours the mobility of
large sections of the crowd and where viewing from standing areas
is an essential element.   Any recommendations towards all-seater
stadia must therefore be carefully worded.


Capacities

11. The Technical Working Party recognises that the safe
allowable capacity of any viewing area, whether seated or
standing, is the least of (i) its holding capacity, (ii) the
number of persons who can leave through a normal exit system
within a prescribed time at the end of an event, (iii) the number
of persons who can leave through an emergency exit system within
a prescribed time, and (iv) the number of persons who can be
admitted through the turnstiles serving that area within one
hour.

12. The theoretical holding capacity of a seated viewing area is
simply the number of seats in good condition which comply with
the relevant Green Guide recommendations including those relating
to distance from exits and gangways and size and spacing.
Determination of the holding capacity of a viewing terrace or
slope is not so simple;   factors that must be taken into account
include the strength and spacing of the crush-barriers, the
position of gangways, the dimensions and physical state of the
steps, the effective standing area, and the acceptable packing
density.

13. A packing density of 5.4/m2 is recommended in the current
Green Guide as the maximum allowable figure for terraces and
viewing slopes that meet all the specified guidelines. A reduced
figure of 2.7/m2 is presently recommended for areas deviating
materially from the guidelines. The Technical Working Party sees
no point   in retaining reference to the lower figure and
recommends that there should be no lower limit to the reduction;
ie if the enclosure had such poor safety standards that it was
totally unfit as a viewing area the figure should be zero.

14. As to the maximum      figures, the Technical  Working Party
concludes that a uniformly distributed density of 5.4/m2 should
be safe in static conditions where the terraces are in full
compliance with the Green Guide.    It recognises, however, that
there will be variations of density within a given enclosure, and
allowance should be made to accommodate this factor in the final
determination.

15. The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
allowable average packing density determined by the Inquiry
should establish a general reference for certifying authorities.
For an individual ground, the packing density applicable to a
given standing area should be derived from this figure, the full
figure for areas in good condition and reduced figures for areas
in poorer condition. Detailed calculations of holding capacities
should then be determined on the basis of the agreed packing
density for that specific enclosure or other relevant factors.
These calculations should take into account specific features of
the crush-barriers and      fences and of step    dimensions as
illustrated in the Green Guide.     The Technical Working Party
recommends a thorough review of the examples currently contained
in   Chapter 16 of theGreen Guide,     and the     inclusion of
appropriate diagrams.

Structural Elements

16. It is a fundamental requirement of safety that structures at
grounds should provide spectators with safe accommodation and
safe means of ingress and egress. They should also enable police
and stewards to exert proper control over crowd movements. If a
conflict should occur between these objectives, a substantial re­
arrangement may be required;    in no circumstances should safety
standards be compromised. The Technical Working Party recommends
that references to sub-divisions in Chapter 14 of the Green Guide
be reviewed with these considerations in mind, and that the
Chapter   as a whole should reflect these principles more
positively.

Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch

17. The Technical Working Party recognises the importance of
physical barriers as deterrents to pitch invasions.      It also
recognises that not all viewing areas present the same risk, and
recommends that consideration be given to differentiating those
areas requiring higher levels of security and other areas, such
as seated accommodation and members' enclosures, where a lesser
degree of security might be acceptable.

18. The   general   principle of separation endorsed by the
Technical Working Party is that the means adopted should provide
sufficient security against pitch incursions to enable the police
to take timely and effective action should such incidents occur.
Clearly a balance has to be struck between crowd control and
safety.

19. A configuration recommended for wider consideration consists
of a perimeter barrier on the pitch-side backed by a parallel and
continuous crush-barrier on the terrace-side, set back from the
perimeter barrier so as to provide a clear walk-way between the
two;   except in emergencies, spectators would not be allowed to
enter the walk-way.    Such an arrangement would reduce the risks
associated with a common feature of British grounds, namely that
the front steps of terraces are substantially lower than the
level of the pitch:    immediate attention should be given to the
elimination of this hazard.

20. The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
height of perimeter fences should be determined in relation to
the UEFA standard of 2.2m.    It also recommends the removal of
overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire attachments at the
tops of fences.

21 . A form of separation increasingly adopted in new stadia is
the dry moat.   To be effective, a dry moat must be sufficiently
wide and deep, and should be protected by fences on both sides to
ensure that spectators and players do not fall into it.     Where
enough space is available, a moat may offer an attractive
solution, but its application to older grounds is likely to be
restricted by limitations of space.
Emergency Access to Pitch

22. The Technical Working Party recommends that emergency access
to the pitch should be provided from all adjacent viewing areas.
It considers the provision of gates or gaps in any formal barrier
to be in all cases advantageous for the evacuation of adjacent
enclosures and essential except where adequate, safe alternative
arrangements exist.      Where fences,   barriers or moats are
installed the majority view of the Technical Working Party is
that there should be clear gangways leading to emergency exits on
to the pitch.  Such gangways must be properly identified and kept
clear at all times.   The exit gates or gaps should be at least
1 .1 metres wide or as wide as the gangways feeding into them,
whichever is the larger and should be sufficient in dimensions
and spacing to allow evacuation of the enclosure within a
prescribed time. The Working Party recorded a minority view that
the need to police gangways exacerbated friction on terraces, and
that gangways were not always essential for proper crowd control
and safety.

Crush Barriers

23. A review of the procedures for inspection and testing of
barriers is recommended.   The Technical Working Party considers
that greater emphasis should be given to thorough recorded and
certified annual inspections of all crush barriers.    Particular
attention should be given to the development of corrosion.

24. It is further recommended that 25% of barriers, evenly
spaced through each enclosure as designated by a competent
engineer, continue to be tested each year.     In addition, all
barriers which the inspection has identified as of possibly sub­
standard condition should also be tested.

25. The adopted test method should be capable of applying to
barrier rail, post and foundation anchorage, a loading equivalent
to a uniformly distributed load 1.20 x the design load of the
barrier as at present.

26. The test procedure should be revised in line with current
practice for structural testing to incorporate (i) a detailed
visual inspection of the barrier, (ii) a bedding-in cycle taken
to a percentage of the design loading and (iii) a single cycle of
proof testing taken as at present to 1.20 x the design loading.
Deflections at all significant points should be recorded.

27. After the full proof load has been held for a minimum of
five minutes the deflections should be recorded prior to release
of loading and the permanent residual unloaded deflections
recorded after the load has been released.

28. The Technical Working Party recommends the adoption of two
criteria for acceptable structural performance      (i) that no
significant   defects,   including corrosion,  are revealed by
inspection and (ii) that the percentage recovery of deflections
after   release  of   the   load during proof-testing achieves
acceptable values.   The specific values required will depend on
the materials of construction.
29. The Technical Working Party recommends that the distinction
currently drawn in the Green Guide between "peak" and "non-peak"
viewing areas for the purpose of assessing barrier spacing should
be abolished.   All areas should comply with the peak viewing
specifications.

Stands

30. A substantial part of Chapter 10 of the Green Guide, 'Roofed
Stands   with  Seated Accommodation',    deals   with temporary
structures.   It is recommended that this material should be
placed in a separate chapter, and that it should give explicit
references as required to British Standards and to applicable
regulations.

31. The remainder, which might be called 'Covered Standing and
Seated Accommodation', should clarify the special requirements
for safety that are involved, noting that fire risk is not the
only hazard and that statutory control of the requirements may be
vested in different authorities.      Appropriate references to
Building Regulations should be made.   It is important to ensure
that all spectators can be cleared into safe protected escape
routes within prescribed times, although such routes need not be
exits from the stand as a whole.

Ingress/Egress

32. The current Chapters on Ingress and Egress in the Green
Guide (Chapters 5 and 6) contain much useful information, but are
nonetheless in need of some revision. Consideration was given by
the Technical Working Party to the possible amalgamation of
features common to both ingress and egress, but despite the
common ground it is recognised that emphases might well differ.
The Working Party does not therefore recommend amalgamation of
the individual Chapters.

Ingress

33. The    Technical Working Party felt that Chapter 5 needed
expansion to incorporate additional clauses on (a) the positive
counting and recording of those passing through each turnstile;
(b) the    location of amenities inside      the ground to avoid
obstructing or disrupting the flow between turnstile and
enclosures;     (c) the sub-division of enclosures;        (d) the
adequacy of well distributed entrances into large enclosures to
facilitate even packing;     and (e) the design of entrances so as
to avoid local pressure on spectatorscaused, for example, by
downward   ramps.   Informative diagrams should be adopted and
general principles laid down, wherever possible.     The Technical
Working Party would not favour the introduction of numerical
examples which might, in any event, be difficult to establish.
It views the current maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of
750 persons per hour (as set out in paragraph 47 Green Guide) as
too high, and recommends a figure of 500 as the median for a
normal turnstile.    Furthermore, it recommends that variations up
or down be approved by the certifying authority, subject to a
maximum upper limit of 660 persons per hour.
Egress

34. Greater cross-referencing with other Chapters is required,
and the Technical Working Party favours expansion or amendment of
a number of paragraphs.    In particular, the density figure set
out in paragraph 54 in respect of reservoir areas is felt to be
too high,   and the members of the Technical Working Party
recommend that, where reservoir areas cannot be removed from
egress routes, a lower density of 35-40 persons per 10 sq metres
be substituted.    The Technical Working Party favours greater
emphasis on networking, and believes that the Green Guide should
include a stipulation that each ground produce proper, networked
plans, delineating all aspects of ingress/egress.

Enclosures/Turnstiles

35. The Technical Working Party strongly recommends that there
should be a direct one-to-one relationship between banks of
turnstiles and enclosures in order to maintain accurate counts of
entries.   A review of the current state of League grounds had
shown that sub-divisions such as had occurred at Hillsborough
were uncommon, and had generally been initiated by police for
crowd control.     Where such sub-divisions do exist,      it is
imperative that the total number of spectators entering each sub­
division should be counted separately.

Stairways and Ramps

36. The Technical Working Party notes the dangers presented by
stairways and ramps, particularly those used by the public in
large numbers, and recommends extensive redrafting of the Green
Guide to present more sharply the hazards involved.            It
recognises that the standards of safety required for stairways
and ramps which form part of the access between enclosures and an
exit and those which exist as gangways within enclosures differ
and recommends that the differences be explained in more detail.
Particular attention should be given by certifying authorities to
acceptable upper limits on the gradients of ramps and stairways.
The maximum gradient for ramps set out in the current Green Guide
was felt acceptable.

37. Similarly, the Working Party believes that the channelling
of flows by the provision of handrails should be given greater
emphasis.   The recommended width of channel for both stairways
and ramps should not exceed three persons (unit widths) in line
abreast, and the width of up to 1.8 metres permitted by paragraph
76 should therefore be reduced accordingly.      Handrails should
extend, by at least 300mm beyond the top and bottom of any
stairway or ramp.

38. The difference between handrails, balustrades and barriers
on or near the top and bottom of stairways and ramps, and their
appropriate strength requirements, needs to be clarified.

39. The Technical Working Party recommends the inclusion in the
Green Guide of a greater number of diagrams illustrating the
potentially hazardous situations in relation to stairways and
ramps and of the principles behind the provisions.

Inspections and Tests

40. Inspection and tests of all equipment and structures at
grounds are vital features of good operation.     Their range is
wide, extending from visual inspection before and after each
event to regular testing of structural components.       It is a
matter of serious concern that the interpretation of requirements
by those responsible is unacceptably variable.      The Technical
Working Party considers that action should be taken to ensure
that common high standards of inspection and test are realised,
and makes the following recommendations.

     (i)    The Green Guide should include a comprehensive
     tabulation of inspections and tests covering the essential
     technical features of grounds.    It should prescribe the
     minimum frequencies at which the inspections and tests
     should be conducted.

     (ii)   The required levels of competence of those carrying
     out the inspections and tests should be defined.

     (iii)   Records of the results of inspections and tests,
     including the identification of defects and the remedies
     adopted, should be certified by those carrying out the work.

     (iv)    A national Inspectorate should be established to
     oversee the adoption of common standards of inspection and
     test. Its terms of reference should include the compilation
     and maintenance of a national register of organisations
     employed to carry out inspections and tests;         central
     recording of the extent and type of the inspections and
     tests adopted at individual grounds;    and the provision of
     advice on inspection and test for those responsible for
     carrying out the work and for certifying authorities.     It
     would be in the interest of common standards if an
     Inspectorate of this kind dealt with the grounds of all
     relevant sports, and consideration should be given to its
     formation through an association of their governing bodies.

Fire Safety

41. There is general recognition amongst Technical Working Party
members that the current Chapter on Fire Safety (Chapter 11) is
well-defined.  It contains much useful advice on egress and means
of escape, application of which is not restricted to fire risks
and which would bear repetition in other Chapters.

42. The Technical Working Party considers that it is essential
to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and communication;
independent input from individual bodies is to be avoided. With
that in mind, its members believe that consultation on all safety
matters should be directly with the certifying authority who, in
turn, would consult with the fire, police, and other authorities.
Emeraencv/Auxiliarv Power

43. The Technical Working Party considers that the current Green
Guide contains insufficient information on auxiliary power.    It
recommends a separate chapter on the topic with a requirement
that emergency power should be sufficient to maintain an adequate
level of lighting, and public address system and to operate any
electronic gates, alarms etc for a period of three hours from the
time of failure of the normal supply.

Communications

44. The Technical Working Party considers that too little weight
has in the past been attached to the need for a comprehensive
communications    system, capable of reaching both inside and
outside the ground.

45. Chapter 12 of the Green Guide therefore requires substantial
amendment to reflect the importance of effective communications
systems, the need to make use of high-technology equipment, and
the value ofcloser co-operation between        club and police
personnel.   The Technical Working Party considers that Interim
Recommendations    31-34  should be retained permanently and
incorporated into the Green Guide.

Disabled Spectators

46. The current Green Guide fails to address the specific
problems encountered by disabled spectators and the Technical
Working Party recommends the introduction of a Chapter to cover
these aspects.    It should deal in particular with Ingress and
Egress and with  the provision of self-contained viewing areas.
                    SUMMARY OF MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS


The Green Guide


1.   A higher degree of standardisation in stadia design and
construction is required.     An updated and revised Green Guide
should form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is
certified.   It should incorporate appropriate diagrams and refer
to relevant Building Regulations.


Advisory Body


2.   There should be a single, central body (called perhaps the
Advisory Council for Sports Grounds) to provide an authoritative
source of knowledge for all those involved in the design and
construction of stadia.


Seating/Standing


3.   Whilst standing accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe,
all-seater stadia bring benefits to spectator comfort, safety and
crowd control.     The implementation of higher proportions of
seated accommodation should be governed by common high standards
of design and construction.


Capacities


4.   Capacity depends on standards of ingress, egress and safety
generally as well as the acceptable packing density and the
effective area of the accommodation.     The current maximum packing
density of 5.4/m2 recommended in the Green Guide for standing
terraces should be safe in static conditions where the terraces
are in full compliance with the Green Guide.     It should be
recognised, however, that densities normally vary over an
enclosure, and an allowable average figure should reflect this
consideration.     The reduced figure of 2.7/m2 should be abolished
and there should be no specified lower limit.     If an enclosure
has such poor safety standards that it is totally unfit as a
viewing area, the figure should be zero.
Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch


5.    Consideration should be given to different perimeter
arrangements appropriate for different areas of a ground.


6.    The means of separation adopted should provide sufficient
protection against pitch incursions without compromising
spectator safety.    The maximum height of fences should be
determined in relation to the UEFA standard of 2.2 metres.
Overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire attachments should
be removed.


7.    Attention should be given to the elimination of spectator
viewing from front steps of terraces which are substantially
lower than the level of the pitch.


Emergency Access to the Pitch


8.    Emergency access to the pitch should be provided from all
adjacent viewing areas.


9.    Exit gaps or gates should be at least 1.1 metres wide or as
wide as the gangways feeding into them, whichever is the larger.
All gangways must be clearly identified and must be kept clear of
spectators in normal circumstances.


Crush Barriers


10.   A review of the procedures for inspection and testing of
barriers is recommended.    Greater emphasis should be given to
thorough recorded and certified annual visual inspections of all
crush barriers, and to the establishment of an unambiguous
testing procedure.


Stands


11.   The Green Guide should contain a separate chapter on
temporary structures, with appropriate references to applicable
regulations and British Standards.


Ingress


12.     The current maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of 750
persons per hour is too high.     A figure of 500 should be adopted
as the median with a maximum upper limit of 660 persons per hour.
Variations from the median must be approved by the certifying
authority.


Egress


13.     Where reservoir areas cannot be removed, a lower density of
35-40 persons per 10 sq metres should be adopted.     Each ground
should produce networked plans delineating all aspects of ingress
and egress.


Enclosures/Turnstiles


14.     There should be a direct one-to-one relationship between a
bank of turnstiles and corresponding enclosures.     Where sub­
divisions exist, it is imperative that the totals entering each
sub-division are counted separately.


Stairways and Ramps


15.     The recommended width of channels should not exceed three
persons (unit widths) in line abreast.     Handrails should extend
by at least 300mm beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or
ramp.     The design and strength of handrails, barriers and
protection on or near stairways or ramps should be clearly
defined.     Ramps should not produce dangerous crowd pressures.


Inspection and Tests


16.     Action should be taken to ensure that common high standards
of inspection and test are realised.     A national Inspectorate
should be established to oversee the adoption of such standards.
Its terms of reference should include compilation and maintenance
of a national register of organisations employed to carry out
inspections and tests;   central recording of the extent and type
of inspections and tests at individual grounds;   and the
provision of advice.


Communications


17.   The Green Guide should be amended substantially to emphasise
the importance of effective communications systems capable of
reaching both inside and outside the ground.


Disabled Spectators


18.   The Green Guide should contain a separate Chapter to cover
this subject.
           MEMBERSHIP OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY



Professor Leonard Maunder, OBE, BSc, PhD, ScD, FEng, FIMechE
(Chairman)
Assessor to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry


Mr L N Bush FRICS, CEng, MIStructE, FIAS
City Building Surveyor, City of Liverpool


Mr W H Carter MSST
George Corderoy & Co, Quantity Surveyors
(Nominated by the Football Association)


Mr M G T Dickson BA, MS, CEng, MIStructE
Buro Happold Consulting Engineers
(Nominated by the Institution of Structural Engineers)


Dr C E Nicholson PhD, CEng, MIM
Deputy Director, Research & Laboratory Services Division
Health and Safety Executive


Mr B A Stickley CEng, FIStructE
Directorate of Works, Home Office


Mr J C Sweet (Secretary)
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
                                                           APPENDIX 4


           FINAL REPORT OF MR JUSTICE POPPLEWELL'S INQUIRY


              CHAPTER 2:   HISTORY OF PREVIOUS INQUIRIES


2.1   When my Interim Report was published, it might have been
thought by some that the suggestions which I set out had only
recently been considered.     It was said to be unfair to expect the
football clubs to have taken earlier steps to arrange their
affairs.    It was urged that they should now be entitled to more
time and more money in order to deal with the problems of crowd
control and safety at their grounds.    The problem of crowd
control and safety had, so it was said, suddenly arisen.       I have
to say that almost all the matters into which I have been asked
to inquire and almost all the solutions I have proposed have been
previously considered in detail by many distinguished Inquiries
over a period of sixty years.


The Shortt Report


2.2   On 11 June 1923, the then Secretary of State for the Home
Department asked the Rt Hon Edward Shortt KC to form a Committee
to inquire, amongst other things, into arrangements made to deal
with the abnormally large attendances on special occasions,
especially attendances at athletic grounds.     This arose from
disorder which occurred at Wembley Stadium on the occasion of the
first Cup Final on 28 April 1923.    The Committee reported on 13
March 1924.   The Report was presented to Parliament and published
as Command Paper 2088 at the princely sum of 6d.


2.3   About responsibility for control inside grounds the Report
had this to say:


      "As regards the general question of the apportionment of
      responsibility inside the ground as between the police and
      the ground authority, the principle to be followed should,
      in our judgment, be that the police should be responsible
      for all matters appertaining to the preservation of law and
    order and that for arrangements for the convenience of the
    public the ground authority should be responsible.     It is,
    however, most important not only that the police
    arrangements should be under the control of a single
    officer, but also that the duties for which the ground
    authority is responsible should be assigned to a definite
    individual, who should be competent to give instructions and
    to deal with any incident which arises.    If responsibility
    is definitely allocated in this matter it appears to us
    that, in ordinary circumstances, there need be no difficulty
    in this division of duties and that no disadvantage need
    result from the existence of dual control so long as the
    closest co-operation is maintained between the two
    authorities at all times.   We are of the opinion, however,
    that if any emergency arises or there appears to be the
    slightest probability of a disturbance, it is essential that
    control should pass into the hands of one individual, and we
    recommend that, in the case of grounds providing
    accommodation for more than 10,000 persons, on all occasions
    when specially large attendances are anticipated or for
    other reasons unusual excitement is to be expected,
    arrangements should be concerted beforehand by which one
     individual can at any moment take control of the situation."


2.4. That paragraph of the report continued:


     "The question in such circumstances would have become one of
     the preservation of law and order and we therefore have no
     doubt that the control should then pass into the hands of
     the senior police officer present, and we consider that such
    officer would be justified in any circumstances, whether in
     accordance with a pre-arranged scheme or not, in assuming
     control if he considered it necessary for the purpose of the
     restoration of order.   As part of the arrangements for this
     purpose we think that, in the very large grounds, there
     should be a central control box in telephonic communication
     with all parts of the ground and that the principal police
     and ground officials should be stationed there so that they
     may be in constant touch with the situation."...(Paragraph
About stewards the Report said:


"We understand that there is no uniform practice with regard
to the employment of stewards at sports grounds, that in
some cases they are only used to show spectators into the
seating accommodation, and that, in cases where stewards are
employed for packing of the standing room, they are only
employed when there are specially large crowds.    We consider
it desirable in the interests of safety that, for the
purpose of handling a crowd, stewards should be employed in
any case where the crowd is likely to approach the capacity
of the ground.   For seating accommodation stewards should
always be employed.   It is in the highest degree important
that any such stewards should be properly trained int heir
work and intimately acquainted with the part of the ground
placed under their charge.    We doubt whether it is
practicable to secure suitable men for this purpose unless
they are given continual experience in the work, and we
therefore recommend that every ground with a capacity
exceeding 10,000 which provides terraced accommodation for
its spectators should maintain, or have a call upon, an
adequate staff of efficient stewards, and should ensure that
they keep proficient by requiring them to perform duty at
frequent intervals.   Stewards should be organised as a
disciplined body and should act under the control and
supervision of their own officers.     They should wear a
distinctive badge of authority, which they should not be
able easily to discard."     (Paragraph 27).


The Report had this to say about precautions against fire:


"We have been somewhat surprised to find that in many cases
little or not precaution is taken against the risk of fire
in stands.   We do not suppose that either the risk or the
consequences of fire would be so serious in an open stand as
in a closed building, but we consider it most important that
adequate arrangements should be made to deal with any
      outbreak which might occur."     (Paragraph 40).


but concluded generally:


      "We are assured that these governing bodies are only too
      anxious to secure that their sport is carried on under
      conditions which will promote the public safety, and we feel
      that at this stage it is safe to leave the matter to them."
      (Paragraph 47).


The Moelwyn Hughes Report


2.7   The next report (published as Cmnd 6846) arose out of the
disaster at Bolton Wanderers' Football Ground on 9 March 1946.
Mr R Moelwyn Hughes KC was appointed by the then Home Secretary
to conduct an enquiry into the circumstances of the disaster
which arose by the presence of some 85,000 spectators.         50,000
had been expected.      Because of the press of people in an
enclosure two barriers collapsed and 33 people were killed.


28.   It is interesting to observe that the previous best
attendance at Bolton in the 1945-46 season had been 43,000 and it
was amply policed by a force of 60.      On this occasion there were
103 police to control 85,000 spectators, which is about 1/10th of
the present ratio of police to spectators at football grounds
both inside and outside the ground.


2.9   Mr Hughes made a number of recommendations.        He said:


      " B u m d e n Park is typical of most home grounds of the leading
      football teams in the country.     They have grown stage by
      stage from humble beginnings on sites acquired when the
      large gates of these days were not anticipated, or when the
      clubs had not achieved eminence.     It would be idle to
      suggest that the grounds or large sections of them, should
      be rebuilt, but if they are to be made reasonably safe and
      if the risk of repeating the tragedy of B u m d e n Park is to
      be avoided, then, I have formed the clear view that the
      following steps must be taken..." (Page 10).
2.10 The recommendations included inspections of the enclosures,
scientific calculation of the maximum number to be allowed entry,
counting those entering the ground by mechanical means and
central co-ordination of the system, all to ensure the admission
of a safe number of spectators.


2.11 So far as future regulation was concerned the Report said:


     "The preceding safety measures cannot be secured without
     legislation.   A Departmental Committee reporting on Crowds
     to a previous Home Secretary in 1924 (Cd 2088) anaemically
     recommended that adequate provision for safety be left to
     the pressure of the governing bodies in sport.    The most
     important of these was, of course, the Football Association,
     which had not deigned to appear before the Committee...


     The legislation should empower the Home Secretary to issue
     general regulations for different kinds of grounds and the
     broad conditions necessary for safety.


     No ground of any considerable size should be opened to the
     public until it has been licenced by, I suggest as an
     appropriate licensing authority, the local authority.     The
     issue of the licence would depend upon satisfying the
     authority as to the construction and equipment of the
     ground, its compliance with regulations and the proposed
     maximum figures of admission to the different parts."


2.12 Mr Hughes when on to say:


     "Compliance with the recommendations of this Report will
     cost money.    They will involve grounds in a loss of gate
     money on popular days...     The insurance for greater safety
     for the public demands a premium."


Mr Hughes ended his report by saying:


     "I earnestly hope that, if the proposals I have made in this
     Report, or similar suggestions, commend themselves to you,
     Parliament will not be slow in granting you the necessary
     powers."   (Pages 11-12).


The Chester Report


2.13 Mr Hughes' words fell on deaf ears.     It was another 22 years
before there was a further report commissioned by the Government
on the problems of football.     In June 1966, the then Secretary of
State for Education and Science appointed Mr Norman Chester CBE,
as he then was (Warden of Nuffield College, Oxford), to chair an
Enquiry.   His terms of reference were:


     "To enquire into the state of Association Football at all
     levels, including the organisation, management, finance and
     administration, and the means by which the game may be
     developed for the public good;    and to make
     recommendations."


2.14 Mr Chester made this observation about crowd behaviour:


     "In recent years there has been an increase in disorderly
     behaviour by spectators.    During the period 1946-1960 there
     were 195 cases brought to the attention fo the FA, an
     average of 13 per season.     In the following six seasons 148
     cases were reported, an average of 25 per season.     The
     matter was discussed some time ago at a meeting between
     representatives of a number of police forces (including the
     British Transport Police), the Football Association and the
     Football League.    Both these governing bodies have been very
     concerned at this development."


2.15 The Report continued:


     "We have not been able to devote the time and resources to
     the study of this problem which its complexity deserves.     We
     very much welcome the initiative of the Birmingham Research
     Group, of which Dr J A Harrington is Research Director and
     have been fortunate enough to see the Group's preliminary
     report.   We are sure that its findings will be of value to
     all concerned."    (Page 97).


The Harrington Report


2.16 This was made to the then Minister of Sport.^   It observed:


     "Some spectators carry knives, hammers, sticks and spikes,
     choppers, and other offensive weapons like powdered pepper
     which are not necessarily used for violent purposes but may
     be used in threatening displays.   There is also the problem
     of singing or chanting bawdy or obscene songs and phrases
     some of which are also threatening and provocative."     (Page
     8) .


2.17 About riots the Report said:


     "While such riots must be regarded as almost unknown
     accompaniments of football in this country, their potential
     seriousness and danger were exemplified recently by football
     riots in Turkey, where many people were reported killed.
     While comparable riots seem unlikely here, it would be
     foolish to rule out the possibility of much more serious
     crowd disturbances at football matches than we have yet
     experienced."     (Page 9).


2.18 The Report regretted inactivity thus far:


     "The absence of national legislation outlining minimum
     standards of safety and amenity at football grounds means
     that some club managements do not feel obliged to put their
     grounds into a state considered by the police to be
     necessary for crowd control."   (Page 33).


2.20 And continued:




     ^"Soccer Hooliganism: A preliminary Report."    Bristol:
John Wright and Sons Ltd 1968..
   "We feel that improved ground facilities would not only help
  to deal with the hooligan problem but do something towards
  its prevention.   Clubs often seem keener to spend money on
  the purchase of players than to undertake any major spending
  on ground improvement which would increase safety and make
  hooligan control easier.   The loss of revenue which a club
  may suffer from alterations may be the determining factor.
  There is of course no obligation on a club to convert a
  ground which can accommodate 50,000 to one which takes a
  smaller number in conditions of greater safety and comfort.
  Letters from members of the public suggest that already some
  are staying away because of their dislike of poor
  facilities, overcrowding, and disturbances, so that the
  neglect of ground improvement may ultimately be self
  defeating."   (Page 34).


21 So far as responsibility is concerned, the Report said:


   "We think that those responsible for club management and the
  governing bodies of football should accept far more
  responsibility for keeping their crowds in order.     This
   applies not only within the stadium itself but to club
   supporters travelling in groups to and from matches.     One
  gets the impression that some clubs disclaim any
   responsibility for the behaviour of their supporters and if
   the atmosphere of a Roman holiday is not deliberately
   fostered it is looked on with considerable tolerance.
   Football matches are commercial enterprises conducted for
   profit on private premises and clubs have therefore a heavy
   responsibility for keeping order and safety for the public
   on their premises."   (Pages 35-36).


22 In its summary the Report concluded:


   "The solution of the problem of hooliganism in the football
   stadium is ultimately the responsibility of individual clubs
   who must each deal with it in the light of local
   circumstances.   While a few clubs are exemplary in their
   attitude to the problem of others are laissez-faire and need
     persuasion to take a more active role in trying to control
     hooliganism in their own grounds.    This laissez-faire
     attitude does not help the police in their attempts to deal
     with the matter."     (Page 56).


The Lang Report


2.23 Shortly thereafter, a Working Party under the chairmanship
of Sir John Lang GCB and including a number of distinguished
members, was appointed by the then Minister with special
responsibility for Sport to examine the problems involved in
football crowd behaviour to which attention had been called a few
months previously by the Harrington Report.    Sir John's Report
was presented on 21 November 1969.


2.24 By way of introduction it said:


     "The Working Party was dealing with a subject which has been
     discussed almost ad nauseam during recent years.    Not
     unexpectedly the Working Party has not found a single simple
     solution for a problem which is often due to a combination
     of factors..." (Page 3).


2.25 The members of the Inquiry witnessed the demonstration of
CCTV equipment and reported:


     "... the view was formed that closed circuit television
     could be of value in the general subject of crowd control
     and ... would be an important factor in preventing
     misbehaviour by spectators at grounds.     It was a refinement
     which most of the top class clubs could be expected
     eventually to have as a matter of course."     (Page 9).


2.26 About alcohol the Report said:


     "There can be no doubt that consumption of alcohol is an
     important factor in crowd misbehaviour, both because it
     stimulates quarrelsomeness and because empty bottles are
     dangerous missiles.     There would be no advantage in refusing
     licence facilities to football club grounds - this would
     merely stimulate spectators to bring their supplies from
     outside."   (Page 14).


The Wheatley Report


2.27 On 4 February 1971 the Rt Hon Lord Wheatley was asked by the
then Secretary of State for the Home Department and the then
Secretary of State for Scotland to make an independent appraisal
of the effectiveness of existing arrangements for crowd safety at
sports grounds in Great Britain, and of the improvements which
could be brought about within the present framework of the law,
and to consider the nature of any alterations in the law which
appeared to be needed.   This arose from the disaster at Ibrox
Park where 66 spectators died.


2.28 On 16 March 1972 Lord Wheatley completed his Report and it
was presented to Parliament and published by HMSO as Cmnd. 4952.


2.29 The Report contained a technical Appendix.    Following the
Report, the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 was passed.    A
licensing system involving the issue of a safety certificate for
designated grounds was introduced and supporting guidance (the
Green Guide) was published.   In his Report Lord Wheatley said:


     "I recognise that a decision to introduce a licensing system
     for grounds along the lines I have recommended may cause
     anxiety to some football clubs and football administrators.
     As I see it, their misgivings are associated with a fear
     that such stringent conditions might be attached to the
     granting of a licence that many clubs may not be able to
     afford the cost and some may have to go out of business."
     (Paragraph 66).


2.30 "My answer to that is this.   My task was to consider the
     problem of crowd safety at the grounds.   Clubs which charge
     the public for admission have a duty to see that their
     grounds are reasonably safe for spectators.    That is a
     primary consideration.   It is accordingly necessary that
     some standards should be imposed and observed.    This has
     been recognised by the football authorities themselves ... I
     have canvassed all the alternatives that have been proposed
     or which I personally thought were reasonable to consider,
     and the one which I decided was best to meet the situation
     in the interest of the public is the licensing system by a
     local authority.   There is nothing new in this proposal.       It
     has been mooted for almost fifty years.     It can come as no
     surprise to the football world, and in the light of
     happenings over the years the demand for an independent
     appraisal and determination of the safety of grounds becomes
     almost irresistible.   I certainly cannot resist it."
     (Paragraph 67).


2.31 Lord Wheatley ended his Report by saying:


     "I trust that this Report may be of assistance to you in
     deciding what should be done to solve this important
     question of crowd safety in football grounds.     One thing is
     certain.   The public demand for something to be done has
     been growing over the years.   I am sure I am reflecting
     public opinion when I say that something    must be done now.
     The evidence certainly supports that view."


The McElhone Report


2.32 In October 1976 the then Secretary of State for Scotland
asked Mr Frank McElhone MP to chair a Working Group on Football
Crowd Behaviour.


     "to consider the problems caused by some Scottish football
     supporters and to make recommendations to the Scottish
     Football Association and other organisations concerned."


Among the membership of the Working Group were representatives
from the football authorities, from the football clubs and the
Strathclyde Police.
2.33 In the introduction to the R e p o r t Mr McElhone said:


     "There is no simple solution to the problem;     it is but one
     of the manifestations of anti-social behaviour besetting
     society in general today.   We have however in our findings
     arrived at a number of conclusions and recommendations which
     we hope, given a commitment to implement them on the part of
     all those most closely concerned, will go some way towards
     reducing the problem of hooliganism at football matches and
     by so doing turn football grounds once again into places of
     entertainment where parents can take their children to
     enjoy, in relative comfort and safety, the pleasures of our
     national game."


2.34 The Report observed that:


     "A hooligan is a hooligan no matter where he operates and
     the fact that his behaviour is conspicuous at a football
     match has very often nothing to do with the game itself."
     (Paragraph 4).


Mr McElhone saw the problem as one of trying to reduce, or at
least contain, the incidence of hooliganism at football matches
without restricting the pleasure of the majority of supporters.


2.35 So far as drink was concerned, the Report recommended that
it should be an offence for a spectator to carry or attempt to
carry alcohol into a football ground;    that is should be an
offence to be in possession of alcohol within the ground or to
attempt to gain admission while drunk.    The Report recommended
that more people who were physically capable of carrying out the
duties of enforcement would have to be recruited and suggest
that, in their recruitment of stewards, clubs should look to
their supporters' clubs to assist in providing the kind of men
required for the job.   So far as transport was concerned, the
Report recommended that it should be an offence for anyone to be


     ^Report of the Working Group on Football Crowd Behaviour:
Scottish Education Department/HMSO 1977.
in possession of alcoholic liquor on a vehicle hired specifically
for the purpose of carrying passengers bound for a football
match;   or to allow any alcoholic liquor to be carried on a
public service vehicle being used for the purpose of carrying
passengers to football matches;   or to allow the carriage of any
drunken person on such a vehicle bound for a football match.


2.36 So far as the separation of supporters was concerned the
Report recommended:


     "That in the interests of crowd control and safety,
     separation of rival supporters at turnstiles should be
     carried out if the police, in consultation with the club,
     consider such a step to be necessary;     that for matches
     where larger than average attendances are expected,
     sufficient turnstiles should be opened timeously in order to
     achieve speedy admission."   (Recommendation 13).


     "In order to protect players, match officials and the pitch,
     access to the playing   area should be made as difficult as
     possible.   To prevent an invasion of the playing area by
     spectators ... the erection of a physical barrier in the
     form of a fence not less than 1.8 metres in height with
     access points to allow the pitch to be used if necessary for
     the evacuation of spectators in an emergency."      (Paragraph
     53) .


2.37 A further recommendation was that:


     "the Courts should make full use of the higher fining powers
     under the Criminal Law Act 1977 in respect of common law
     offences which include malicious mischief, breach of the
     peace and assault, these being the most common offences
     associated with football hooliganism, and in respect of
     persistent offenders, should normally impose imprisonment
     without option."   (Recommendation 19).


2.38 The Report recommended that:
     "The police should have statutory powers to search for any
     containers ... in the possession of any person entering or
     attempting to enter football grounds."    (Recommendation 24).


but went on to point out that the clubs must bear their share of
the responsibility for the behaviour and conduct of their staff
at all levels.


2.39 Among other observations the Report says this:


     "We recognise that many football grounds in Scotland are
     very old;   some could even be described as primitive in that
     not only do they lack any kind of comfort for spectators but
     they also lack basic amenities including adequate toilet
     accommodation.   This primitive environment encourages some
     people to react in a primitive manner.    Moreover there is a
     strong case for more seating accommodation.    In our view it
     would go a considerable way towards reducing hooliganism;
     potential trouble spots could be more quickly recognised and
     identification of troublemakers by police would be made that
     much easier."


The Report therefore recommended:


     "that clubs should consider the provision of additional
     seating accommodation.   In addition clubs must provide
     adequate toilet facilities for men and women and generally
     improve amenities for spectators."   (Paragraph 88).


2.40 This Report also recommended that:


     "players should be encouraged by the clubs to extend their
     voluntary public relations work in the community including
     personal appearances at youth clubs etc and coaching
     sessions in schools with the objects of promoting the game
     and the concept of good sportsmanship."    (Recommendation
     37) .


CCTV was recommended and supporters' clubs encouraged.      The
Scottish Football Association was recommended to take
appropriately firm action against clubs.


Department of the Environment Working Group


2.41 The most recent Government publication on the subject of
football is the Report of an Official Working Group on Football
Spectator Violence set up by Department of the Environment, which
was published by HMSO in 1984.    The Working Group was set up
following incidents of violence involving British supporters at
England's soccer matches in Luxembourg and Franc in November 1983
and February 1984 respectively.    It dealt party with problems
arising out of international football.


2.42 However, as regards domestic football the Report said:


     "the Group reaffirmed the importance of consistent planning,
     preparation and co-ordination;      of building on experience;
     and of the need to consider afresh all possible measures,
     including those previously thought to be impractical or
     unnecessary."    (Paragraph 5.1).


     "We recommend therefore that the FA reviews and better
     defines its powers and procedures and the responsibilities
     of the clubs.    If their powers prove to be inadequate, the
     Association should consider enhancing them."


The Report went on:


     "This would better equip the FA to implement some of the
recommendations." (Paragraph 5.5).


2.43 The Football Association had issued a "blueprint" detailing
the precautions which league clubs should take against violence,
which was circulated to clubs at the beginning of the 1983-84
season.   The Working Party Report said that it:


     "... has not been rigorously adopted by all clubs.      Since it
     represents the collective wisdom of football clubs, many of
     whom have successfully countered serious threats of
     violence, its implementation should have prevented some of
     the violence in grounds last season."     (Paragraph 5.7).


2.44 The Report observed that the enforcement by the Football
Association of its "blueprint" occurs after the event when the
deficiencies in a club's planning has become apparent.        The
Report recommended that:


     "improved means should be found for ensuring that clubs
     adopt the provisions of the "blueprint" in a way appropriate
     to their own grounds and matches."     (Paragraph 5.7).


The Report went on to recommend that each club should produce a
detailed set of plans to be submitted to the football
authorities for endorsement.     This would prevent some clubs from
avoiding their responsibilities and might ensure also a more co­
operative and committee response.


2.45 The Report recommended that matches between high risk clubs
should be programmed so that the risk or threat of violence could
be reduced.   The Report said:


     "It is more likely to take place at the beginning and end of
     the season and at holiday periods, particularly at seaside
     fixtures when other groups of young people sometimes also
     clash with football supporters."     (Paragraph 5.13).


2.46 The Report went on to recommend the introduction of club
membership, the introduction of CCTV and closer links with the
community.    It did not recommend that alcohol should be banned in
grounds and concluded that in the absence of clear evidence that
the introduction of legislation along the lines of the Criminal
Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 would reduce violence at English
soccer matches, it could not recommend such action.     Furthermore,
said the Report:


     "legislation of this kind would be unwelcome to many;          the
     majority of football clubs are untroubled by violence and
    4^<uld unnecessarily be penalised financially and the vast
     majority of non-violent spectators would suffer for the
     actions of the few."        (Paragraph 5.34):


The Working Group did not recommend additional measures for
banning alcohol on trains or on football coaches.


Conclusion


2.47 A study of all these reports (and there are numerous reports
and discussion papers by other bodies) shows that the following
are measures which have been frequently recommended:


     1.      Closed Circuit Television
     2.      Membership Cards
     3.      Segregation
     4.      More seating at football grounds
     5.      Encouragement of supporters' clubs
     6.      A ban on alcohol
     7.      Involvement of the clubs with the community
     8.      Heavier penalties


I too shall argue for these and related measures.     It is to be
hoped they will be more vigorously pursued by the appropriate
bodies than in the past.
              APPENDICES 5 TO 8




PHOTOGRAPHS
