                                                       27 September 1991


     Dear Sir


     I write to       you as the father of Philip Hammond a fourteen year
     old school       boy who was killed in the Hillsborough tragedy on the
     15th April       l9q9,for you to overturn the verdict of the inquest on
     the points       mentioned below.
                          i



     l.The coroner only let the inquests run until three fifteen on
     the day because that was the time the first ambulance came onto
     the pitch,he sind the pathologists also stated that all the people
     who died would of been dead by then this is totally untrue people
     have knowledge of there loved ones being alive after three
     fifteen.
                          !

     Take my own case for example my boy was put into an ambulance at
     about 3-10 by two policemen and and ambulance man the ambulance
     did not have any oxygen so the policeman and the ambulance man
     worked on hiss heart to try and get him breathing again they said
     he started to pink up and felt a pulse when they got him to
     hospital the doctors worked on him for about fifteen to twenty
     minutes and gave up,yet in the corners court the policemen or the
     ambulance man were not called to give evidence the corner asked
     the pathologist dont people in that situation think they feel
     what they want to feel he answered yes,so that leaves me thinking
     what did these people who give statements for bother when the
     coroner is excepting the pathologist word and not theirs.

     2.On 20/11/91 the corner brought a witness a
                 w&o was the barman at the       public house he toifl
     the jury that Iover 5,000 pints had been consumed on the day and
     the juke box ijras pulled off the wall plus the cigarette machine.

      On 7/12/91 tl[iey brought the husband of the licensee of the     ^
     public house\                 |, because of the remarks families of
     the deceased i|nade about                  evidence to put the facts
     _
     Straight           stated that only 1000 pints had been consumed
     and that therfe was no trouble at all the wires of the duke box
     were pulled out but nothing was pulled off the wall.

     So did Mr              commit perjury if not why did he come to
     the coroners 6ourt with fabricated stories,also why did the
     coroner call jthis man surely he must have read his statement
     beforehand toI see what kind of evidence he was putting to the
     jury, if Mr              did commit perjury what as happened to
     him.
     3.Mr Marshall had a pace statement read out to the jury after the
     families complained the coroner told the jury to forget what they




10   OCT   ’ 91   16:09                                      PAGE. 0 0 6
 have heard anc seen concerning Mr Marshalls pace statement surely
 the right thir g to do in that case would have been to dismiss the
 jury and start afresh.

 4.The main witnesses who where questioned hid behind the corners
 rule 22 refusing to answer questions in case they incriminated
 themselves,ho» can you find truth when this is allowed to happen
 Mr Duckenfielc admitted to Lord Justice Taylor that he had lied
 about the fane breaking down the gate yet he would not answer
 this in the ccrners court,is this JUSTICE.

 The coroner himself admitted this kind off case was to big for
 the coronial system yet it was seen through to the end even with
 all the fabrications that where told.
 1 consider th verdict of "accidental death/misadventure" is not
 correct moral y despite the legal technicalities that brought it
 about, it is mportant for everyone to remember that Dr.Popper
 himself stres ed that accident or misadventure verdicts are the
 same in law a d neither indicates that nothing went wrong or that
 there is no b ame to be attached to any of the parties involved,
 it merely mea s that involuntary or reckless manslaughter has not
 been proved tt^ the jury "beyond all reasonable doubt".

 Lord Justice Taylor was not an angry member of a bereaved family
 but a highly respected Law Lord with personal experience of
 football.In milch less time than the inquests took and in more
 difficult circumstances I believe he "got it right".
 Another injustice is that the only people who had to carry their
 own legal costs in this case are the victims families. Forty
 seven familie^ faced a legal bill of £152,458.48p plus massive
 personal travel and accommodation costs,none of which is
 recoverable.
                     i
 It appears farcical to me that South Yorkshire Police can on the
 one hand allege that budgets are being cut to the point that they
 cannot preven^ crime increase,while on the other six lawyers
 costing probably a million pounds or more represented the police
 officers.


Yours trul




 P .Hammond

c.c. David Alton MP

c.c, Peter Kiifoyle MP

c.c. Frank Fields MP




OCT   ’ 91   16:10                                           PAGE. 0 0 7
