  >   K a u e     oVteA    4®            .

                                                HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
 lr\£ceju>tVv                                                 Pioneer House
                                                             65-67 Dale Street
 i. 9cate/»uzjvfc          fWJu&AJ tUccAVe^                  Liverpool L2 2NS
                                                            Tel: 0151 236 1919
Q_ OocjujwertfiUtton            ^Jrorn iW _                 Fax: 0151 236 1936

                ifc^   1 S te d O fv ^       Cosrvi'ikkc.
                           '5
      \(y ©i-oe>»ot v^e>u_ c»j >tv»     <■                  Jffr/i compliments
      C\uer-^ gjqdiJc.          j^roser
I ANDREW W ORSLEY will say:



1.   I attended the FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough Football Ground on 15 April 1989. I

     was with my father, a friend and his father. We had tickets for the Leppings Lane end

     and arrived at approximately 2.45-2.50 pm.



2.   The scene was complete chaos, there was no order whatsoever, and we could not find

     our way to the right turnstile. When Gate C was opened I went through along with

     my father, my friend and his father. We could see the tunnel entrance to the pitch and

     were carried along by pressure from a wave o f people. We kept thinking that the

     pressure would ease but the crush continued.



3.   Once the game had been stopped, I realised that my dad was being pulled under by the

     pressure of the crowd. He was approximately ten metres from the perimeter fence

     behind the goal. He called to me to help him, to get him up, but by the time I got to

     where he was he had already gone under the crowd. I picked my dad up and

     discovered he was lying on top of a man I now know to be Stephen Williams. I tried

     to put my dad in front o f the barrier for protection and went back to pick Stephen up.




     Stephen was blue in the face and his eyes were staring, I thought that he was dead but

     was not sure. I cannot remember how I got Stephen out from the crush but I know I

     dragged him back across the terrace through the tunnel. There was suddenly an

     opening available in the back o f the crowd and I was able to drag Stephen towards the

     tunnel and to the courtyard beyond.
    5.    When I arrived I saw that there were at least fifteen to twentyfive bodies laid out in

           rows, they seemed to be either dead or unconscious. I would estimate that they varied

           in age between 60 down to young children.



    6.    I handed Stephen over to the care o f a capable-looking policeman. However, he took

           hold o f Stephen and dropped him onto the floor. I was shocked by the uncaring way

           he handled him and I shouted to the policeman to be careful, even though I did not

           know if Stephen was dead or alive. I do remember that he appeared to be completely

           lifeless. I did not see Stephen being put into an ambulance.


*
    7.    At this point I was concerned for the safety o f my dad and the people I had travelled

           with, and I went back to check that they were safe.



    8.    Later that day I saw on the television news that Stephen had survived and I got in

           touch with him.




    Dated this   2-1   S-+* day of O ctober 1997




ANDREW WORSLEY
