INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH    The Kt Hon Lordjustlce Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                 50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                 London SW1H 9AT
                                 01-2732577/3602/2370




                                 Date

                                -16 February 1990




Dear

Thank you for your letter of 1 February 1990.
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry office
has now closed, but I will ensure that Lord
Justice Taylor sees your letter.

                          Yours sincerely




                          R M WHALLEY
                     Secretary to the Inquiry
Lord Justice Taylor
"The Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry"
The House of Lords
LONDON SW1                            February 1 st 1990


Dear Lord Taylor
    If there was one comment from you, that to me summed up the
underlying reason for the chain of events that were responsible
for the disaster it was your reference to the,
"difference of attitude towards Boardroom and terrace"
    What I feel you are saying is in essence; "if people are
treated like animals, do not be surprised if they behave like
animals" with the almost inevitable results.
     Perhaps you recall the Abafvan disaster. I do, because of
the remarks by the Judge who conducted that enquiry.
In essence he confirmed that this was a "disaster" that
everyone involved from the lowest "tipper driver" up to the
Chairman of the Coal Board, knew was inevitable.
It was just waiting to happen.
Each "level" of Coal Board staff that was interviewed by the
Judge in effect said "Yes, your Honour, this is a terrible
event, but I am "clean"- do you see in my monthly report for
so-and-so I said it was unsafe."
The Judge indicated in his Report, that if an individual is
paid for his brain, not for his brawn (ie executive not menial
responsibilities) he has a duty to do more than just "pass it
up the line!"
    I have no doubts that there are individuals who pointed out
the potential problems at Hillsborough and other grounds long
before the event: and were probably threatened with trouble for
causing waves!
    When will our society allow those with the forsight to see
potential problems to be "whistle blowers" and to stop play
before the foul is committed: hence avoiding the exercise of
the 20/20 hindsight that seems an inevitable part of every
engui r y .                          Yours_si o c e r p l v
