                       W L&U/
                                                   r LONDONBOROUGHOF
                'T^CeJr tr> P V/fr ii              RICHMOND UPON THAMES
                   < V vc Ia/vU.                    Department of Technical Services
                                                    Regal House, London Road,
                                                   Twickenham, TW13QB
                                                  Telephone: 018911411
Our ref:   BC/DB/SP
                                                  Direct dial:

                                                 BUILDING CONTROL
                                                 D. Baker - Extn.7347


Mr. R.M. Whalley
Secretary to the Inquiry into
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT


                                                  15th September, 1989



Dear Mr. Whalley

Hillsborough Inquiry - LFCDA Submission
Twickenham RFU

Thank you for your letter of 5th September, 1989, in connection with the
submission of the LFCDA to your Inquiry.  I am grateful for this
opportunity to comment on the citing of this Council as an example of
"difficulties being encountered by the LFCDA" (paragraph 4.1.7(b) of
their submission refers) and set out in detail below the actions of the
Borough by way of response to this criticism.

I would request that the observations listed here be read in conjunction
with my letter of 1st September, 1989, addressed to the Secretary at the
Home Office, which sets out the grounds for my objection to the
particular criticism made by the LFCDA relating to this Council.  I have
enclosed a copy of the letter for this purpose.

Clearly this single issue is not fundamental to the Inquiry and I would
not expect any further comment from yourself in connection with this
particular matter.  I intend only to make it known that the Council's
actions in respect of Safety of Sports Grounds legislation generally, and
in addressing the problem of means of escape from the West Stand in
particular, have had regard to observations made by the representatives
of the LFCDA, both through their attendance at Safety Team meetings and
through formal consultations when appropriate.  Where differences of
opinion have arisen by reason of differing interpretation of "Green
Guide" criteria or a varying application of the "flexible approach"
suggested in paragraph 6, I am confident that the procedures adopted by
the Council have allowed decisions to be made in a fully accountable
fashion.

                                               Continued




                                                    M.S. Hebron BSc C£ng MICE
                                                    D ire c to r o f Technical Services



    *                                           anti   Can/irae
                                     - 2 -



I am, of course, grateful for all advice received from the LFCDA in their
capacity as consultants to the Borough, and would advise that their
representations are always given careful consideration by Officers of the
Council.  Notwithstanding the above, I have no objection to the Brigade
registering their disagreement in their submission to your Inquiry with
any terms and conditions in the General Safety Certificate, should they
consider it to be important so to do, and note that they have advised
London Boroughs generally that they intend to take independent legal
action where it is considered that means of escape in case of fire
provisions are inadequate (Appendix C to their submission refers).   I am
less happy that their abbreviated account of events states that the
Borough "have not reacted" to their comments.

I set out below the actions of the Council in respect of means of escape
arrangements in the West Stand:

1.   1st M a v r 19 8 6: The inaugural meeting of the Safety Team was held
      (responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975,
      falling upon the Council following the demise of the G.L.C.).     My
      records show that a representative from the LFCDA was in attendance
      at this meeting.

2.   14th May. 1 9 86 :   A letter was sent by the Council to the RFU
      following a site visit of persons in attendance at the first Safety
      Team meeting.     This letter included commentary identifying
      emergency egress from the West Stand as an area of concern.     A copy
      of this letter was forwarded to the LFCDA, together with an
      invitation to attend the next meeting of the Safety Team.

3.   Sth .Time. 1986:   A letter was received from the LFCDA dated 30th
      May, 1986.   Amongst other things this included comments on the
      means of escape arrangements in the West Stand.   Specific
      recommendations included the suggested provision of n ew external
      staircases to each end of the stand.

4.    4th August. 1 9 86 : A letter was sent to the RFU following an
      inspection of the rugby ground by the Safety Team on 12th June,
      1986.  Amongst other items this letter confirmed discussions that
      had taken place in respect of means of escape from the extreme ends
      of the West Stand.    The RFU was advised that "additional stairways
      (or alternatively vomitories) will be needed to remedy this
      condition".  A copy of this letter was sent to all members of the
      Safety Team.

                                                        continued........




WP0888A
                                    - 3 -



5.   15th October. 1 98 6 : A letter was sent to the LFCDA by the
     Council conveying the R F U ’s opinion that the above recommendation
     (i.e. the provision of new staircases) was unduly onerous.
     Furthermore, guidance was sought on their interpretation of "Green
     Guide" requirements in this respect, the Council putting forward a
     point of view that certain other measures proposed by the RFU might
     be considered as an alternative.     The letter refers to particular
     commentary from the "Green Guide" which the Council have considered
     relevant in support of the R F U ’s alternative proposals.

6.   24th N o ve m be r . 19 8 6: A further letter was sent to the LFCDA
      inviting a reply to the Council's letter of 15th October, 1986.
     The letter again requested that the question of interpretation of
      "Green Guide" recommendations be addressed, stating that "the need
      for such additional exits must be clearly demonstrated and to this
      end detailed written justification, based on the minimum standards
      of the revised Green Guide, should be provided to enable this
      Council to determine if indeed additional works are required to
      comply with the Act".

7.   27th November. 1986:   Minutes of a meeting of the Safety Team
      show that means of escape from the West Stand were again subject to
     discussion.    Two representatives from the LFCDA were present.

8.   2nd December. 1986:   A letter dated 28th November was received
      from the LFCDA.  This set out in detail their recommendations in
      the light of the RFU's alternative proposals.  In summary, it can
     be said that the Brigade were prepared to accept the Lower Tier
      arrangements without the provision of additional stairways/
      vomitories, however in connection with the Upper Tier they advised
      that "the Brigade maintains the view that alternative external
      staircases should be provided at each end of this stand".

9.   27th January. 1 98 7 : A further letter was received from the
      LFCDA, dated 22nd January, 1987.   The purpose of this letter was to
      amend clause numbers referred to in their letter of 28th November,
      to coincide with clauses in the updated "Green Guide".   The brigade
      also reiterated their view that two new alternative escape routes
      should be provided to serve the Upper Tier.

Subsequent to this date, amendments have been made to the General Safety
Certificate.  However, the Council have not considered it appropriate to
include a requirement to erect new staircases to serve the West Stand.
Other measures have been taken by the RFU to facilitate safer evacuation
under emergency conditions in the West Stand (for instance improvements
have been made to the guarding arrangements adjacent to circulation
spaces and stairways, these being carried out at the request of the
Council), and the Council have had regard to these measures in assessing
whether the criterion of "a reasonable degree of safety" has been met for
the West Stand.




                                                        continued




WP0888A
                                    - 4 -



I feel that the sequence of actions detailed above accurately reflects
the involvement of the Council in this particular matter and would hope
that any criticism of the Borough of Richmond upon Thames in relation to
their duties under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act would be based upon
the detailed account of events I have provided here, rather than the
brief commentary contained in the LFCDA submission.

In conclusion I would confirm my broad agreement to the recommendations
summarised on page 1 of the LFCDA submission with the proviso that very
careful consideration should be given to any proposal which allows the
issue of a Prohibition Notice under the provisions of Section 10 of the
Act by any authority other than that which issued the Safety Certificate.

I have forwarded a copy of this letter to the LFCDA.

Yours sincerely,




Chief Planning Officer




Copy to:    Mr. G.D. Clarkson
            Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive
            LFCDA
            F.P. Branch
            Queensborough House
            12-19 Albert Embanlanent
            SE1 7TJ




WP0888A
                                                             —   W   I V   U




Our ref:    BC/DB/SP

                                                  BUILDING CONTROL
                                                  D. Baker - Extn.7347

The Secretary
The Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
Room 662
London
SW1H 9AT


                                                  1st September, 1989



Dear Sir,

Hillsborough Inquiry - LFCDA Submission
Twickenham RFU

I refer to the Formal Submission of the LFCDA to the Inquiry by the Right
Honourable Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, a
copy of which was received at this office on 19th July, 1989.

It is regrettable that this copy document came into my possession too
late for the Council to make representations to the Inquiry in response
to a specific criticism made in connection with means of escape
provisions at the above stadium.  However, after some consideration, I
feel it would be appropriate to comment on the citing of this Borough as
an example of "difficulties being encountered by the LFCDA" (paragraph
4.1.7(b) refers).

In attempting to summarise the situation in order to illustrate their
"difficulties", I feel that the Brigade have allowed the reader to form
an incorrect opinion of the actions of this Council.  I would criticise
the text of their submission principally in their assertion that the
Borough "have not reacted to these comments" ("these comments" being that
the means of escape from the upper tier of the West Stand are considered
by the LFCDA to be inadequate).

That the reaction of the Borough to their comments has not been to the
complete satisfaction of the LFCDA is not disputed here.  However, my
records show that correspondence between the LFCDA, the RFU and the
Council in respect of this particular matter reveal that the Council have
indeed taken steps to find a solution to this problem to the satisfaction
of all parties concerned.  I would not wish to detail here the
documentary history relating to means of escape from the West Stand,
suffice to say that formal consultations have taken place in connection
                                    -   1   -




with proposals put forward by the RFU and the Brigade have, as a
consequence, accepted an arrangement for effecting adequate means of
escape from the Lower Tier of this stand which does not require the
provision of new external staircases (this was part of their original
recommendations in respect of the West Stand).

The Brigade still feel that the Upper Tier arrangements cannot be
satisfactorily altered without the provision of new stairs and (albeit
subsequent to the date of the LFCDA's submission to the Inquiry) the RFU
have now provided drawings showing new staircases to the extreme ends of
the stand, which should overcome this problem.  The Council have, of
course, consulted the LFCDA in connection with these latest proposals and
their comments are awaited.

I am concerned that a submission has been made to the Inquiry to the
effect that this Council has not "reacted" to comments of the LFCDA and
would be pleased, even at this late stage, for an opportunity to detail
fully the actions of this Council in this particular matter should you
consider it to be appropriate.  I should be pleased if you would,
therefore, advise whether, and if so how, any formal representations may
now be made.

I have, as a matter of courtesy, forwarded a copy of this letter to the
LFCDA.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Planning Officer




cc.   Mr. G.D. Clarkson
      Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive
      LFCDA
      Queensborough House
      12-18 Albert Embankment
      SE1 7TJ




WP0856A
