From: Linda Rushton                              cc:    Mr Michael
      APS/Mr Howarth                                    Mr Middleton
      Room 702                                          Mr Pugh
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                 Mr Evans
      ® 273 4238                                        Mr Edmundson
                                                        Ms Clifford
      6 May 1998                                        Mr Warner
                                                        Mr Owen



Clare Sumner / PS to Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT DEBATE

Mr Howarth has seen the Home Secretary’s draft speech for the above
debate and has suggested the following slight amendments:

Paragraph 4

Knock out ‘the then’ before Kenneth Baker

Paragraph 19

Between ‘having’ and ‘read it through’ insert ‘had the opportunity to’

Paragraph 20

Between ‘all through’ and ‘will I believe’ insert ‘with an open mind’

Paragraph 21

Replace ‘that has to be so’ with ‘I believe this to be the case’

Paragraph 24

Replace ‘- the police’ with ‘- mainly the police, with other bodies sharing
varying levels of responsibility’

Paragraph 39

Replace ‘would serve no purpose’ with ‘would not I believe serve any
purpose’
2.       In addition to the above, Mr Howarth has also asked me to pass on to
you the attached letter from Mr and Mrs Joynes of
addressed to the Home Secretary. Mr and Mrs Joynes are Mr Howarth’s
constituents whom he visited last week following which they faxed to him this
letter. If the Home Secretary prefers, Mr Howarth would be content to reply.




                              LINDA RUSHTON
                                                    oiuisC* in                    m   ir n i   b U '   UU'   w «   w   ■ bW
t HA   O lin i




                                                                               MR AN D M RS JOYNES




                                                                              3RD MAY 1998



                  QUESTION TO HOMli SKCRKTARV: JACK s r p a w

                  ? L h v ti' ? , ^ ,W? " , ‘hrJ Rig1’1 llc”’" u' abl« S tu .il Smilh and C hief C o,,stable o f
                  Sou h Y orkdnre, R ,cl,arf W ells. M r W ell, m ade it plain thut sincc Lord T a v lo r t
                 ! S e n » 'f °            acknowledged on bch.II q f Ihe Force that there had been 4 '


                  1.      bailing to delay the kick-off in the light o f the large crow ds at U p p in g s Lane.

                 2.
                          250pmiCing° rlak'ngfUl1 aCC° Umofthe,actthatthecentral Pcns w c r e hy


                 *           A r c i n g w i« rc the Supporters w ould go once gate C was opened and
                         not blocking of! the tunnel - th is w as the critical mistake

                 4.      NO. d istingu ish in g distress from disorder and consequently not reacting
                         sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.



                 O fflr ™ ° pm,i0n tha!    5 f® ,4 crr0rs ton lrib »ted to criminal neglect and the
                 O fliccrs m charge should be dealt with hy a C ourt o H ,aw accordingly.
