                                                         IN CONFIDENCE



                   THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                   Room 528
                   50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                   Direct Line 0171 273 4347 Fax 2703



Dr David J Williams                                                          Your reference:
Clinical Director
A & E Department                                                             Our reference:
St Thomas’ Hospital
Lambeth Palace Road                                                          Date:             December 1997
SE1 7EH




                                                            Os   RwiiX 1m    >



         T ) g^                                      I                                lfc«- /t-p
                                                                         .wPK< c V - / « a w                   W

                                                                         ■cT pa$.
Thank you for your two very helpful letters o f 17 December, which freceived today.                  I will
ensure that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith sees them.

2.     I am sorry that the material we sent you seems to have given the impression that we
do not have access to Dr Bull’s ‘personal record o f events at Hillsborough’. We do, and
indeed did - we had it at the meeting and gave him a copy (page 2 o f the transcript), and I
now enclose one, in confidence of course, for you.

3.      I am also sorry that my absences from the office prevented you from telephoning, as
you wished, before you wrote. I think that it would be helpful if we could now speak briefly
about your addendum letter. You begin this by confirming that you have no difficulty in
supporting Dr Bull’s actions on the day. But you conclude that ‘more contemporaneous
records’ require further study before Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes his examination of
the disaster,

4.      As I understand it the question you have in mind is whether Dr Bull actually had, or
took, enough time properly to determine that the unfortunate people he looked at in the
gymnasium were in fact dead as the police believed, especially given that he was also
checking people who had been examined by another doctor. Aside from the timings
involved - dubious as you rightly say some o f these could be - we have his comment to the
Judge (pages 3 to 4 o f the transcript) that he did not feel rushed or under pressure, took what
he thought was a reasonable time, and could have taken twice as long if he wanted. On the
                                                         IN CO NFID EN C E
 G :\H I L L S B O R \M A IN \W IL L IA M S .2 2 6
                                                      INCONFIDENCE



 other hand, he said 7 must admit when I looked at the times I thought that that was short’.

 5.        I am not sure that Dr Bull’s personal record o f the day adds much to what comes out
 o f the transcript o f the Judge’s discussion with him. Now that you have seen it, do you still
 think that we should seek to examine other material before reaching a conclusion about the
 role he played? Are you in any doubt from what you know o f the incident as to whether Dr
 Bull acted properly?

6,      I look forward to hearing from you. I do not expect that you will see this letter
before Christmas (this building is shut on Christmas Eve) but if it will help I will be in the
office throughout next week except for Wednesday ((Kfew Year’s Eve) and Thursday, and
then again from Monday 5 January.



               4

C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




                                                     IN C O NFID EN C E
G :\ H I L L S B O R \M A IN \W IL L IA M S .2 2 6
                                                                                          St Thomas’ Hospital
Guy's &St Thomas'                                                                         Lambeth Palace Road
                                                                                          London SE1 7EH
                         HOSPITAL TRUST                                                   Tel 0171 928 9292




      Our ref gc\bone.doc


      17 December 1997

                                                          ADDENDUM IN CONFIDENCE

      Mr C F Bone
      Secretary to the Hillsborough Scrutiny
      Room 528
      50 Queen Anne’s Gate
      London
      SW1H 9AT



      Dear Mr B

. , „ I apologise for the delay in sending the enclosed letter but you will note that I have no difficulty
      in supporting the actions of Dr Bull on the 15 April 1989.

      I have tried to telephone you but I do recognise that you have many responsibilities which take
      you away from your office. However, I felt that I should make reference to two points which I
      have omitted from the enclosed letter but on which I would have liked clarification. They are as
      follows;

      1)      Much significance is placed on the times when Dr Bull is said to have certified each
      individual dead. It is acknowledged that he did not use his own watch and the different times
      noted would seem to have been made by the Policemen responsible for each body. I am not
      certain whether it would be normal practice for a large body of Police to synchronise their
      watches at the start of a major event but it does seem probable that there would have been
      some discrepancy in the times showing on their many different watches and this could have
      become particularly relevant when evaluating the significance (page 6, lines 17-24) of
      Dr Bull’s examination of Church (15.53 hours) and Aspinall (15.54 hours).

      2)       It was suggested to Dr Bull by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith (page 2, lines 19-23) that
      concern had been expressed that “because you certified some twenty people dead in the space
      of about 25 minutes you cannot have given them a proper examination”. I have taken this time
      at face value and have therefore assumed that Dr Bull took 60 or even up to 90 seconds of time
      over each examination but I am also aware that he shared this task with Dr Redgrave and that
      (page 3, lines 10-11) “He had a stethoscope which we shared”. I note that Dr Bull was
      identified as having certified life extinct in 20 persons during the period from 3.50-4.15/20
      hours and I presume that Dr Redgrave was responsible for certifying life extinct in a similar
      number of persons during the same period of time. It is not clear whether they were working
      synchronously or alternately but the latter arrangement will have meant that 40 persons were
      certified dead within 25-30 minutes rather than the 20 persons about whom concern has been
      expressed, I do not consider that this would necessarily affect my judgement of Dr Bull’s
actions but I would perhaps need to revise my estimate of detailed timings in the enclosed letter
if this proves to be the case. Synchronous activity would have enabled each of the two doctors
to use the stethoscope for 20-30 seconds during a 60 second examination but this timing would
obviously need to be revised if they worked alternately. I note that Dr Bull further said (page 4
line 39 and page 5 line 1) that “I think we swapped over and looked at the patients that each
other had seen” but he did also say (page 5 line 28) that this subsequent checking took place
beyond the period of the 25-30 minutes under consideration.

I am aware that neither Dr Bull nor Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had access to Dr Bull’s
“Personal record of events at Hillsborough” at the time of their recent discussion and I presume
that Dr Redgrave made a similar statement soon after the Hillsborough disaster. It seems
probable that these more contemporaneous records will contain better information about the
system of working they evolved and I do think that these require further study before Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith concludes his investigation. I finally confirm that I would have no
objection to his report referring to my conclusions if so required but I should be pleased to have
the opportunity of reviewing the content and context of such reference before it is released.
Please let me know if I can be of further help.

Yours sincerely




Dr D J Williams FRCP FFXEM
Clinical Director
Accident & Emergency Department
                                                                                    St Thomas’ Hospital
Guy's &St Thomas'                                                                   Lambeth Palace Road
                                                                                    London SE1 7EH
 m p m p m n o b l O S P I T A L TRUST                                              Tel 0171 928 9292


  PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL

  Mr C F Bone
  Secretary to the Hillsborough Scrutiny                     17 December 1997
  Room 528
  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
  London SW1H 9AT


  Dear Mr B

  Thank you for your letter of the 1st December with which you enclosed the transcript of a
  recent discussion between Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and Dr Matthew Bull, I have read this
  with interest and I have concluded that the procedures described by Dr Bull were sufficient for
  him to be able to confirm that the bodies he examined were of persons who had died. My
  reasons for this conclusion are as follows:

  1)      Those who died at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989 sustained their deaths by
  crushing and this was subsequently confirmed by post-mortem evidence that they had all died
  from asphyxia. Sustained crushing of the chest would have rendered them unable to breathe
  and the resulting lack of oxygen would have precipitated rapid secondary cardiac arrest
  (stoppage of the heart). Those affected would have lost consciousness within about 2 minutes
  and cardiac arrest would have occurred about 5 minutes later. At this stage they would have
  been deemed to be clinically dead although it would have been theoretically possible for the
  condition to be reversed by immediate cardio-respiratory resuscitation. However, full cardio­
  respiratory resuscitation would have needed to be instituted within 5 minutes of the secondary
  cardiac arrest and it should be noted that cardiac arrest due to prolonged asphyxia has a
  particularly bad prognosis. The significance of these timings is that the crushing on the terraces
  had ceased by 3.15pm at the latest but it was not until 3.50pm that Dr Bull confirmed his first
  death. This means that it would have been totally inappropriate for him even to attempt any
   form of cardio-respiratory resuscitation at that time on persons who, as Lord Justice Stuart-
   Smith said (page 9), were “people who either Police Officers or ambulance attendants had
  already considered to be dead”.

  2)       The Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine states that death may be diagnosed if “the
  patient is pulseless, apnoeic, with fixed pupils, and no heart sounds . These were the criteria
  used by Dr Bull and their application requires no more sophisticated equipment than a
  stethoscope and a bright light, both of which he has confirmed were available. He recently gave
  further details of the procedures he undertook to establish these four criteria as follows:

    a)       “The patient is pulseless” :- On page 4, line 19, Dr Bull confirmed that he felt
  for the carotid pulse, the pulse in the neck. This is an appropriate major pulse to be felt and it
  would have been standard advice in 1989 that the pulse should be sought for at least 5 seconds
  to make sure that there was no circulation. That advice has more recently been amended to 10
  seconds but it seems probable that this longer time was exceeded by Dr Bull because he felt for
  the carotid pulse whilst listening to the chest.
                                                   - 2 -



      b)    “The patient is apnoeic” :- Apnoea means the absence of respiratory effort and this
    absence can initially be determined by visual and tactile examination of a bare chest. However,
    this may have been difficult in the situation faced by Dr Bull because he will presumably have
    needed to lift clothing in order to gain access to the chest with the stethoscope. He has
    confirmed (page 3 lines 18-19) that he listened for breath sounds as well as heart sounds and it
    is evident that he heard none. The normal respiratory rate in an adult is 10-12 breaths/minute
    and Dr Bull may well have listened for 25-30 seconds since this procedure will have occupied
    the majority of the time he spent examining each person.

      c)      “The patient has fixed pupils” :- This is probably the least reliable sign in isolation
    but will have been a valuable adjunct in circumstances where it would have been highly
    unlikely that any of the persons examined would have had mydriatic (dilating) drops recently
    placed in their eyes. Constriction of the pupil in response to light occurs if the optic nerve
#   (cranial nerve II), oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III) and intermediary mid-brain nuclei are
    intact and functioning normally. It is common practice to use a small torch to seek to elicit this
    reflex constriction but it is perfectly acceptable to close and open the eyelids if the environment
    is well lit. Dr Bull said (page 3, lines 19-20) that it was bright in the gymnasium (“there were
    floodlights”) and the procedure whereby he opened the lids to inspect the pupils to see if they
    constricted to light was appropriate in those circumstances. This procedure would have
    occupied only 10-15 seconds of time.

      d)     “The patient has no heart sounds” :- Reference has already been made to this part of
    Dr Bull’s examination because he listened for heart sounds with the stethoscope which he used
    also to listen for breath sounds.

    The persons examined by Dr Bull during the period of time from 3.50pm until 4.15 or 4.20pm
    had all suffered traumatic asphyxia prior to 3 .15pm. This means that they were unable to
    breathe because of chest and abdominal compression and there may also have been some
    associated suffocation of the mouth and face. The resulting lack of oxygen led to secondary
    cardiac arrest and Police later separated those whom they thought were dead from those who
    were injured but showing signs of life. It was not until 3.50pm that Dr Bull confirmed death in
    the first of the 20 people he then examined and the procedures he described were appropriate in
    the circumstances. It is evident that he spent at least 60 seconds and possibly up to 90 seconds
    over each examination and this will have been sufficient for him to confirm that no person had
    a palpable carotid pulse, that there was clinical evidence of mid-brain cerebral death because
    the dilated pupils did not constrict on exposure to light, and that auscultation with a
    stethoscope yielded no audible heart or breath sound.

     I am impressed that Dr Bull feels able, more than eight years after the event, to say (page 9,
     lines 8-10) that “I felt confident then and I still remain so that everybody I saw I thought was
     dead”. I consider that his confidence is justified and that he did spend sufficient time over his
     confirmation of death.

     Yours sincerely



     Dr D J Williams FRCP FFAE
     Clinical Director
     Accident & Emergency Department
                THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                Room 528
                50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                Direct Line 0171 273 4347 Fax 2703



Dr David J Williams                                          Your reference:
13 Spencer Hill
Wimbledon                                                    Our reference:
LONDON SW19 4PA
                                                              Date:           I   December 1997




CONFIRMATION OF DEATH

Thank you for telephoning me last Friday following my discussions with Dr Mike M cGovern
at the Department of Health. We would greatly appreciate your advice about the way in
which Dr Matthew Bull went about examining people who were killed in the Hillsborough
football stadium disaster and confirming to the police that they were dead..



 Background

2.    As I said, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary to
conduct a scrutiny of fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. We discussed the
background which, in broad terms, was that a total o f 96 people were crushed to death on the
Leppings Lane standing terrace at the Sheffield Wednesday football ground during the FA
Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on 15 April 1989. The post­
mortem evidence was that all o f them died o f asphyxia.

 3.     There was a major public inquiry at the time, conducted by the late Lord Taylor,
 which concluded that ‘the main reason fo r the disaster was the failure o f police control’
 (Interim Report, para 278). The Inquiry was followed by inquests on the victims, which
 brought in a verdict of accidental death upon each o f them. The Director o f Public
 Prosecutions considered criminal proceedings against the police commanders at the ground,
 and the Police Complaints Authority considered police disciplinary proceedings against them.
 Both decided not to bring proceedings.

 4.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s objective is to establish whether there is any significant
 new evidence about the disaster which was not previously available to Lord Taylor, to the
 Inquests, or to the DPP or PCA. If there is significant new evidence, he intends to see
 whether it might have affected the outcome o f any of the proceedings. He hopes to report
 his findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year.


 G :\H lllS B O R \M A IN \W llllA M S .1 9 5
5.     I am acting as Secretary to the scrutiny. You may wish to see the Judge’s terms o f
reference, and I attach a copy.




The sequence o f events

6.       The match started at 3 p.m. By 3.02, supporters had begun to spill onto the pitch
from behind the fencing at the Leppings Lane end o f the ground, and the match was stopped
at 3.06. It is clear from the evidence that the crushing on the terraces had ceased by 3.15 at
the latest. For the next 45 minutes there were chaotic scenes. Police and supporters worked
to rescue fans from the overcrowded terrace. Many o f the dead and injured were placed on
the pitch while fans, police and a handful o f St John ambulance people tried to revive them.
Supporters tore down advertising boards and used them as makeshift stretchers to get people
out o f the way and carry them to the other, Penistone Road, end o f the ground.

7.     From there they were taken to the club’s gymnasium, which was doubling as a
makeshift casualty clearing station and mortuary. Police separated those whom they thought
were dead from the injured and laid them out in rows.



Dr Matthew B ull

8.       Dr Bull is (and was at the time) a radiologist at a hospital in Sheffield. He would
have been about 30 years old in 1989. He was a seated spectator at the Penistone Road end
o f the ground. Seeing that the situation was very serious, he went onto the pitch to help.
Later, at about 3.45, a senior police officer asked him to go into the gymnasium. When he
got there, the police asked him and another doctor, Dr Redgrave, to confirm the deaths o f
some o f the people who had been laid out. (There were other doctors who looked at other
apparently dead people). Dr Redgrave had also been at the match as a spectator. He had a
stethoscope, but Dr Bull did not.

9.      Between about 3.50 and 4.20 Dr Bull looked at some 20 people and confirmed that
they were dead. His name appears to that effect on the documentation o f these individuals
(though he did not complete any documentation him self). Many o f the relatives o f the
deceased have seen this documentation. During the course o f his scrutiny, Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has met relatives who have said that it would not have been possible for Dr Bull
properly to have confirmed so many deaths in so short a time. W hat they infer from that is
that either the times at which death is said to have been confirmed are wrong (which would
point to attempts by the police to conceal what actually happened to their relatives) or that Dr
Bull did not carry out this task properly (which could mean that some people were still alive
and rescuable).

10.    None o f the relatives who say these things has, so far as we know, any significant
medical background. But some o f them have pointed out that - unlike people who are killed
in road accidents or disasters such as train crashes, etc - those who died at Hillsborough were
intact and most did not bear obvious external injuries (though many showed varying degrees
of cyanosis).

 G :\H lllS B O R \M A IN \W llllA M S .1 9 5
11.    We wrote to Dr Bull telling him about this, and saying that it would be helpful to have
his advice about what he did before confirming the deaths o f these people. He came to see
us in London (thought there was no obligation on him to do so, as we had pointed out).



Questions

12.       I attach a transcript o f the interview he had with the Judge. (Owing to an error on the
part o f the shorthand writer he is referred to throughout as Dr Ball, but we have o f course sent
him an amended copy with his name correct).

13.    He told us that both he and Dr Redgrave carried out examinations o f all the people
whom he (Bull) certified as dead. He used Redgrave’s stethoscope. You will obviously
wish to read the entire transcript, but it may help if I say that Dr Bull describes the procedures
which he went through in each case at pages 3 and 4.

14.    Given the information in this letter and in the transcript, could you confirm that Dr
Bull went through what you would regard as proper procedures to confirm that these people
were dead? If the information is inadequate, could you please say what else you would need
to know?

15.    As I explained it is o f course essential that itremains confidentialat this stage that we
are consulting you about what Dr Bull has told the Judge. The Judge’s report will however
be published, and I would expect that it may contain some reference to this issue. If so, it
will probably need to say that we have consulted a senior accident and emergency consultant
about what Dr Bull has said. Can I take it that you would have no objection to that and
about the report referring to, or if need be quoting, any conclusions you might draw?

 16.      I look forward to hearing from you.




 C F BONE
 Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G :\H lllS B O R \M A IN \W llllA M S .1 9 5
