To: Chris Bone

From: Sarah Clifford

1 October 1997


VISIT TO MERSEYSIDE: MEDIA HANDLING


As discussed:

• A 10-15 minute photocall at 9.30am outside the Maritime Museum on
  Monday, to which Sheffield, Liverpool and national media will be invited
  late tomorrow (if you are content). Sir Murray will not give interviews but I
  will issue the attached statement on his behalf (copy attached for his
  comment/clearance)

• The Cook Report now have been in touch with me and seem content to
  partake in the photocall as arranged - they may even get the regional TV
  news company (Granada) to get the footage on their behalf - so either way
  there should be no problem.

• I will recce the museum on Sunday as regards the photocall location, or if
  that is not possible, early on Monday morning

• Mike Duffield from COI Manchester will be on hand all day on the Tuesday
  and Wednesday to assist you and Sir Murray as needed.

Suggested statement

VISIT TO LIVERPOOL: STATEMENT BY LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH

Lord Justice Stuart Smith, who is carrying out the Hillsborough scrutiny, was
in Liverpool today to meet families from the area who want to put their cases
to him.

During the three day visit, the judge will meet xx (or -Chris - if you don’t have
exact figs “over 20”) families in a series of private sessions held at the
Merseyside Maritime Museum near the Albert Docks, Liverpool.

Lord Justice Stuart Smith said:

“I am pleased to have been able to come up to Merseyside and hear from all
the families and individuals who wanted to put their cases to me.
“I realise it must be an extremely harrowing experience for them to relive the
terrible events of 15 April 1989, but I wanted to have as full an opportunity as
possible to hear their evidence.

“I am scrutinising all the evidence presented to me - whether from families,
survivors, the police or other agencies - with the utmost care. I hope to report
my findings to the Home Secretary towards the end of the year.

Anyone who considers that they are able to submit material to me should
contact my secretary via Room 1106, Home Office, 50 ,Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT.”
