                                                                              STATION
 NAME:             KEITH
                   GOLDING




AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:        DRIVER



by^^irtru^to                    fonsi®tin9 of 000 P^ges, each signed
it knowing that if it is tendered ?owled3e and belief and I make
prosecution if I haVe w i l f u l l ^ t J V      ^     *ha11 be      to
to be false or do not 11 H e J e ^ b e ^ r ^ e .   a"ythi"9 Which 1

DATED: 210489
                                                               K GOLDING (SIGNED)


             I live at the above address with my son
                                                            GOLDING aged five.       I

             am a driver          »ith CEF (City El.ctrical Factor.) of Unit 6,
             Priestley Street, Warrington.                                               '

             I was also at the office of Norman JONES of Fanshaw, Porter &

             Hazlehurst on 21st April 1989 <210489) when Malcolm HORROCKS gave hi*

             statement with regards to the circumstances of the Hillsborough

         Disaster on 15th April 1989 (130489).      With regards to the          .   "

             circumstances leading up to our going into the ground I agree with      ^

         what has already been said and therefore I will not repeat his
         statement.                                                       'v

         I had not gone to the match the previous year so therefore I wasn't
                                                                                     'i .



         able to compare the scene or what it was like with this years semi-'A'

         final.     When we arrived at the ground, you have to go through a

         perimeter gate before getting to the turnstiles, when we arrived

         having got a bus into town, it was just chaos, there was no

         organisation at all in respect of the crowds, there just seemed to be

         thousands of people milling around.     Nicola Karen STEWART is my

         g     Ifriend and I had her ticket, obviously I was more concerned than
 GOLDING                 KEITH                                        PAGE


 anything else to stay with her to make sure that she was alright and

 to give our tickets in together.    Having gone through the outer

 perimeter gate we then made our way to the turnstiles* you were just

 having to move with the crowd to try and jockey forward to get

 towards the turnstiles,   it was just a mass of bodies, all I saw were

 two mounted Policemen, one was getting very hariated^ I don't know

whether they had radios with them but I didn't see them.         We had been

waiting for about twenty minutes when we got through the turnstile,

Nicola was getting rather squashed and it was very worrying the

conditions.   It was worse outside as your whole body was moving from

side to side and you were trying to shuffle along.       There was no

attempt made to have an orderly queue or control of the crowd, I just

got the impression that the Police had given up completely in trying

to control the crowd, people were climbing up onto the wall to try

and get out   of the crowd, not to get in but just to    get away from th#

crush, eventually we got through the    turnstiles and I handed both

tickets in,   the man at the turnstile didn't hand the   other

counterfoil   back to stop any hastle, we got through    and then

obviously waited for everybody else to get through from our group, we*:

witnessed one lad who was being asked to pay for his programme as it i

looked as if he had gone off without paying for it, a Policeman and

Policewoman was there.     Then we saw the gate opened and a flood of

supporters came through the concertina gate, an’d I just said to

Nicola to get out of the way because it looked as if they kicked the

door in, a then saw a bobby's helmet and saw the door being closed

again.

    came through the turnstile and he went to the toilet whilst

was in the toilet the gate was opened again and another surge of fans

came through, maybe a hundred or so were let in on the second
 GOLDING               KEITH                                        PAGE


 occasion, maybe a couple of hundred got through.   Once we went down

 the tunnel it had all cleared and we headed into the crowd, it was

 probably about ten to or five to three, the teams hadn't gone onto

the pitch at this point,         said make, your way over to the right,

that is in the centre terracing, behind the goal at the Lepping Lane

End, as he said it looked alright over there so we started to make

our way down to this point behind the goal.    We seemed to lose

Arthur was being pushed to the left and we managed to get him back,

we went down to the front, almost without touching the ground, we got
under the bar and made our way almost to the front, when we got

there, there were people screaming and shouting then, you could feel

the pressure in the ground of the people around you as soon as you

got ito the crowd.    Then the pressure just got gradually worse,

initially you had little bit of room around you, the people were

screaming and shouting but the Police at the front were oblivious as

to what was going on, the people were shouting for help, they were

being asked to be got out as they couldn't breath, one Policeman did

have a radio to his mouth but he wasn't speaking into it, the

Policeman just looked but he didn't do anything.    Eventually when

things got really bad and we thought that we weren't going to get out

of this, eventually they did open up the gate at the front and a

couple of supporters got out and then they closed the gate shut and

one Policeman leant on it to close it, one sup’porter got over the

fence ad in fact was fighting with the Policeman and three other

Policeman jumped on him.   People were screaming for help but they

didn't seem to be taking any notice, at this time Arthur was O.K. and

      was O.K.,   I could see that Nicola was distressed and her face

was going red, the three lads who were next to us were clearly gone,

they were deep purple and their mouths were opened.    People were
GOLDING                 KEITH                                        PAGE


shouting to the Police there's people dying here, we can't breath, we

are getting crushed, there were people climbing and standing over our

heds to get out and it was as though the Police were trying to throw

them back in again to keep them from getting onto the pitch, the

pressure got worse and worse and I thought that Nicola had gone

because she had gone a very deep red and her eyes seemed to be glazed

and popping out of her head,    I remember         shouted to me is Arthur

alright, he looked alright he had his pinkish M^hite colour but as if

he was asleep,   I couldn't speak, my mouth was going but I had no air

to be able to speak,    I felt like being sick, but I had to gulp to

keep it down and I remember Nicola saying,       I'm going to be sick,   I

don't know how I was able to talk to her but obviously I must have

got the message through that she had to hold it back, at times I was

mouthing the words because I just simply couldn't get any words out

because I was under so much pressure-        I just got the impression of

the build up of pressure getting worse and worse and worse, rather

than there being a big push at the end, the pressure was such I have

neve ever experienced this bad before-       I have never been so scared

in my life,   it is the most frightening experience I have ever been

through.   Our         went through a panic stage,    I went through a

panic stage before I calmed down but I actually thought that I was           M

going to die.    I was feeling extremely hot and I could feel myself         S

passig out as I was crushed,    I just kept my head up and was gulping

for air just like a goldfish.     I can't say how long this was going on

for, but I suppose it must have been fifteen, twenty minutes or even

longer, as the pressure eased, so Arthur was dropping, as the

pressure eased so I fell back, there were people in front of me who

had dropped and there were people behind me who had dropped onto me.

I was lying on somebody or somebodies but I never M/ent onto the
 GOLDING                KEITH                                          PAGE


 ground,   I was virtually sitting on people, I couldn't get out because

my left leg was trapped,    I could move my right leg but I couldn't

move my left leg, I remembe r grabbing at Nicola's jumpsuit to try and

 pull her out, and then a Po liceman pulled at me but my leg was

hurting and I was screaming and I said to them, get the people off

that were on me first of al 1.     I would imagine the people that were

around me were dead, they w ere so still, there was a lot of bodies

around me, they were dead o rt top of me as wel as under me,     I just

can’t explain how lucky I a n to be here, a lad and Policeman dragged

me out,    I tried to stand up but I fell over-     The Policeman put me

onto is shoulder and I was then passed over the railings into the

right hand side section of      he Lepping Lane Terracing,   I was then

carried out onto the pitch and I was left-        Eventually I managed to

get up to find Nicola,    I can't remember seeing          ir him shouting

at me to get out, having found Nicola I then tried to find the

others-    We eventually got round to the gymnasium where we saw

and he came over and told us about Arthur having died.




When I returned back to Liverpool, the ankle was throbbing by then.

I also had a bruised and grazed left hip and subsequently had a

                                                       On the Sunday
        GOLDING           KEITH              PAGE


                                  K GOLDING SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
