                                                                 4>

►
                                                            ,»
    E.R.
       30-2.JS
                                                         cc: Mr Chilcot
                                                             HMCIC
                                                             Mr Boys Smith
       From:         J L Goddard
                     F8 Division
                     Ext. 3314

                     9 February 1990




                                                  -&JUL l£t ©il[-€4,6
       Mr Hammond
       Mr Addison
       Mrs Reisz
       Mrs Catto
       Mr Cane
       Miss Goose
       Mr Coabil-1                                                      sy-“ 5 ^ ,    _^

                                                                                     J/l^iC i ^
       TAYLOR REPORT:     POLICE ISSUES



       Mr Chilcot has asked me to co-ordinate the Police Department's
       response to the final Taylor Report.     As a first move I have
       prepared the attached draft letter for Mr Boys Smith's
       signature to go to Mr Anderton in his capacity as Chairman of
       the ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events.            I
       should be grateful for any comments you may have on the draft
       to be made to me within a couple of days so that I can put
       forward a final version to Mr Boys Smith on Wednesday 14
       February.


       2•      Mr Hammond. Miss Goose. and Mr Coabill will note that
       with regard to the recommendations (70-73) for some new
       offences and penalties the draft is no more than a holding
       operation.     I propose to discuss further with the three of you
       the substantive letter which it promises.     Mr Addison's
       concern is with recommendation 53 about charging.         Mrs Reisz
       may wish to look at recommendation 48 about arrest procedures
       although I have not thought it necessary to draw particular
attention to this in the draft.   Mrs Catto's main interest is
in recommendation 52 for training senior officers.   Mr Cane I
have assumed would have the main interest in recommendations
54-58 dealing with communications and, in particular, a
dedicated command channel.   However, if this matter would be
more properly handled by someone else perhaps he could let me
know.


3.   For ease of reference I attach a copy of the Taylor final
recommendations and one of the schedule placed in the Library
of the House setting out the Government's response to them.


4.   I have built into the draft letter to Mr Anderton an
indication that we shall be wanting to monitor the police
response:   the draft suggests a meeting, perhaps around
Easter, when Mr Boys Smith and I and those of you who wish
might meet with ACPO and review progress.


5.   If it is more convenient for you to make any comments on
the draft by telephone to me this will, of course, suffice.




                         J L GODDARD
