NOTE OF MEETING WITH HOME OFFICE OFFICIALS:      17 OCTOBER


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor     Mr   A   H Turney
           Mr Johnson              Mr   P   E Bolton
           Professor Maunder       Mr   J   L Goddard
           Mr Whalley              Mr   D   J Mould
           Mr Sweet                Mr   B   A Stickley
                                   Mr   F   Smith



Safety Certificates


1.   Lord Justice Taylor asked what consideration had been given
to the detailed replacement of Section 2 (2) of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975.   This was relevant to the question of
standardising the content of Safety Certificates.        Clause 13 of
the Football Spectators Bill gave the Football Licensing
Authority powers in relation to designated football grounds which
raised the question of the overlap with the 1975 Act.        A further
consideration was the question whether the Health and Safety
Executive under the Health and Safety at Work Act could be given
an inspectorial or regulatory function.


2.   In reply, Home Office officials suggested that the long
title of the Bill would limit any changes to football grounds.
Section 2 (2) of the 1975 Act had been replaced because the 1975
Act was capable of application to all sports grounds, and all the
detailed terms of the old Section 2 (2) would have been too
onerous in the limited context of the 1987 Act.      Ministers had
also been anxious to retain as much flexibility as possible in
certification requirements, and had also been conscious of the
need to keep the Secretary of State distant from the detail when
he was the appellate authority under Section 5.


3.   In further discussion on the position of local authorities,
it was noted that few grounds were owned by them.        In any case
the occupier not the owner was the Certificate holder, and he
would be required to ensure compliance with the Certificate.           In
practical terms, local authorities' resources were thinly
stretched since sports grounds were only one of many activities
to be regulated or licensed (as the public inquiry at Sheffield
had shown).


4.   On the question of national oversight, perhaps by means of
an inspectorate, Home Office officials took the view that there
were clear advantages in some form of national inspection process
in relation to local functions, but they had to strike a balance
between local flexibility and central control.    Thus there were
national inspectorates for the police and fire services.     The FLA
was congruent with such an approach.   As for the HSE, the
arguments went both ways:    the HSE's major preoccupation with the
safety of workers might suggest a different approach from what
was needed, and to give them tough powers of oversight might not
be acceptable to some of the agencies concerned, for example the
police.


The Safety Certificate and the Guide


5.   Discussion then turned to possible developments of the
system, for example including sports grounds other than those of
association football under Clauses 8 to 13 of the Bill, whether
or not it was better to merge the FLA with the 1975 Act
certification process in relation to football grounds, how to
persuade local authorities to adopt a less parochial approach,
the status of the Guide (particularly the question whether
aspects of the Guide should be made mandatory for inclusion in
Safety Certificates) and whether there was a hard core of
requirements which were absolutely essential, as under the old
Section 2 (2), for example concerning crush barriers or
gradients.


6.   The Home Office took the view that change away from the
present position should be evolutionary rather than
revolutionary.   So long as the principle of local authority
responsibility for the certification process was maintained, the
Government was agnostic on the precise relationship between the
FLA and local authorities.    The Government continued to attach
importance to local flexibility and the need for local discussion
on the exact conditions in a Certificate, and since the Green
Guide was not a "design guide", and had to take account of
enormous variations in practice, there was bound to be hesitation
over the mandatory inclusion of all its provisions.     However, the
Government was likely to accept identification of those
provisions which local authorities should themselves specify as
mandatory in a particular case.


7.   Discussion then turned to areas of particular difficulty in
the Guide.     Lord Justice Taylor raised the question of limits for
crowd capacities, and in particular keeping an absolute upper
limit but having no absolute lower limit.     Clubs would inevitably
tend to regard an upper limit as a norm, and would discount less
than they should do.     In reply, Home Office officials recognised
the need to ensure that proper recognition was given to existing
guidance, while stopping short of imposing a skeleton Safety
Certificate.     It was certainly recognised that there were many
circumstances where 54 persons per 10 sq metres was too high a
density, and more specific advice was needed on calculation of
densities.     Home Office lawyers had cast doubt on whether powers
existed to specify precisely the methods of calculation.      On the
status of the Guide, Home Office officials said that after
Hillsborough consideration had been given to a new version of the
Guide, but the decision had been to await Lord Justice Taylor's
Report.


Crowd Control


8.   Lord Justice Taylor raised the question of responsibility
for crowd control (Chapter 2 of the Guide).     The Hillsborough
Inquiry had revealed doubt and confusion over responsibility for
control on the terraces.     Some were arguing that the clubs should
be made to exercise full responsibility:     others took the view
that, since the police de facto had the authority, they should
have the nominal authority also.     The Home Office view was that
the safety responsibility should rest on the occupier:       they
could use the police as an agency, and of course the police had a
role in public order, but the legal responsibility should not
move away from the occupier.     The Home Office therefore
subscribed to the summary of management responsibilities set out
in paragraph 29 in the Guide, and would not detract from
paragraphs 204 and 205 as a summary of the relative
responsibilities of the police and clubs.    Interim recommendation
4 was showing up some of the grey areas.    Police forces were
encountering difficulties over the contractual implication of an
agreement with clubs, in particular the point that their common
law duty could not be bound by contract.    Difficulties had also
been raised over the civil liabilities created by a contract.       On
the other hand, where difficulties could not be resolved locally,
the local authorities had extensive enforcement powers under the
1975 Act, and the powers in Section 14 of the Public Order Act
1986 could be brought to bear.


9.    Lord Justice Taylor noted the argument that, to cut through
the difficulties, the police should assume all responsibility at
football matches, or, as a lesser option, full responsibility at
certain grounds or matches.   That inevitably raised issues of
principle as well as resource implications, and hence cost
implications for the clubs.   A second option was for the police
to be involved as an agency in some aspects, although again that
would raise cost implications for clubs.    A further option was to
hive off large areas of crowd management to a private security
form, as at Ibrox, and there was a case for encouraging clubs to
do that.   His current view was that clubs should be encouraged to
accept as much responsibility as possible, either on their own
account or through their own security arrangements, while
recognising that in the last resort the responsibility for the
maintenance of order would rest with the police.


10.   Home Office officials said that, in dealing with queries
about interim recommendation 4, they had stressed the need for
practical agreements rather than detailed contractual
undertakings.   Concern was bound to focus on two points:
ensuring that the police did not take on more responsibility than
was proper, and ensuring that any costs incurred by the police
inside grounds were capable of being fully reimbursed.     There was
some reluctance to encouraging clubs to entrust more of their
responsibility to the police than the current structure in
paragraphs 204 and 205 of the Guide envisaged.    The Home Office
was certainly prepared to see clubs entrust their function to
private security firms or other agencies, and also to the police
provided that the full police costs inside the ground were met.
The full economic cost of policing a football match was
considerably more than the costs of stewarding on terraces.       They
would also be reluctant to see the police accepting written
agreements to steward particular areas of the ground, for
example, and preferred to retain to the full the Chief
Constable's discretion to maintain public order.   Subject to
that, the Home Office would be looking for the elimination of
areas of doubt or confusion as to where responsibility lay.


Alcohol


11.   Lord Justice Taylor referred to the Football Association's
suggestion that the ban on alcohol should be reviewed.    Would
exemptions make it any more likely that fans would get into the
ground in time?    The Ibrox concourse (where no alcohol was on
sale) showed that it was possible to encourage fans to get into
the ground earlier without the need to provide them with alcohol.
In reply, Home Office officials drew attention to the traditional
view that inhibitions on alcohol at sporting events should be
kept to the minimum necessary to ensure proper behaviour, bearing
in mind that the purpose of sporting events was meant to be a
social and pleasurable one.   They acknowledged, however, the
reality that alcohol and football did not readily mix, as the
need for the 1985 legislation had shown.   Options might be
limited, given that Ibrox type facilities were likely to be the
exception rather than the rule.   Alcohol was bound to be seen by
some clubs as an attractive lure to get people in to the ground.
On the other hand, Government recognised the problems created by
drunken fans notwithstanding the 1985 Act restrictions, hence the
inclusion in Schedule 1 to the Football Spectators Bill of
alcohol related offences.


12.   Lord Justice Taylor explored the inter-relationship of
alcohol with other variants such as early kick-offs and Sunday
matches.   Home Office officials noted that the overriding point
was likely to be the climate created by the 1985 Act, and the
need to avoid encouraging any reversal to the pattern which had
made the 1985 provisions necessary.    There had nevertheless been
in excess of 1,000 arrests for drunkenness entering or at
football matches in 1988.   The Government's present intention was
to tighten the position, for example by inclusion in the Bill of
amendments restricting the consumption of alcohol on any journey
to a football match.


Breach of the Peace


13.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about Home Office views on the
breach of the peace provisions in Scotland, and whether there was
a case for similar provisions in England, to deal with behaviour
such as pitch invasions.    Home Officials took the view that
Section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 provided adequate powers
and was moreover being widely used.    It had followed on directly
from the Popplewell recommendations.     Those powers, plus the
common law powers in relation to breach of the peace and the
powers in the Football Spectators Bill    in relation to restriction
orders, were presently thought   to be sufficient to deal with
identified football hooligans.


Ticket Touts


14.   Lord Justice Taylor drew attention to the police view that
ticket touts were undesirable, because they disrupted plans to
segregate offenders, and encouraged people to come without
tickets.    At present, police had no specific powers to deal with
ticket touts, and there were arguments for the creation of a
specific offence, which could cover the three elements of selling
a ticket above its face value,   selling it within a specific range
of a ground, and selling it on   the day of a match.   In reply,
Home Office officials cited the undesirability of placing
restraints on legitimate activity, and the fact that Ministers
were likely to attach some weight to the point that market forces
ought not to be interfered with unless an overriding case was
made out.
Football Spectators Bill

15.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for Home Office views on two
criticisms which had been made of Part 1 of the Football
Spectators Bill - that it was based upon an unproven technology,
whose implementation would entail a large bureaucracy which even
then would leave inconsistencies and anomalies;    and that it
would apply indiscriminately over the whole population of
football spectators rather than only the hooligans for whom it
was intended.   He asked what consideration had been given to
extending the powers in Part 2 of the Bill to apply to football
matches in England and Wales, drawing on the framework presented
by the existing exclusion order power.   There were attractions in
the proposition that identified football hooligans should be
subject to a reporting requirement during football matches, and
there was an analogous penalty in the attendance centre order.
He wondered whether, spread across the whole country, the numbers
were likely to be a burden on the police.   He was bound to
consider these factors against the difficulties inherent in mass
control of the football going population, and the potential
evasions which had already been identified, such as multi­
membership addresses, difficulty of checking photographs, the
need to follow up those who are admitted on amber lights, and the
inevitable burden falling on the police of ensuring compliance
with the scheme.


16.   Home Office officials drew attention to Ministers'
commitment to the policy in Part 2 of the Bill.    The use of the
exclusion order power (some 1785 between August 1987 and May
1989) had not encouraged Ministers to think that by itself it was
a sufficient power against football hooligans.    A requirement on
offenders to report every Saturday, and at weekday matches, to
police stations could create considerable burdens locally, and
raise questions whether it was acceptable to use police resources
in this way.    It was recognised that Part 2 of the Bill would
create a similar burden in principle in relation to matches
overseas, but the difference seemed likely to be one of scale.
By analogy with the Government's wish to make football clubs take
over more of the responsibility, the national membership scheme
was designed to involve clubs more fully.    The membership scheme,
plus the prospective police national intelligence scheme, was
thought by Ministers to be sufficiently targetted on serious
offenders, without imposing an undue burden on the police or on
spectators as a whole.   Ministers valued an all embracing scheme,
hence the choice of a national scheme rather than a system of
partial membership schemes.


All-seater Stadia

17.   Lord Justice Taylor raised the provisions on all-seater
stadia in Clause 11 of the Bill.    Home Office officials said that
Ministers envisaged the money for such improvements being found
from within football itself, from the Football Trust, sponsorship
and advertising in particular.     On the question of the pool
betting tax, Ministers took the view that football was presently
a business from which the Treasury should take a share:     any
lessening of the pool betting tax was likely to be seen as a
direct Government subsidy to a particular form of private business.
