03/11 -^97 16:59           01512361936          HF S G                    ->01712732007                       Pg. 01

                                                                                            spMRotr,




                                                                                               su ppo'
                                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                   Pioneer House
                                                  65-67 Dale Street
                                                  Liverpool L2 2N


              To Chris Bone

              Fax No

              From Ann Adlington

              Date 3rd November 1987

              Fax No 0151 236 1936

              No of pages to follow. 1

              Message;-
              Chris herewith names and addresses o f witnesses referred to in Submissions.
              Has Lord Justice Stuart-Smith given any further thought as to interviewing any of them.
              I dont think it could be said that Scrutiny was complete unless at the very least the
              Ambulancemen were interviewed Even Jack Straw in interviews he gave to the media on 30th
              June, acknowledges the serious allegations which were made in the respect of Ambulances
              being prevented from going onto the pitch
              If necessary I will dig out a reference for you.

              Regards.


              Ann




   CHAIRM AN                                     VICE-CHAIRM AN / SECRETARY                TREASURER
   T. Hicks                                      P. Hiimmord                               Mn. J. Traynor
   Fern Hill Bam                                 21 Rosemont Road                          43 Gcn i-field Road
   Nuwhouse Lane, Cong Preston                   Liverpool                                 B lr tt ^'r ra d
   Skjpton B 023 AQU                             1,17 6BX                                  MciicjMde
   Tel/Fax: 0I729-840840                         Tel/Fax: 0)51-724 5771                    Ttl OI5 J-652 7503
   Mobile: 0973-411051                           Mobile: 0589-32-1121
43/11'-'97
i, - .. *>. 16:59   01512361936   HF S G   -->01712732007   Pg. 02




        I. Tonv Edwards




        2. Peter Howes




   #
         3. Ian McDermott




         4. Paul Taylor




         5, Steven Williams
               TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                -     The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                              This Transcript Fran: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161228 6922




              G.B.:
                         Well joining me now is the Home Secretary Jack Straw. Home Secretary why couldn't
              you have gone for what the families wanted which was a full public inquiry?
              .L&i
                         Because I thought that it was appropriate to have the allegations of new evidence
              examined fully by an independent senior member of the Court of Appeal in the way that I'd
              proposed and that's partly because four possible causes of action could follow such an
              examination. There could be a recommendation for a new full public inquiry, there could be a
              recommendation to the Attorney General for him to apply for a new inquest or a
              recommendation to the Director of Public Prosecutions for criminal proceedings or to the Chief
              Constable of South Yorkshire for disciplinary proceedings against police officers. It seemed to

         «    me that it was important to have a focus and a funnel if you like for a consideration of these
              allegations of new evidence and I think that Lord Justice Stuart Smith is a man who is ideally
              placed to conduct that investigation. And although I understand...
              G.B.:
                         Well...
              J-S.:
                         ...if I may just say this, that the family support group would have liked me to go, go
              further they made it clear to me in my meetings today with them that they welcomed what I'd
              done.
              G.B.:
                        Yes, but will this new investigation or examination deal only with what is regarded as
              new evidence or will it consider what the families feel was evidence ignored or not given
              enough importance in previous inquiries or inquests?
              J-S.:
                         Well it'll, it'll deal principally with allegations that there is new evidence which was not
              before the original inquiries and in particular as far as the families are concerned before the...
              G.B.:
                        The new medical evidence...
              JSA
                         Yes and that, and that principally, not exclusively but it principally relates to the video
              evidence, that there is, there are claims now that there was video evidence which was available
              at the time which was not shown to the inquest or to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry and also
              evidence about the time of death which is obviously critical so far as the families are concerned v
              in then establishing other issues including for example culpability of those who did not allow



COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the cBent Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex
for private use o f the dlent and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast In part or as a whole v/ithout the formal consent of the copyright holder or the
broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio or Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                       Job N um ber: C97-074002 - Page : 3
            TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                -       The Broadcast Reporting Service
            NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                             This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161228 6922




           the, or would not permit the ambulances to go onto the field. So it's those issues which will be
           among the items which will be examined by Lord Justice Stuart Smith.
           G.B.:
                      And if this investigation feels that there is significant new evidence like for instance the
           video that you talked about then could it then lead to disciplinary action or indeed criminal
            proceedings against the South Yorkshire Police?
            J.S.:
                      Yes is the answer, that will be a matter for Lord Justice Stuart Smith to make a
            recommendation as far as criminal proceedings are concerned to the Director of Public
            Prosecutions. If Lord Justice Stuart Smith makes a recommendation to me as Home Secretary
              >r there to be a further full public inquiry then I've already given an undertaking that I will act

        t     n that and in any event I will ensure that his advice to me is made public.
            G.B.:
                       Home Secretary thank you very much indeed for joining us.
            J.S.:
                       Thank you.
             G.B.:
                       Well Phil Hammond who lost a son at Hillsborough was one of the relatives who met
            Jack Straw before his announcement. Earlier I asked him for his reaction to today's news.
             PHTIJP HAMMOND:
                  (Hillsborough Family Support Group) We're happy with what Jack Straw has come up
             with, it's not everything we want but we're happy, it's open the door for us and we're about to
            just walk through it now.
             G.B.:
                       Yes, I mean it does fall short of what you were actually asking for doesn't it?
             P.H.:
                        It does, does fall short but it's up to Lord Justice Stuart to how, how he's going to do this
             inquiry, how he's, how he's going to do this. We'll have to get in touch with our barrister and
             our barristers are getting in touch with him to put pressure on that we want legal input into this.
             G.B.:
                        I mean do you have worries about that inquiry as to what evidence might be admissible
             and what evidence might not be admissible?
             P.H.:
                        No, Jack Straw has said all the evidence that we put forward will be admissible so all the ,
             evidence we've got he's going to take on board.


COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client Reports and audio-visual material are ^ P P ^ b y
for private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copynght holder or me
broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.


Audio or Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days from broadcast data
                                                                                                      Job N um ber: C97-074002 - Page: 4
