                             Incident Narrative.


Hillsborough Incident.


The call to this incident was received at Control at 1517 hours.
I proceeded with two pumps Central 1, Central 2, and E.T. (10
men) .

The route followed to the stadium was along Penistone Road, the
route was reasonably clear, thejweather was dry and sunny.

On arrival at the stadium there was no one there to meet us which
I expected given the message said (major disaster).

We drew the appliances to a halt just before the first set of
gates into the stadium, I dismounted the appliance and asked a
police officer where we were expected to go, he said he had no
knowledge of any incident or direction.  I asked a further police
officer if we could get in via the double gates, he said yes and
immediately opened the gates into the roadway down the side of the
stadium, I went to a gate adjacent to the entry gate, the police
officer said they hadn't called us and didn't need our assistance
but perhaps we should go further down the road, this we did.

 I ran down the road to the end of the stadium where the police
 observation box was situated and was shown the route to the pitch
 by a Marshall.
                                                              •

 I proceeded onto the pitch the crowd had not moved at all. The
 pitch around the area of the Leppings Lane goal area was full of
 people some casualties, some relatives and friends of casualties,
 people stood, people kneeling, people laid down. Many people in
 obvious shock this included St Johns ambulance personnel, police
 as well as the fans.

 Once on the pitch I asked several police officers who was in
 charge and where the casualties were being moved to - they
 couldn't tell me.

 It was clear to see that no rescues as such needed doing, but
 bodies and casualties obviously needed removing from the scene. I
 gave my men instructions to carry out first aid and resuscitation
 that required doing and to try to be as selective as possible
 (there were only five men available initially).

 I spoke .briefly to. Station Officer Swain who informed me he was
 having difficulty in getting to the incident.               I informed him I
 was at the actual incident. It was obvious to me we were going to
 need more men than the initial turnout and there would be an
 urgent need for resuscitators. I then lost contact with him and
 my own drivers, I sent a Liverpool fan with a message to my
„„<iri^i:s 1t.o*-ma3ce«piM^»a,,-Jil^,,Jthis^he«did, but in^ tlie-meanfeime-Stafei-OH -
 Officer Swain had already sent the message.
At this point I contacted            the driver of Central 1 and
asked him to try to get ambulances to the point where our
appliances were as I knew this route was clear - this he together
with            driver of Central 2 did. Shortly after this Temp.
Station Officer       reported to me I asked him to go to the
roadway were the appliances were parked and set up a casualty
handling area, which he did, I then proceeded to try to get the
most urgent cases transported to this casualty handling area,
approximately 20 to 30 persons were transported by means of make
shift stretchers to this point, approximately 10 persons were
taken off the field by ambulance.

At this stage Firemen from Darnall and Ringinglow were arriving
and giving first aid. This was also the time when ADO Robjohns
arrived on the field.

ADO Robjohns informed me that a temporary morgue had been set up
in the gymnasium, I responded by having the obvious dead removed
to the gym and the other casualties to the point I had set up.

DO Lockwood arrived on the pitch I gave him a brief report of the
situation, he informed me he would go to the police control box
overlooking the incident and set up a control point which he did.

ADO Robjohns informed DO Lockwood that a casualty handling centre
had been set up in the gym but there was a shortage of ambulances
- the number of serious casualties was quite low at this stage and
the decision was made to move the remainder to the gym, and
discontinue the casualty handling area I had set up and divert the
ambulances to the gym.




STATION OFFICER FLETCHER.

                 £6   Ttetetr
