NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE SCOTTISH FIRE AND AMBULANCE SERVICES
HELD AT ALHAMBRA HOUSE, GLASGOW ON FRIDAY 27 OCTOBER AT 9.00AM


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor       Mr C Halliday, Firemaster
           Mr Whalley                Mr Hunter, Asst Firemaster
           Mr Sweet                  Mr Docherty Asst Firemaster
                                      (Ops)
                                     Mr J Wilby, Director, Scottish
                                      Ambulance Service
                                     Mr W Robson, Chief Ambulance
                                      Officer, Glasgow



Lord Justice Taylor welcomed the representatives from the Fire
and Ambulance organisations, and sought views first from the
Scottish Ambulance Service.


2.   They had encountered few specific problems in applying the
recommendations of the Interim Report, but currently had an
unsatisfactory relationship with the Scottish Football
Association over the use of private ambulances, particularly in
relation to St Helens, St Mirren, Motherwell and Dundee United.
The latter refused to allow the Scottish Ambulance Service (SAS)
into their ground because of the additional costs incurred.    The
SAS felt aggrieved that clubs were unwilling to pay comparatively
small sums for the provision of life-saving care.


3.   In response, Lord Justice Taylor reminded the SAS that it
was not for the Inquiry to resolve essentially internal disputes
between the SAS, local authorities and the clubs.


4.   The Fire Service, similarly, had encountered few problems
with the interim recommendations.    They already had pre­
determined arrangements in respect of each stadium for the
receipt of information from the police about crowd size, ingress
and egress etc.   Their only complaint stemmed from the lack of
standardisation about the form of delivery (telephone call;pro­
forma);    their preference was for formal written notification.


5.   In discussion, the Fire Service confirmed that they felt it
unnecessary for a senior officer to be present in the police
control room at a game;   their response time was invariably quick
and a senior officer would always attend with the vehicles.       The
service had established a close working relationship with the
police, and an administrative group co-ordinated the issuing of
Safety Certificates.    It was a condition of Certificates that
gates be locked, provided they were at all times manned and
easily unlocked.


6.    On perimeter fencing, ten out of the 13 designated grounds
in Strathclyde had no such fencing, the exceptions being Ibrox,
Parkhead and Hamden.    Where fencing existed, the Fire Service
view was that bolt-cutters were not particularly satisfactory,
requiring too much time to cut each strand.    Furthermore, if
clubs had such cutting gear, there would be insufficient time for
those (such as the Fire Service) outside the ground to enter and
use it;   the equipment would have to be wielded by stewards and
others already present.    That was not particularly satisfactory.
If perimeter fencing was to be retained, it therefore needed to
be redesigned so that sections of the fencing could be removed
easily.   Alternatively, gates should be of sufficient width to
cope with the volume of spectators using them and should be free
of encumbrances, with no walls or steps to hinder movement.


7.    More generally, uncertainty was expressed about the form of
 'advisory group1, and the involvement of football supporters.
Lord Justice Taylor confirmed that the annual meetings already
undertaken in the region were satisfactory fora, provided they
 included spectators.


 8.   Finally, the Inquiry noted the concern felt about eh 15%
 reduction in capacity being increased by a further 5% to
 incorporate UEFA's ruling.   Lord Justice Taylor confirmed that
 his 15% figure was intended to incorporate, not be in addition
 to, the UEFA figure.
