From:        J L Goddard                      cc   Mr Boys Smith
             F8 Division                           Mrs Catto
             Ext 3314                              Mr Cogbill
                                                   Mr Rhodes
             31 May 1990                           Mr F Smith
                                                   Ms Jago
                                                   Mr Mould



Mr Bolton


POLICING FOOTBALL

                       r minute of22 May, I deal below with the
points you raised.


Stewardinq


2.      Our views on stewarding are clear: we wish to encourage
clubs to provide more and better stewarding.        As they do so it
will be possible for the police to reduce their presence and
the consequential        charges to clubs. The division of
responsibility between clubs       and the    police needs tobeset
out clearly in the statement of intent.        There is nothing
between us here.


Rugby League


3.      It is not uncommon for clubs whether football or Rugby
League to dispute the necessary level of policing.           I am sure
that we must rely on the judgement of the chief officer
concerned.     As our policy of making realistic charges bites we
may well see more        complaints of this   nature in future.


4.      We are aware     that there is a particular problem in the
relationship between Mr Maurice Lindsay, Rugby League, and
Chairman of Wigan, and the Greater Manchester Police.          Wigan
attracts crowds of the order of 30,000 with a significant
troublesome element.       The police have recently increased the
number of officers deployed at Wigan's matches.      But even now
fewer are deployed there than would be at a football match
attracting a crowd of similar size.      Mr Malcolm George, ACC
(Operations) at GMP has made the point firmly to Mr Lindsay
that the levels of policing at Wigan are not excessive.


Advisory Group


5.    I support your view that the Green Guide should stress
that relevant requirements imposed by the police or fire
services should be properly drawn to the attention of the
advisory group so that all concerned have an appreciation of
w h ^ ^ i s going on and why.


Police Training Courses


6.   Mr George, ACC GMP, is interested in your idea that there
should be a Home Office input to police training courses on
the status and purposes safety certificate.      I am sure he
would be very appreciative if you were to offer this.      His
telephone number at GMP headquarters is 061 855 2014.      If you
do take this forward with him you might like to mention that
you are doing so after discussion with me.




                                 J. L.


                                J L GODDARD
