MEETING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITY ASSOCIATIONS:     11 DECEMBER:   POINTS
FOR DISCUSSION


Association of County Councils

1.   Arrangements for local co-ordination:

          structure
          range of interests represented
          effectiveness of procedures
          how practically based (visit to grounds etc)
          a "minimalist" approach or a "questioning" approach to
          safety?
          effective management by senior officers and elected
          members.

2.   National arrangements for oversight:
          lack of any national forum
          joint local authority groups
          an inspectorate based on the FLA
          a role for the HSE

3.   Detailed points for discussion:

          police arrangements
          stewarding arrangements
          alcohol
          ticketless fans
          prohibition on sale of tickets on day of match
          offence of gaining entry without a ticket
          crush barriers
          gates and their manning
          police costs and the involvement of private security
          firms


Association of District Councils

1.   Unsatisfactory inspection procedures:

          bid to take over from county councils (paragraph 2.3)

2.   Local authority ownership of grounds (paragraph 1.2) and
questions of relocation and redevelopment (paragraph 6.3).

3.   Advisory Groups (2.4) and safety panels    (5.4).

4.  National Standards (2.7) - is the Green Guide not
sufficient?

5.   Stewards and police training (2.6).

6.   Alcohol (paragraph 6.2) what does the Association have in
mind ("extension of this practice") at point b?
Association of Metropolitan Authorities

1.   Alternative means of escape

          configuration of exits, seated stands and stewards.

2.   Fences and gates

          quick release mechanisms etc (what did they think of
          Nimes)?

3.   Scope of our Inquiry (paragraph 7 a, b, c and e) fall to be
considered by the recently appointed Civil Emergencies Adviser
following a Home Office review.

4.   Paragraph 7d raises detailed points on crowd densities.
Could they elaborate (especially the last paragraph of section
7d) - lower packing densities for intermediate terraced areas
between stands and playing areas.


Convention of Scottish Local Authorities

1.   All-seater stadia and fencing.

2.   Membership of control rooms (should it include all the
emergency services).

3.  How wide ranging should the mandatory training exercises
recommended be?

4.   How much flexibility should there be in spectator capacity?

5.   How do they think turnstile entry should be measured (page 3
criticises without offering alternatives)?

6.   What would be involved in annual renewal of Safety
Certificates? Should the local authority have flexibility as
suggested on page 4?

7.   What extra statutory powers do they have in mind to enter
and inspect stadia, require the carrying out of urgent repairs
and revoke certificates: in what way are the present powers
deficient?
