From: M J PYNE                                                  cc     Mr Howarth
      Operational Policing                                             Mr Omand
      Policy Unit                                                      Mr Lyon
      Room 528, QAG                                                    Mr Pugh
      S 273-2433                                                       Mr Edmundson
                                                                       Mr Butler
          12 February 1999                                             Mr Owen
                                                                       Mr Russell


Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM PETER KILFOYLE MP

Issue

Peter Kilfoyle has written to ask about placing copies of evidence on the Hillsborough
disaster in Liverpool Central Library.

Tim ing

2.     We understand that Mr Kilfoyle is anxious to clarify the position, so an early
reply would be helpful.

Recommendation

3.     That you reply to Peter Kilfoyle as in the attached draft, explaining that there are
no plans to place material in Liverpool Central Library.

Consideration

4.     Mr Kilfoyle refers to your response to a request from Frank Field in the House
on 26 October to place the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in
Liverpool Central Library. You indicated that you believed this already to be the case and
that you would endeavour to comply with the request. You wrote to Mr Field on 7
December and again on 12 January (copies attached) explaining that you had been
mistaken and that it had not been planned to send the material to Liverpool Central
Library and that it was not practical to do so now.

5.      As well as being placed in the Library of the House, copies of the Hillsborough
police statements were also supplied to the Family Support Group following a request on
their behalf. Mr Kilfoyle points out that there are now about ten families who belong to
an alternative group, the Hillsborough Justice Campaign, and who are denied access to
material held by the Family Support Group. He argues that each family should have the
opportunity to reappraise the evidence, regardless o f which group they belong to.

6.      Peter Edmundson’s submissions o f 30 November and 8 January explained that
the police statements, which comprise the bulk o f the material involved, had been
returned to the South Yorkshire Police archive as they remain the property of the force.




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#9()211#l
It would be a large, expensive and time-consuming task to recall the statements and to
copy them together with the other material involved. It would also be for the Chief
Constable in the first instance to agree to the release of the statements.

7.      We do not believe there is any reason to reconsider your earlier decision and we
suggest that you reply in similar terms to your letter to Frank Field.

Handling/presentational issues

8.     N o additional issues.




                                              M J Pyne




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#9()211#l
DRAFT REPLY FOR H O M E SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

Peter Kilfoyle MP
House o f Commons
LO N D O N SW1A OAA




Thank you for your letter o f 8 February about placing material about the Hillsborough
disaster in Liverpool Central Library.


I am sorry that my reply to Frank Field in the House on 26 October last year gave the
impression that the material from the Hillsborough scrutiny was to be placed in
Liverpool Central Library. I had misinformed myself on this point. There are no plans to
do this and I wrote to Frank on 7 December to apologise for the misunderstanding. A
copy o f my letter was also placed in the Library o f the House.


Much o f the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was already in
the public domain. His report also included the material which he considered relevant to
his conclusions. In my statement to the House on 18 February 1998 announcing the
outcome of the scrutiny, I undertook to place in the Library of the House as much o f the
remaining evidence considered by the scrutiny as possible, including all the police
statements. This has been done and the material is available if Members wish to arrange
for their constituents to view it.


As you know, we were also able at the same time to provide the Family Support Group
with copies of the police statements in response to their request. This was possible
because there was minimal additional work and cost involved in producing an extra set of
copies at that stage. Unfortunately, that is no longer the case and it would be a large and
costly exercise to copy all the material again. Also, following the completion o f the
scrutiny, the police statements were returned to South Yorkshire Police, whose property
they remain. It would, therefore, be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider whether to release the statements now that the scrutiny which I established has
ended.




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#9()211#l
We have tried to be as helpful as possible by placing the material in the Library of the
House and providing a copy to the Family Support Group. I realise that there are
families who do not belong to the Family Support Group, although it was the main
representative body at the time of the scrutiny. I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful.
I can only advise you to arrange for the material to be viewed in the Library of the
House.




::ODM A\ Meridio \E D R M #90211 #1
