From: N A Nagler                          cc Mr Yates
      Finance Division 2                     Mr Chilcot
      Ext 3472                               Mr Malone-Lee
      13 June 1989                           HMCIC
                                             Mr Whalley
                                             Mr Addison
                                             Ms Ransford
                                             Mr Durbin —

Mr Storr


HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


I have spoken to Sir Richard Barratt following his notes of
12 June to Mr Yates and Mr Addison, which set out his
recollection of the events which let up to the police inquiry and
his conversations with the Chief Constable of West Midlands.     We
suggest that the draft letter for the Home Secretary to send the
Chief Secretary be amended slightly, to make it clear that any
misunderstanding which may have arisen about the status of the
police inquiries occurred only on the part of Mr Dear.


I attach a revised draft of paragraph 8 of the draft letter
(changes from the earlier draft are sidelined).




                                     H
                                   N A NAGLER
Draft letter to the Chief Secretary



8.   I would like to make South Yorkshire an early offer of a
special payment, in the hope of persuading them to agree to meet
the initial costs of the investigation and thus relieve West
Midlands, which is extremely concerned about the drain on its own
policing resources and the absence of any agreed arrangement for
reimbursing its costs.     There is a risk that matters could come
to a head at an early stage.     A further complication is that the
Chief Constable of West Midlands (Geoffrey Dear) has told us that
his understanding has always been that he was conducting the
investigation solely on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor.     This may
be perhaps a confusion on the part of Mr Dear which arose because
when he was initially approached by HM Chief Inspector of
Constabulary the possibility was raised that he might be an
assessor for the Taylor enquiry as well as conducting the
investigation (although it was then decided to separate the two
roles).     The Chief Inspector has however confirmed that,in
approaching Mr Dear about the police investigation, he made it
quite clear that the initiative for the request came from the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, a fact borne out by the terms
of the press statement issued by South Yorkshire Police on
16 April.    Whatever the reasons for the apparent
misunderstanding, it would be very difficult to find ourselves
involved in any public dispute over the events which led up to
the investigation.
