                                                                                         <s>
From:           Giles Herbert                           cc:        Mr O’Brien
                APS/Alun Michael                                   Mr Howarth
                Room 705, QAG                                      Permanent Secretary
                9    273 4597                                      Miss Wheldon
                                                                   Mr Boys Smith
                05 June 1997                                       Mr Granatt
                                                                   HMCIC
                                                                   Mr Pugh
                                                                   Mr Middleton
                                                                   Ms Loudon
                                                                   Mr R Evans
                                                                       ;<^f(indson
                                                                   Mr Warner
                                                                   Mr Owen




Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Mr Michael has seen Peter Edmundson’s submission of yesterday about Hillsborough.
He agrees that you write to colleagues about the inquiry and has amended the attached
draft letter.




                                  GILES HERBERT




gh-127.doc
    REVISED DRAFT LETTER TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR
    SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



    THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




    As you know, I have been considering the representations which have been made about
    the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster was of course fully
    investigated by the late Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor, but concern has been raised about a
    number of features of the case and material considered by some to represent new
    evidence has been brought to our attention. These and related matters were raised in the


•
    Granada Television documentary drama “Hillsborough” last December.


    My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the allegations
    made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that there are no grounds
    for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has also been considered by the
    Attorney General’s Office and the DPP’s Office. None of those who have examined the
    material consider that there is evidence to justify a new public enquiry, a re-opening of
    the inquest, or the prosecution of individuals. However I am certain that continuing
    public concern will not be allayed with a reassurance that all the evidence has been given
    careful and independent scrutiny so that action can be taken where it is justified by the
    facts. I therefore propose that there should be an independent examination of the alleged
    new evidence by a senior legal figure - a respected judge (serving or recently retired), or
    perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be important to ensure that whoever undertakes the task
    is sufficiently senior and respected to command public confidence. My personal
    preference would be for a judge.


    The proposed terms of reference are:


    “To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new evidence
    relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which provides
    sufficient grounds for:




    gh-127.doc
        i.     the Secretary of State for the Home Department to establish a further
                public inquiry;


        ii.    the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
                Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;


        iii.   The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                charges against any person;


        iv.    The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary action
                against any police officer.


Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.”


There will need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the independent
examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the announcement will
have to be made in the House. But I shall want to make sure that the ground is properly
prepared before the announcement is made with those outside Government with a close
interest in the Hillsborough disaster including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor’s advice on a suitable figure to lead the
independent examination, and for your comments and those of copy recipients on the
proposed terms of reference by 12 June.


Copies o f this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the Secretary of
State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and Sir Robin Butler.
