                                 liberty
                                         Legal D epartm ent




Mr R.M.Whalley                                                               Your ref.
Room 662
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                         O u r ref.

London SWl 9AT                                                                                26th June 1989




Dear Mr Whalley



                                     Hillsborough Enquiry


The National Council for Civil Liberties has been concerned with the
Football Spectators Bill since its inception, and has drafted a number of
the amendments which have been put before the House of Lords. As you will
know, the Bill has now started its passage through the House of Commons,
but will probably still be under debate when Lord Justice Taylor presents
his interim report.

We should be grateful if you would convey to Lord Justice Taylor our
comments on certain aspects of the Bill that are relevant to the
Hillsborough tragedy, since his recommendations on crowd control are likely
to influence Government thinking on possible modifications to the Bill. It
would in our view be unfortunate if this led to any curtailment of civil
liberties beyond that already incorporated in the proposed legislation.

The report of the Minister for Sport's Working Party, which anticipated
many aspects of the Bill, concluded (para.32) that although there should be
a legal requirement to produce the proposed membership card on demand, this
should be restricted to "persons on, or seeking entry to, club premises for
the purpose of attending a designated match."

The Bill did not, however, incorporate this restriction, and Lord Graham
and others put forward amendments to insert it at both Committee and Report
stages of the Bill. Although the amendments were not passed, the Government
agreed on two occasions that they did not conflict with the purpose of the
Bill. On 14 March 1989 (H.L. Hansard col.164) Lord Hesketh said "We accept
that there will be no requirement on people to produce their cards away
from grounds", and on 12 April (col.441) he promised to consider issuing a
Home Office circular to the police to cover the point. The only exception
which the Government suggested was the production of cards when purchasing
tickets away from a ground.

It   would in our view be a retrograde and unnecessary step for this position
to   be abandoned as a consequence of the Hillsborough tragedy. It may well
be   argued that the police would be better able to control the accumulation
of   a large crowd if they set up control points well away from the ground,
as   is done at some large stadiums in Europe. Such a control point could


                                    National Council for Civil Liberties
                  21 Tabard S treet, L o ndon SEI 4 L A , Tel. 01 403 3888, Fax 01 407 S3S4
                             Madeleine C olvin, Barrister. Paul Hunt, S olicitor
                                     General Secretary, Sarah Spencer
form the head of a queue leading directly to the turnstiles, and in these
circumstances it would be logical to arrange for the inspection of both
cards and tickets at that point. This is quite different, however, to
allowing unrestricted inspection of cards at other locations - for example
railway stations, motorway service areas or special roadblocks.

We are concerned that unrestricted powers of inspection could encourage the
police to treat the cards as general identity cards, which Ministers have
repeatedly discounted as being neither necessary nor desirable, not least
because it opens the door to reviving the discredited "sus" laws.

From the police point of view it might well be convenient to be able to
intercept groups of people travelling in the general direction of a
football ground, and delay them while their cards were checked. We would
argue that this was an unnecessary interference with freedom of movement,
unrelated to the need for proper control in the vicinity of the ground.

We would only add that Mr Justice Popplewell, in his final 1986 report on
crowd safety and control (Cmnd.9710), recommended consideration of some
form of membership scheme but was at pains to deny that he was advocating
an identity card system (para. 4.107).

We shall be happy to amplify the above comments if required, and to
cooperate with the Enquiry in any other way that might be useful.




Yours sincerely




.Madeleine Colvin
 Legal Officer
m
