SIR CECIL CLOTHIER,   KCB, QC              POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Chairman
                                                                         10 Great George Street
                                                                             London SW1P 3AE

           PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL                                  Telephone: 01-2i5   273 6400



           P Wright Esq CBE OStJ CBIM
           Chief Constable
           South Yorkshire Police
           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
*          SHEFFIELD
           S3 8LY                                                            25 May 1989




           I enclose a copy of a letter which I have written to Mr David Alton MP. It
           appears that despite my best efforts to deflect him from doing so, he has
           decided to lodge a formal complaint with you.
           There is nothing in his various letters of complaint which calls for a mandatory
           referral to this Authority and I by no means encourage you to refer it to us
           voluntarily. So far as I am concerned, you may investigate Mr Alton's complaint
           in whatever way seems best to you, pursuant to the Police and Criminal
           Evidence Act 1984. You may, I suppose, wish to appoint Mr Geoffrey Dear to
           embrace this complaint within his general remit, but it seems to me that is
           entirely a m atter for you. It would of course satisfy the statutory requirement
           to appoint an investigating officer. I do not think it would satisfy Mr Alton
           however, who seems to think that Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear are not
           sufficiently independent. As you know from previous correspondence, I do not
           share this opinion.




           cc Lord Justice Taylor
              F2 Division, Home Office
              Mr Geoffrey Dear
              All Members
              SEOs
SIR CECIL CLOTHIER,   KCB, QC             POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Chairman
                                                                     10 Great George Street
                                                                         London SW1P 3AE

                                                                 Telephone: 01-3SS   273 6450




           David Alton Esq MP
           House of Commons
           LONDON SW1A OAA




                    /ft*
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

           Thank you for your letter of 17 May.
           I note that you have now lodged a formal complaint with the Chief Constable
           of South Yorkshire, thus setting the statutory procedure in motion. In due
           course you will be informed of the outcome of the investigation of your
           complaint.
                    HOUSE OF COMMONS
                       L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                     David Alton's Office


                                                          17/5/89



\J5ir Cecil Clothier, KCB, QC,
 Police Complaints Authority,
 10 Great Geore Street,
 London,
 SW1P 3AE




Thank you for your recent reply, although I am disappionted at
its contents. The point of my letter was that the statements
made by members of the South Yorkshire Police were made
anonymously.  Therefore there seems to be no one Officer to lodge
a complaint about.

Also the statements were immediately damaging.  Both I and my
staff then began to hear derogatory comments about the conduct of
Liverpool supporters that were completely at variance with all
the eyewitness accounts that I have heard.

One constituent subsequently wrote to me "...I was both vomited
and urinated upon, not as a result of drunkeness, but by people
in their death throes."

The provenance of those comments should be investigated.  You
suggested that no action should be taken until after the Inquiry.
By the same argument, should not the Officer who made the
offensive comments about Liverpool supporters have kept his
comments to himself until after the Inquiry?




David Alton MP




     ^       >oA                 .
