1
                     The Tavistock
                     Institute of
                     Human Relations

                     The Tavistock Centre
                     Belsize Lane London N W 3 5BA
                     0 1 - 4 3 5 7111




The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SE1H 9AT

20 July, 1989


Dear Lord Justice Taylor,
Guidelines for the design or modification offootball grounds
Need for empirical studies
Although I am unaware of what outcomes may arise from your Inquiry, I have formed
the impression from some newspaper cuttings that much of the interest in the later
stages of the Inquiry will be on the problems of designing safe accommodation for the
public. This will inevitably lead to considerations about revising and strengthening the
existing guidance, and possibly its replacement by a more comprehensive guidance
system.
My reason for writing is to stress the importance of basing new guidance wherever
possible on empirical studies of football crowds. I am concerned that the design and
engineering professions in the building industry will be too eager to apply generally
recognised standards so that the case can be readily made for extensive rebuilding of
new stadia. For example, it is easy to imagine a debate on the flow rates that might be
used for the design of entry and exit systems, based on design standards for other
settings or from overseas research. There is a tendency to bandy theories and
recommended evacuation flow rates, all of which disagree in some large or small way.
What is important is to recognise that football crowds probably behave differently from
most situations where research has already been carried out. For example, research on
the evacuation of North American office buildings is hardly likely to be a useful guide to
the design of systems for evacuating football terraces.
It surprises me that design professionals are satisfied with the process of making a few
brief visits to football grounds, and then adopting flow rates based on North American
research which may have little or no real relationship to the behaviour of football
crowds.
The only work that I am aware of which involved empirical studies of football crowd
movements was done in connection with Lord Wheatley's Inquiry, and it is interesting to
note that most of the peak flow rates which we recorded at football matches were in
excess of most other published research findings.




 Charity Registration No. 7 6 2 2 0
 Company limited by guarantee, No. 4 4 2 5 1 7
                                            2



This empirical research also revealed that you cannot treat a football crowd like a liquid.
We found that the condition of a crowd and its behaviour varied considerably from
orderly free flowing movement in which individuals could completely control their
direction and speed, to highly compressed crowded situations in which individuals have
no choice or control whatsoever; they were drawn along with the rest of the crowd willy-
nilly. These differences in crowd behaviour seemed to us to be a function of the overall
conditions at the time and the collective perception of the crowd of the ease or difficulty
of leaving the ground. No doubt the idea of collective perception also explains why the
crowd behaved as it did outside the Leppings Lane entrance to the Hillsborough
stadium. These psychological variables do not seem to be discussed in most of the
research papers on movement in buildings. The only reliable way to assess these
matters is to cany out a programme of observation and counting of real live crowd
behaviour at football grounds.

A similar argument m ust apply to the factors which cause a local collapse or crushing
within the crowd on a terrace. As far as I am aware the surging of crowds on a stepped
terrace environment is unique to football stadia. There are no design standards
developed elsewhere which could apply. The only way to find out how far different
arrangements of steps, crush barriers, etc can control stability in a crowd is by careful
observation and measurement of crowds under a variety of conditions. I am confident
that no such detailed research has been attempted.

No doubt some will object that measuring behaviour in existing stadia will not provide a
sufficient range of insight to cover the problems of designing radically new types of
stadia. Although there is some truth in this kind of argument, it should be remembered
that there is a great deal of variety within the existing range of grounds, and it should
be possible to measure behaviour under a wide variety of conditions.
Yours sincerely,




BARRY POYNER
Behaviour/Environment Programme
