R.
  h s .5.2/f la6.peb                                             (


  Fr°m:       roE n?0^ ° n                         cc     Mr Goddard
                              on                          Mr Smith
                                                          Mr Mould
              2 May 1990


 Miss Nicholson                                                        >
                                                                       I
                                                                       i




 MEETING 3RD MAY - HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP (HFSG)

                         r®JJu®sted/ briefing material for Lord Ferrers to
 “television                  gf ther thffc the meeting will take place in the
    elevision interview room' at the House of Lords; and that
 b o t h * ™ ^ ? ™ b r i e f i n g w i n be 1000 here in QAG.   I shall attend
 at the meeting with the*HFSG^hf ^                 "°Uld W±11 aCC°"pa^     "e

 p o l i c e f is s u e s S    t W   r   j S   ?    W<S       dM l With « “




                                                   P E BOLTON


Enc
 h s .5.2/fla7.peb


 BACKGROUND BRIEFING


 MEETING - 3 MAY: WITH HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP

 INTRODUCTION


 Lord   Ferrers will    recall that Mr Robert Hughes MP wrote to
Mr Brandon      Bravo    asking       Home   Office   Ministers     to    meet
Mr Trevor Hicks and members of this group.            Lord Ferrers replied
(see Annex A ) .


MR HICKS


Mr Hicks lost two teenage daughters at Hillsborough.                 He has
since been active in the Hillsborough Family Support Group of
which he is the chairman.


Annex B is a newspaper article which provides more background
information     about   Mr   Hicks.      our   limited   contact   with   him
suggests he is a sensible, level headed individual deserving of
a sympathetic hearing.       He gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor
(see Annex C ) .


HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP (HFSG)


This Group has had a number of meetings with MPs at Westminster
including the Leader of the Opposition.


The HFSG is understood to be voluntary group to help victims and
their families, and to lobby for them.             The objectives of the
group are summarised at Annex D.               Secretary to the HFSG       is
Mr Barry   Devonside who      is understood to have        lost    a son at
Hillsborough. He will accompany Mr Hicks as will Mrs Sefton and
a Mr Pemberton on whom we have no information.
 ITEMS FOR DISCUSSION


 No advance information is held about specific issues which the
 group      wish   to    raise.   They   may   however be     critical     of   s.
 Yorkshire police and Chief Constable Wright.             The group are also
 likely to raise


         a)     what the Government is doing to achieve all seated
                accommodation at football grounds;


       b)       the arrangements for setting up the Football Licensing
                Authority;


       c)       safety standards, particularly pitch perimeter fencing.

CORONERS INQUEST


The subject of the inquest may be raised.             Lord Ferrers may wish
to know that the present stage of the Inquest will be adjourned
on 4 May, when the medical causes, place and time of death of
the victims will have been established.               The inquest will not
risk prejudicing police inquiries.             (Mr Hicks should be aware of
this). Details of the police investigation are described below.

POLICE INVESTIGATION


Line to take


Hillsborough tragedy shocking for everybody - terrible loss for
the bereaved, who all have our deepest sympathy.


In relation to the main inquiry all questions of blame must be
very carefully investigated - that I am afraid takes time and
must be completed before any comment can be made.


On   the      specific   complaint   against   Mr   Wrlcrht   i   gather   that
Mr Sharp visited you (Mr Hicks) and Mr Devonside and Mr Hammond
within the last week to explain his conclusions.              I do hope this
 was helpful, and that it indicated the care and thoroughness with
 which all this must be examined.


 Background note


 The main policy incruirv. by West Midlands Police, centres on any
 possible criminal actions by South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield
Wednesday      football   club,   Sheffield      city    council   and   their
 advisors,    or disciplinary matters in relation to the police.
While   each    element   is being examined       in its     own right,    all
aspects are inter-related and there is close co-operation between
the police conducting the investigation, the Director of Public
Prosecutions, and the Police Complaints Authority.


The initial     (very detailed)    assessment of evidence is nearing
completion and interviews with those directly involved on 15
April 1990 will shortly begin.           No conclusions on criminal or
disciplinary matters are likely for some time - perhaps three
months or more.


Separate     police   inquiries   are    being    pursued    personally     by
Mr Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria, concerning the involvement
of senior eolice officers of      acpo   ranv (Assistant Chief Constable
and above) - ie Mr Jackson, the then ACC            (operations)     and the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Mr Wright.              Consideration of
Mr Jackson's actions may be on a similar timescale to the main
inquiry.  Mr Sharp has also recently take charge of all police
investigations related to Hillsborough.


Mr   Sharp has however     just   completed his         investigations    into
alleged remarks by Mr Wright which were reported in the press
as being critical of supporters, eg for being drunk.               This has
cleared Mr Wright of any impropriety in this matter: essentially
because the press reports were exaggerated from the more cautious
words spoken by Mr Wright - a tape recording of the interview,
by the journalist concerned, was crucial in establishing this.
Although entirely outside his obligations, Mr Sharp decided (with
 the agreement of Police Complaints Authority) to visit Mr Hicks.
Mr Devonside and Mr Hammond who had made the complaint against
Mr Wright - all three are from the Hillsborough Family Support
Group - to explain why Mr Wright had been exonerated.                   These
visits took place in the last few days.             A bland statement in
writing along might well have been painful to the complainants
and hard to understand.


The suggestion for the visits was compassionate and touching,
and   Mr   Hicks   greatly   appreciated   this     initiative    (Mr Sharp
visited him on Monday 30 April) .          He agrees that no blame for
the press reports lies with Mr Wright.              Indeed,    he commented
that this was the first time he had been "treated like a human
being"     (by officialdom).      This may therefore be an opportunity
for Lord Ferrers to emphasize that those investigating the case
££®— very— sympathetic       to   the bereaved,    but   are   also   tightly
constrained in what they can say until their work is complete.


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION


The Group's view on all seater stadia is not known but it is
likely to be favourable.


Line— to— take:    the Government     support     the recommendation     for
football league grounds and see all seated accommodation as a
significant step towards improving conditions for spectators.
We expect clubs to make the first steps.           The Football Licensing
Authority will monitor the position and the provisions of the
Football Spectators Act 1989 will be used to enforce the changes,
if that proves necessary.


FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY


The concept of the FLA is likely to be supported by the Group
who may well press for early implementation.
Line to take on:-
 a)    responsibility for the FLA is likely to become a Home Office
       responsibility now that the national membership scheme is
       not to be introduced;


 b)    functions of the FLA will be:


       (i)    to    issue    licences     under     the   1989    Act       which      will
              contain,      as    necessary,   conditions        directed         by    the
              Secretary of State on seated accommodation; and


       (ii) to keep under review safety certification by local
              authorities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
              with power to amend safety certificates;


c)    commencement: the FLA will be set up on or after 1st June
      although it will be a little longer before it becomes fully
      operational;


      membership:- FLA membership is not finally decided but we
      envisage that it will comprise some people with relevant
      knowledge      or     technical     background       (eg        in     particular
      engineering, fire safety, policing of football matches), and
      others with knowledge of the professional game or with other
      skills felt to be of value;


©)    staffing:      the FLA will also have an inspectorate.


SAFETY STANDARDS FOR FOOTBALL GROUNDS


The   group   may    press       for   government    action      to        set   minimum
standards at football grounds and the removal of pitch "barrier"
fencing.


Line to take:        Finally the FLA will keep under review safety
certificates       and   will     have   its   own    power      to    direct       that
particular conditions should be included in them.
The, Green Guide is being revised in the light of Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations;


When that has been done we will ask Parliament to consider an
order   under   section   15A   of   the   1975   Act   to    implement
recommendation 24 of the Final Report, and which will require
local authorities    to   address    particular   matters    in   safety
certificates;


Background Note: Recommendation 24 says that the Secretary of
State should exercise the power available to him so that safety
certificates must contain terms and conditions about the maximum
number of spectators, entrances/exits and crush barriers.

Pitch Perimeter Fencing


Line to take:- understand the concern.     The Final Report did not
recommend its removal.    The need for such fencing is for local
decision by the club in conjunction with the police and local
authority, if it is not necessary to prevent disorder, it is not
required for safety purposes.
