                                                                                                  37 ,
                 Association of Chief Police Officers
                                                                              . 8 J U N 1998
                     of England, Wales and Northern Ireland

                         GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE                           04-
                                                                                        Kv S v t W k
                                                                                        Hr Cv*-*>
Chairman :                                         From:   Hon Secretary:
C SMITH Esq CVO QPM B Soc Sc                               JS EVANS LL.B FBIM
Chief Constable                                            Chief Constable
Thames Valley Police                                       Devon and Cornwall Constabulary
                                                           Headquarters Middlemoor
                                                           Exeter EX2 7HQ
                                                           Telephone 0392 52101
 CC/GP/SO/PA
                                                           Staff Officer
                                                           Fax number
     June 1990
 £
 J.L. Gogerard,
 F8 Division'                  V-*
 Home Office
 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SW1H 9AT




                                                       A2j?                //* /* < ?     ^ w 6 6 ^
                                      <ip-c

                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT:
                  RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEW OFFENCES AND PENALTIES                          -   ■

  I write in response to your letter of 26 February 1990 concerning the above
  subject and have pleasure in enclosing a copy letter from Assistant Chief
  Constable, Malcolm GEORGE, of the Greater Manchester Police in respect of
  four recommendations.

  This composite reply has been formulated following circulation to all chief
  constables   in England,   Wales  and Northern Ireland as well as the
  Superintendents' Association.

  I trust this information will be of some help.




                                     f Constable
                                      Secretary
                                                                      2028



                                                               GMG/JD/TAYLOR
                                                      11 April 1990




Dear Sir,


LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S      FINAL   REPORT:   RECOMMENDATIONS    FOR    NEW
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES


I write on behalf of Mr. Anderton, in my capacity as Secretary of
the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting
Events.
     #

As was previously agreed, I circulated the correspondence from Mr.
John Goddard at the Home Office, to alls Chief;Const able s E n ^ L and,
                               as well a~s the ^uprintendent|'
Association rJind invited their observations on the proposed
offences. The majority of those responses has been received and I
have prepared a synopsis of same which I forward to you in your
capacity as Secretary of the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee
 for further attention.

Briefly there are four recommendations

Recommendation 70 deals with action to prevent sales of tickets by
ticket touts; Recommendation 71 deals with three specific public
order offences; Recommendation 72 considers the use of attendance
centre; and Recommendation 73 the use of electronic monitoring as
deterrents.

RECOMMENDATION 70

"Consideration should be given to creating an offence of selling
tickets for and on the day of a football match without authority
from the Home Club to do so
  Touting in general, is discussed in paragraph 273.9 of the Final
  Report and reflects the concern expressed in the ACPO submission
  (penned by Mr. David Phillips) on the subject of ticket touts.
  The general observation made in paragraph 278 regarding a loose
  interpretation of existing legislation to control ticket touts is
  generally accepted.. Furthermore there is general support for a
  substantive offence to deal with the problem.

  Three variations of offences are outlined in paragraph 279 of the
  Report viz.

  ®)lSM:To'f?sell;'‘ticlcets''" for?:'and" oh::".ther''day ■.of a   football   match
|g without authority from the home club to do so.J?

  ii) To sell tickets within a specified radius of the ground on
  the day of a match.

  iii) To sell tickets for a football match at more than face value.
  The ACPO, through the Hooliganism Sub-Committee, has endorsed the
  precursor to all-ticket fixtures as outlined in paragraph 271-2.
  However when a fixture has been designated "all-ticket", the
  positive action proposed to deal with ticket touts can only serve
  to dissuade non-ticket holders from attending fixtures on a
  speculative basis. This is a desirable result.

  The pragmatism in the responses from all forces leant||^KeSvY,:BiasSf
glytoyards^ thefirst- suggestioi^, with some qualification. There is
  minority*, conditional support for the second suggestion and,
  whilst empathy was expressed for the third suggestion the onerous
  burden of proof, coupled with the probable hostility of the •
  prospective     purchaser,      effectively   forestalled   serious
  consideration of same.

  The consensus view is that the first suggestion is preferred and
  offers a straightforward offence is which more easily capable of
  proof.   The second suggestion received minimal support and the
  third received only adverse criticism of perceived impractical
  method of obtaining evidence and enforcement.        A significant
  comment centred on the need to encompass not only the sale but
  also the offering for sale, displaying, auctioning or inviting
  tender for the sale of any ticket, ’^f^needj:was?;also»identified^
 ffor'apower of arrest arid”power, of seizure for a police officer i
 fthe measure is to be truly'effective. ff

  j The matter of authority of the home club elicited suggestions that
  / the matter needed to be in writing. Leaving       aside matters of
 i forgery of such written authority,       a more pragmatic approach
I    would be for all clubs to undertake not to give permission for any
| person to sell tickets on the day of a fixture. That measure could
i   include football club outlets, which given the minimal percentage
    of all-ticket fixtures vis a vis the number of football fixtures
    generally, is not an unreasonable suggestion.
    Additional comment concerned the need for clubs to demonstrate
    responsible attitudes towards the allocation of tickets, including
 . those to players and officers. It may be advisable for warnings
 / about ticket touts to be printed on tickets. There may have to be
j an allowance for the collection of pre-paid tickets on the day of
    the match.   One Force, with vast experience of national rugby
   1matches emphasized the benefits of return ticket procedure whereby
  I suoDorters are refunded the full face value of unused tickets to
    offset the temptation to sell on the day of a fixture.
    Significant minority comment opined that the procedure should bee
    expanded to cover other mass gatherings, such as pop concerts and
    tennis tournaments.

   Any estimate of implications for police resources must remain
   speculative. ^Thera; may:welly be;^ no "further demands made on police
  ^resources than currently persists-.-•/} Touts have already adapted t(
   the rigorous attentions of the service, using, for example,
   observers to warn of police activity and runners who supply agents
   with small quantities of tickets from a nearby "bank". There has
   also been a widespread use of cellular telephones for the same
   purpose.   Possible further expansion could include the use of a
   advance credit sales, though whether a supporter will pay an
   unknown person without immediate receipt of the goods is a matter
   of conjecture.

  It is accepted that the most rigorous application of police
  resources will not totally eradicate the problem of ticket touts.
  The effect of this legislation, however, can only serve to
  discourage ticket touts from operating, especially close to
  stadi&, make the tasks of illegal ticket sales more onerous and
  encourage a more responsible attitude from clubs and supporters
  alike.


  RECOMMENDATION 71

  Each of the following activities at a designated sports ground
  should be a made a specific offence:

  i)     throwing a missile

  ii)    chanting obscene or racial abuse

  iii)   going on the pitch without   reasonable excuse.
                                                                          i-he present
                • rl-,-v view that the Pr?vlSl°™!        There was also
There was a min°         sufficient for policing^ne 1      ,s   personal
Public Order Act are          ^   Lord   Justice‘ J ydisorder offence
minority   cowmen't     |           a general publ            phrased to
 preference (Paragraph 299)          popplewell    suitably P ^ ^
as recommended y         ^      abov6i was mor                   former proposal,
encompass eleme        even some supporterso                    pecific offences j
prove.               in e n d o i s i n r ^ 6 r e a t i o n of P ^       *
joined the majori y          tive        response to mi             endations are
'gprobabl,-the         *      however, tha t jfl.es.^ r.c                       a
 It must not be ror&     a,«mtual removal of peri                       attitude,
 "tailored” towards the eventual ^             ^ ^         responsible a t ^ ^ &
 conditioning of s^ P ° r he removal of perimeter                   en        *       „ The
                           is not on the-horizon at pr     ^   q£
fe-itable >ongu term££enc^ ^    o d y be -           to endeavour
  Cr6it:LM C interpretation and proof. J ° r               discourage the use of
  realistic inte^ \ „rrest procedure, so as t                      offences will
  to streamline ^ a-est^P^^ o£                                  ^                   ^

  ejections ,             p ^ c t e d b y resorting to the e]
  be inevitably r                                     itself to ease of
                    •.htforward phraseology lends itself      extracting
   The simple, straig               ^   the     cav        crowds cannot
     oo£   and  f « « - " nasSsedcrowd. ^    " f ^ t l o n can be o££set
  ^perpetrator(s)    pre.determl„ed; An “ iver    overrldlng discretion.
   be realls     he use of the PollC8     <-he use of CCTV, post-match
   however, by           he expertise m the “s*      ble and effective
   This, combined with t       ^ ^    necessary flexibl
    arrests, etc.,
    approach.                                           of the outline
    There     - y   be    -rlt     ‘n   pending                     1« ~ £ *            ^        “s"


     s              S n                                                                     - s s
     The third o££en=e o£ pit                ^          iut 0££ence £ .             ^
     "wi thout reasonable_ ^ _                    identified that

                                              "     —       7        ' tation           o£      these

      Th.    demands      on


         monitored aSainS\ f        V ... ^ e P oUce will in thi                                  ^
         comment in paragraph,301,,                sensible
         other situations have
          judgement.


         B F.COHF :ajDATOjS--^
                                                                    the      Courts         powers     to

          Consideration        should b e   given                        ^ ov l si o n      S           be


                                                                         «    —       “ d - * laet
          capable of imposition on
  to a mavimnn. of 72 hours in the case of an offender aged 17 or
  over.

   With the demise of imposed national football membership schemes,
   now that the provisions of Part 1 of the Football Spectators Act
 / 1989 are not to be implemented, it is probable that exclusion
/ orders will continue      on force. The efficacyof the present scheme
   of exclusion orders      is to be raised at a meeting of the NFIU
   Steering Committee.The observations of           forces   are not a
   reflection of the present system of exclusion orders and are made
   with the understanding that court powers allied to exclusion
   orders to make attendance centre orders will require amendment
   before they encompass the appropriate age group and offences of
    football violence.
  MBSWas^generallyf feIt ■■that the use of attendance centres, as ^
   glco^ended,      appeared   an   effective    response   to  football
 ^hooliganism. Afminority view perceived a need for more effective
    monitoring to ensure maximum benefit.
   »*A'r majority view is that the implications for manpower resources
    y^ill probably reflect an increase.,-^ Generally, attendance centres
    are opened on a regular basis, e.g. alternate Saturdays and are
    staffed by off duty police officers. Football fixtures are
    generally held every Saturday and there are some Sunday and
    weekday matches.      It is probable that demands will double
    throughout the season, nearly eight months of the year! There are
    clear implications for staffing levels.         Because many of the
    reportees fail to attend, it will be requisite for immediate
    attention to be given to such non-compliance by police officers to
    negate attendance at fixtures. In turn, it may well be necessary
     for 'court attendance by the police, usually in duty time, to
     substantiate the offence.

   Whilst support for this p r o p o s a l was^ endorsed by a majority of
   forces; £qually‘ 'a‘ ma3’ority^envisaged'’'po'tentially Onerous demands
  -orf police resources


   RECOMMENDATION 73


   Consideration should be given to the use of electronic monitoring
   (tagging)   in   the   sentencing  of   offenders  convicted   of
   football-related offences.

   £here_was;, no; outright•;support' for. this-.'- suggestion.. - A minority.'-
   tview rejected the suggestion.;? The vast majority proffered a
    cautious view reflecting a need to be satisfied that technology is
    sufficient for the purpose; that further conclusive research is
    necessary; and even questioning the expense involved.           There was
    some expression that tagging is not an effective deterrent.

   The schemes are not implemented by the police but by private
   (security) companies from their own control rooms. Jgwas: mooted|
   that a delay of say four, h o u r s . ..between..violation and the matter
feel„g reported to the p o l U e                 ^ T h o ^ e l ' r ^ t h e
 the perpetrator could vi               guch violation       be   reported
police    were   apprised.     sh°“     Qn fche police for enquiry after
‘inunediately, then the same        ntres is equally yalid.
 non-attendance at attendance centres          q
                               +- 1-v.o nrpsent time is not supported.
 All in all, the suggestion, at the p
                                         ■f sn 1 -rhe thirty three Forces
 These views reflect the responses of                    OODment from the
 Shlch responded to the enquiry                      synopsis .ill be of
 Superintendents' Association.
 Csome use to you In your deliberations.



                                 Yours sincerely,


                               Assistant Chief Constable
                             Secretary - ACPO G.'P. Sub -Committee
                               on Hooliganism at Sporting Events




   J.S.Evans Esq., LLB. FBIM
   Chief Constable,
   Devon and Cornwall Constabulary,
   Middlemooi;.
   EXETER
