TICKET TOUTING

You asked for a contribution from F8 Division to briefing which
you are preparing for the Home Secretary's meeting on 12 March
with Dame Shelagh Roberts, Chairman of the London Tourist B o a r d .


2.   I have just received, and copied to you a letter from
Wimbledon (tennis) about touting.       You may wish to mention this in
the briefing in case Dame Shelagh refers to i t .


3.   I attach drafts of a background note and line to take on
Lord Justice T a y l o r 1s recommendations.   We stress the distinction
that Taylor, and we, see between football and other sporting and
non-sporting events.




                                               J L GODDARD
DRAFT


LINE TO TAKE


Taylor argued that there was a clear distinction between the
impact of touts at football grounds and elsewhere.    He was
concerned that touting outside a ground on the day of a match
encouraged fans without tickets to arrive.    This led to disorder
outside the ground:   and, by undermining the arrangements for
segregating rival groups of fans, led to disorder inside the
ground as well.


2.   We are considering the recommendation.   Too soon to say what
our conclusions will be.   Taylor acknowledged that touting took
place at other events (sporting and otherwise).
DRAFT


BACKGROUND NOTE


Hillsborough Report


Lord Justice Taylor recommended that the activity of ticket touts
at grounds on the day of a match should be made unlawful.     He
suggested a number of ways in which this might be achieved while
acknowledging that it would require careful consideration and
drafting.   He did not go into the ethics of ticket touting
generally but confined himself to arguing that football touts were
a special case which needed controlling in the interests of safety
and order to the extent that arguments in favour of allowing
market freedom should be overridden.    A copy of the relevant
paragraphs of the report is attached.


2.   We are considering the recommendation and are currently
awaiting replies on the proposed touting offence (and others) from
ACPO and the Crown Prosecution Service.
         ________________________                . . . _____________________________   ..   ' .........:_______________ I , --------------------------------   .■................................................................................. . . .




touts
   Z ~ 2 . The recommendations ir. the last two paragraphs are designee to deter those without tickets frcm
turning up at matches ana sc obviating any troubie they may be tempted to cause. However, mam fans
without tickets turn up at the ground in me hope ofbuying mem from touts.
   27-. During my visits to sports grounds I have found universal condemnation of touts by aii involved in
organising and managing large stadium events. Apart from the obstruction they themselves-cause. touts
attract fans without tickets to attenc at grounds in me hope of getting in. Moreover, they sell ticket; :o all
comers regardiess of tneir allegiance. Thus tickets for the nome area at a soccer match faii into me nar.es of
away supporters anc vice versa. The resuit is to frustrate the efforts of ciuos and ponce ic acmeve peaceful
segregation. Pockets of anen affiliation pianted amongst home supporters form a focus for hostility and often
violence results. Apart from these objections, voiced by the FA. the FL. the police and tne ciuos. most
supporters aiso detest touts because they often corner the market for a popular match and offer tickets at
grossly excessive prices.
  275. From all these quarters the plea is to take positive action against ticket touts at footbaii matches.
I am mindful of the need for caution before advocating a law limiting iibeny to conduct onesetf and one's
business freely ana according to established practice. I likewise accept that market forces should, in general,
operate freely in the commercial field. Nevertheless. I am satisfied from what I h a v e read, heard and seen
that outside football grounds the presence and activities of touts have a grossly anti-social effect leading both
directly and indirectly to disorder. Directly, through obstruction and the attraction of numbers without
tickets. Indirectly, because of troubie from those so attracted who, in the end. cannot or do not buy tickets
and from those who buy their way into an opposition enclave.
   276. Touts operate, of course, at piaces other than football grounds. They are to be found, for example, at
national rugby stadia, at the All England Lawn Tennis Club at Wimbledon and at countless other sporting
events. Depending on how one defines "touting”, the activity could include selling unwanted tickets for the
opera, the theatre or concert halls. Touting usually means, however, not just selling at face value a ticket you
cannot use. but selling numbers of tickets at an inflated pnee as a commercial venture. There is a clear
distinction between tne impact of touting at footbaii grounds ana eisewhere. Football is the only sport at
which segregation is practised to prevent violence. This is because it is the soon where violence inside and
outside the ground is, at present, most prevalent. There are therefore strong grounds for regarding footoaii as
a special case as the Government has recognised by promoting the Football Spectators Act.
    277. Whatever the policy m erits o f freedom to trade and market forces, they must surely yield to the
iii2.ixilrWitU.llCv V^I J>WiCl,> tiii d the prevention o f disorder, louts at football matches put both at risk. At other
sports and in other leisure fields the to u t does not endanger safety or order to the same extent. Accordingly,
whatever view one takes of him. he can be left to piy his trade there. But so far as football is concerned, in my
view touting should b e made unlawful. The fast buck should stop here.

  278. At present, police can'deal with touts only by somewhat strained and stretched use of existing laws.
They arrest them for obstruction-even if the physical obstruction caused is minimal. Alternatively, they make
an arrest on the grounds that they suspect the tout of carrying forged tickets, although the suspicion of forgery
may merely be convenient conjecture. After holding the tout during the match the police release him and the
now valueless but genuine tickets are returned to him. Growing wise to this, m a n y touts n o w carry only two or
three tickets at a time, relying on a runner to bring up more from a "‘banker" standing off with perhaps
hundreds of tickets in his possession. If the salesman is arrested the merchandise is not ail lost. Police should
not have to stretch the law.to deal with a public mischief. There should be a specific prohibition which police
can then enforce.

   2 ~ 9 . How to formulate a prohibition against touting at footbaii grounds will require careful consideration
and drafting. It could be made an offence to sell tickets for and on the day of a football match without
authority .from the home club to do so. Another way would be to prohibit such sales within a specified radius
of the ground on the day of the match. Yet a no th er would-be to prohibit sales of tickets for a football match at
more than face value. This th ird alternative, wouid permit any genuine purchaser of a ticket who found he
couid not use it to recoup his o u t l a y by selling his ticket outside the match. Its disadvantage wouid be tne
difficulty-of proving a tout had soid at more than face vaiue: ways would aiso be devised to evade tne
pronibuion. I tend to favour the first alternative which is simple and capable of easy proof. Tne genuine
ticket holder, finding him seif unable -on the day to use his ticket, ana not permitted to sell it outside the
ground, should be permitted to return it to the club and recover his money. G u p s should be prepared to
accept such tickets in the interests of fairness and of having a law which defeats touts, if touting outside the
ground is banned, fans with no tickets for an all-ticket match could have no excuse for turning up outside
norma to set in:

                                                                     a
