From:   M J Moriarty                      cc   Ms Craig
        22 September 1989                      Mr Rex
                                               Miss Nicholson
                                               Mr Yates
                                               Mr Chilcot
                                               Mr Hammond
                                               Mr Turney o/r
                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                               HMCIC
                                               HMCIFS
                                               Mr Mower
                                               Mr Clayton ^
                                               Mr Goddard^
                                               Mr Bolton o/r
                                               Mr Whalley
                                               Mr Mould
                                               Mr Lidington
                                               Mr Yeo

Miss Bannister



HILLSBOROUGH:    PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION

Mr Mould has followed up the points in your note of 20 September.
A draft letter for your signature to Mr Edey is attached.


2. The answers to"the“questions in the!first paragraph of your
note are as follows. Regulations under section 6(2). of the 1975
Act would not give the Secretary of State the authority to oversee
safety certificates (paragraph l(i) of your note). There is no
power under the 1975 Act for regulations made under it to change
the provisions of that Act.


3.   The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) will be a non-
departmental public body. tThe'Secretary of State for Environment-   ;
will appoint its members in consultation with the Home Secretary
in relation to appointments which have a bearing on safety
responsibilities under the 1975 Act. The FLA will nevertheless b£*
a DOE rather than a Home Office body.
4. I wondered whether, in view of Mr Edey's reaction to the
letter of 18 September, we should think again about volunteering
information about the powers contained in the 1975 Act to make a
statutory instrument under section 15A in relation to the contents
of safety certificates. I think it is better to leave that aside.
Such terms and conditions would still have to be flexible enough
to be applied by each local authority to each individual ground.
The option of such a statutory order still remains and G2 have
already begun to consider the sort of thing which might go into
it. Even so it would still not address Mr Edey's main point about
oversight of safety certificates by the Secretary of State.


5. Early indications from G2's enquiries of local authorities on
the progress of implementation of the Interim Report are
encouraging in that the 28 urgent recommendations either have
already been carried out or are underway and well advanced. Some
authorities have also carried out the other 15 recommendations.
Only one authority so far is revealed not to have applied the 15%
capacity reduction from a calculated figure of 54 persons per 10
 square metres. One    or two others have not insisted upon a further
"15% reduction where   the capacity works out at well below that
density level. For     example, one authority has reduced the
authorised capacity    of an area from 2,000 to 370 but felt a
further 15% cut was    unnecessary.


6. We noted that Mr Edey reverted to his intention to make
application for judicial review. That is up to him: you will
recall our lawyers' view that an application is not likely to be
granted or, if granted, to succeed. If he is gx8mted,-;&n...r„.
application and we are asked for a public comment, our line should
be that we acknowledge the action taken by him and maintain our
present position that there is no indication of deliberate, wide- „
spread unwillingness to apply the Interim Report recommendations
to football grounds and implement them quickly; but that we are
i




    s.
keeping the position under review and have not ruled out the
option of taking statutory powers should that be shown to be
necessary.




                                                                            M J Moriarty




               *•■■■' •-   . ►   _           ,• . . . . .   ....




V-   ~   \   ■ r                            ,•    .     r


                    ■;:i£,                                         ;• \ e
                                     ■   S£-r;:'                       v




"“Crap-e'S»€retarf xr\
 Draft letter for signature by PS/S of S

 Roy Edey Esq
 Lower Flat
 Field House North
 West Street
 Harrow
 Middlesex NA1 3ER




When you telephoned last Wednesday, having received my letter of
18 September on the Home Secretary's behalf, I said that I would
write to you further on two specific points: first on the'
regulation powers under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the
1975 Act); and secondly about the Football Licensing Authority
(FLA).                            .


The Statutory power under section 6(2) of the 1975 Act to which
you referred does not enable the Secretary of State to make
 regulations to oversee safety certificates. As I explained in my
 letter of 18 September, the issue of safety certificates is
•entirely a matter for the local authority. ’


The status of the FLA will be that of an independent non-
departmental public body. Appointments to the FLA will be made by
the Secretary of State for Environment, in consultation with the
Home Secretary in respect of those appointments which have a
bearing on the Authority's safety role.


In conclusion, I should like to assure you again about the Home
Secretary's concern over safety at football grounds, and the
importance that he attaches to a proper response by local
authorities and clubs to the recommendations contained in the
Interim Report. That response will of course be followed up by
the Department, and in the light of it, and of the Frinal Report of
of the Taylor Inquiry, consideration will be given to the need for
any further action.




                                                                                             v;: ' X            ::




                                                                     r       “
                                                                                                       '•:” V




                                                                                                                •"
                                  ■ -        ■■




                      •"--.i-;.     V I '.    " J jQ v s . - i .   ‘ ' iV ix * .'.«   ;   r:."-.'-
