            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
            Room 1106
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007


Her Honour Judge Steele                                          Your refere„ce.
Liverpool Crown Court
Queen Elizabeth II Law Courts                                    0 ur reference •
Derby Square
LIVERPOOL L21XA                                                  Date:               9 December 1997




I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence
relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. I understand that you represented
many of the families of those who died in the disaster on behalf of the Hillsborough Steering
Committee.

2.       It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether
there is any significant new evidence about the disaster which was not previously available to
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities.
If there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome
of any of the proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of
the year. I attach my terms of reference.

3.      A question has arisen in relation to the video-tapes of which the police recorded in the
Police control box on 15 April 1989, the day of the disaster. The tapes I am interested in were
exhibited at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and were referred to as TB1 and TB2 (after PC Trevor
Bichard who was the officer responsible). TB1 ran from 11.59 to 15.04, and TB2 from 11.59 to
15.34 (the reason why this was longer is that some of it is in time-lapse, i.e. pictures every half-
second). There was also a schedule of the comments of the tapes. The tapes and documents
were DOC 109 and 110.

4.     A compilation tape was made by West Midlands Police in conjunction with the
Treasury Solicitor. This compilation tape had no scenes taken by camera 5 (which was the one
on the south-east comer of the West Stand near the scoreboard and could photograph the West
Terraces).

5.     Only TB2 contains scenes taken by camera 5. Prior to 14.00 hours there are static shots
of the West Stand and show little or nothing of the terraces. At 14.18 to 14.23 there is a series

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\STEELE.204
 of pictures of fans in pen 2; they were thought to have been misbehaving, but this is not
 apparent from the film. The next scenes from camera 5 are at 15.02, when it is turned onto the
 perimeter fence of pens 3 and 4, and show scenes of fans climbing over.

 6.    I am anxious to know if you saw TB2 (orTBl) during the Taylor Inquiry. I have been
 provided by the Coroner, Dr Popper, with a note which ACC Mervyn Jones made of a
 conversation with him (Popper) on 19 July 1990 as follows:-

         7 advised Dr Popper that Mr Benet Hytner QC approached Lord Justice Taylor
         through Mr Andrew Collins QCfor permission to show some or all videos recorded on
         the 1989 semi-final. The reason for this was that the relatives o f the deceased wanted
         re-assurance that there was no cover up and theyfelt this can best be achieved by
         viewing o f video material. Lord Justice Taylor had agreed that this could take place
         and I have been advised accordingly by Andrew Collins QC. I am decidedly unhappy
         about this aspect not least o f all the distressing nature o f much o f thatfilm.... ’.

 7.     Mr Fraser, who acted for the families at the Inquest, told me that he had viewed many
 hours of video footage; but he cannot recall which tapes he saw. I think it likely that if he saw
 many hours of videos, he would have seen these tapes which in any showing were probably the
 most important.

8.      I do apologise for asking you to cast your mind back now, but it is of some importance
for me to know whether the legal representatives of the families actually saw these tapes, as
well as having the opportunity to do so.



                                                                   k/«——i/ l

LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\STEELE.204
