                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wife


                                                                                                       ititg
      i   I   ''                    >•'*** •?•




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >.r\^’C•.--;>•




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,, . ;.. ■•;...■v.'^.C- .’■’:/                                                                   v^'
                                                                                                                          ■     ,;    ' : > ’ •.         •.         ■ ■ ’- ' ■ ■ . - v                 •-                                                  - • - * • .* .                                         ‘- v     * ;%        V - , . ' ■ ’■ ' ■ ^      > v - - v -r         .:> \V           X v - . - ; t r > - - : .-


                                                                                                                                      *              ■                                                                                                         ■                                "                                                          ■' v-                                                                    \
                                                                                                                           ' - -                     •                                   '              ; .-%■-•.*                                -         ■ .                    ■                                                                                                                                                :••• .
                                                                                                                                 '-'V'-.
                                                                                                                                       -*‘-■■*"Jjv" '                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •                                                     ■- ;•■^                                                                                         -■ ■■'v>;-' "
                                      '* ^-jy .T<-". v.'•                                                    £/.
                                                                                                                          i \c m                                                     - S B M                                                               ifr n m                                                                L          U     ,            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .-.,;y\.,‘-,,,. •--^t*’'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ■      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •-: r ■\-*•:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '■’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -*'■ •’-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     . o    -




          a                    •
          W                          • ;• * *'" * -•                                                                                             - •'/*•' •
          '-'V -' ;'-                               -5 . ' ^                          —‘           -   '-'.r'-£'+.~yr~\'                                                                                        .   yi'. \ '“
                                      .                                                 A                                      W                     Tr'k A* \r79"                                                     -* •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           lif-iti- L i 1 9 W                                                                                                                 r                    ,;.
                                                                               •- ••'. •’ • ‘ ■ ' - v v . / * -                • '.i-.r T - -.       .        ...■ -•           • '- , . ,.-„      •        -                     • r. <•'.   ■ '; '   .      '. ' , , . •   - r- ...   "           •       •:•            ‘          ■ .-r r v        ^-' :- -■ -       - , '*••   '".•'-         -    • '.   \          v ; '■■■- • - ■ V -

                                                        /1                                                                                                                                   *                                                                                                                                                                                                <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                Vv-’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V- '*" ''
                                                        ;•.                          ••-.••'•,                                                                -                                    -l.-;.                                              .                                                    -                                                                                                      I      v ; i
.-.                                                                                                                               :                                     ^                                                                                        i r -

                                                                                                             •          ’’                                •                      -.,                                                    ..’. - V ; 4 ^
                                           '             '       ‘         '             ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :•                  • . . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •/-                                     c - .7                   . - ; .. ■ %Tt. jr -

          '   :.'^v.r.                         -•--V                            .^Z-A                                                            W^-'k:                                                                ■[] "
                                                                                   ,                     ,                                                                           ~                                                                                                      -           ■            ' •          -      '




                   ■■r. *■’ -■-. ; v:-:;r:;^r':                                              .',\•':                                 Vr-v,*.‘'.c?vr •.<>••
                                                                                                                                                       ;> -^ - •■■_      ..
                                                                                                                                                                  r--",.,/
                                                                                                                                                                         .                                                                                                  .               .-'V.
                                 ■ ; ^ :* •-                                                                                   '•■'.' " -   .... -                  V- • • - -r                •*- ••••• •.< ■- > . ?           •:: '    ■>-. - -


                               -                    '        '       ‘ x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -                 .             . . •                              i-'.i                                        . •
                                                                                                                        ' ■ r ' :; .* ' •’ ■ r' r -                  ' ■ ■ , ■ ■ - - • ■■.-                                 :            ^ • ••
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ' -;'-V
                                   ■ -■■:                                        /    *• V                                                -     - • :-                                                                 .    •••'.-■      - .-

                                                                                      ';'•©    ‘' S M S ?
                     _•    -           ' ..-"       '   *'             '             • •."        .- f           . . - * .T r. .%;•■••■-';• • '    r-          •■     /;            ;i        '•   •                       .    "•.


                       :                            -                                        ± :•^ v--'"-./';v -/ ■■ rv.'- -                                                                                               .    - *           —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :■•                     y ' C ^ - a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i:- S h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y ; V -. r i ^ r.:^..                                                  :-;y.■]

                                          •-    *       :■%

          -vili



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .                 • -                   . ..        ■     /.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y .v ^ .
                     SOUTH   YORKSHIRE      POLICE



                             'F' DIVISION



 OPERATIONAL ORDER ,F* 1/89                          6th April 1989




     F A CUP SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                     SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989



 DISTRIBUTION



Chief Constable

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

Chief Superintendent Operations and Traffic

Chief Superintendent 'F' Division

Deputy Divisional Ccmnander 'F' Division

Detective Superintendent 'F' CID

Superintendent 'FI' Subdivision

Superintendent 'F2' Sub Division

Superintendent 'E2' Sub Divis ion

'FI' Sub Division, Control Room

'F2' Sub Division, Control Room

Sub Sector Chief Inspectors

Ground Control

'F' Administration

Chief Siperintendent 'A', 'B* , *C' , 'D', 'E', and CID
                                 SCUIH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                         •F' DIVISION

OPERATIC*.- CR3ER 'F' 1/89                                    DATE:   6th Jfcril 1989


                                  F A CUP - SEMI FENAL

                                 HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD



                             LIVERPOOL    v   NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                               SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989



1.        IKFOWftTION

1.1       The F.A. Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and Nottinghsr Forest
           Football Clubs will take place at the Sheffield Wednesday Football
          Stadium, Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday 15th April 19•?, kick-ipff
          at 3.0Dpm. The gates allowing access to the ground will open at V
           12 noon and admission will be granted to ticket holders onl~.      \

1-2       In an effort to minimise traffic and spectactor congestion snd to             *
          maximise segregation, the stadium has been divided in accordance
          with Appendix 'S'.

1.3       Liverpool supporters have been allocated tickets for the West Stand
          and Terraces and the North Stand and access will be via the turnstiles
          in Xeppings Lane.

1.4       Nottingham Forest supporters have been allocated tickets for the    ,
          Spion Kop and the South Stand and access will be via the tvznstiles \
          in Penis tone Road North and at the rear of the South Stand.         \

1.5        The tickets have been colour coded and details are shown at Appendix
           'E'.
                                                                               f’S*
1.6       A sterile area has been created between the turnstiles at fee reart4 oi|
           the South Stand and those in Leppings lane.                        i\

1-7       To further assist in the segregation of opposing supporters within the
           ground, tickets have been allocated to 'neutral' supporters (i.e.
           Football Association and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club) in the North
           Stand (Penis tone Road end) and the South Stand (Leppings T^np end).

1.8       The routing of vehicles and spectators has generally been designed to
           •ensirre that the approach of respective supporters will preset therji
           at trie end of the stadium appropriate to their particular tirket.

1.9       Extra time will be played in the event of a draw at full-tire.

1.10      If, roll owing extra-time, the match retrains drawn, then the replay will
           take place at Manchester United Football Stadium.


                                                                                            !
INDENTION

It is the intention of the Police to allow this rratch to take place and
to ensure public order and safety both inside and outside the football
ground, to segregate and control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary
obstruction of the highway and damage to property. This will be attained
and displayed with a high standardof smartness and professionalism..

METHOD

Ciief Superintendent Duckenfield will be in overall corrnHnd of this
event.

Tire operation will be in three phases, as follows

Phase 1     - Before the match (1000 - 1500hrs)

Fbase 2     - Curing the rratch (1500 - 1630hrs) **

Raatse 3    - After the match (1630hrs until stand down) **

** Subject to 30 minutes 'extra tine*

Ttas operation will be divided into three sectors, each of which will b
designated to a Senior Officer who will have responsibility for tnj^t
Sector. The Sector areas are shown on the nap at Appendix 'S' and%the
Senior Officers are:-                                               \

SBJTOR                                       OFFICER

Sector 1      (Sheffield Wednesday           Superintendent Greenwood
               football Stadium)

Sector 2      (Liverpool Supporters)         Superintendent Marshall

Sector 3     (Nottingham Forest
             supporters)

Each Sector will be further divided into Sub Sector with a Chief Inspector
in charge, as shown at Appendices A(i) and A(ii)

Separate Operation Orders have been prepared by 'D' and Traffic Divisions
in respect of Policing arrangements for Sheffield City Centre „.th^ ML
Motorway and the routes to and from the stadium.

PRE MATCH BRIEFING

The event is being Policed by Officers, some of whom have never visited
Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium previously and who, therefore, will
be unfamililar with the ground and locality.

In an effort to alleviate this problem, a pre-match briefing will .take
place at 10.00am on Friday 14th April 1989 at Sheffield Wednesday Football
Ground, entry via the 'Gymnasium' gate in Penistone Road North. All
supervisory officers of the rank of Inspector and above should attend.
                                                                               (3)



  3.4     REFORTINS FOR DUTY

  3.4.1   A H Officers shown in the attached Appendices will, unless otherwise
          stated, attend at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 9.45am on
          Saturday 15th April 1989 and occupy a North Stand seat as identified
          in their Serial Instructions, for briefing at 10.00am prcrrct. Entry
          to the stadium will be via the 'Gyrmasium Gate' in Penis tort Road North.

  3.4.2   On arrival, each Inspector will report to the Ackrunistraticc Desk
          situate inside the entrance to the gyrmasiim and will report his
          serials present.

  3.4.3   Police Officers attending in their own vehicles nust find tbeir own
          parking facilities outside the football ground.

  3.4.4   The parking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane
          will N3T be used.

£3.5      BRJETTN3 - MATCH DftY

  3.5.1   After reporting for duty all Officers will be briefed in the North Stand
          as to the general requirements of the day and will corimence duties tin
          accordance with the instructions of their individual Inspector.    y\C

 3.5.2    Inspectors will ensure that officers under their ccnnend disperse t\ their
          respective places of duty with a minimum of delay.

 3.5.3    Sergeants will brief members of their respective serials as to their
          individual duties as outlined in Appendices B, C and D.

 3.6      GROOM) SECURITY
          —   -— —   ..   - ....................   — ,   ■                            i



 3.6.1    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be responsible for tie
          overnight (14th/15th April 1989) security arrangements at the Gro

 3.6.2    Immediately following briefing, twa 'explosives' dogs will search
          stadivxn assisted by the Serials scheduled for duty inside the ground.

          CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DEPARTMENT                                      .

          Merrfoers of this Department will be on duty at the ground. A
          CID post will be situated in the gymnasiim at the ground and          rton
          Road Police Station and will deal with all ccrrplaints of crire and arrests
          for criminal offences made in connection with this event which do not
          require immediate attention. Any such ccnplaints will be directed to
          whichever of the above locations is most convenient.

          In aodition, teams of officers will operate mainly on foot octside the
          ground, paying particular attention to the problem of pickpockets and
          'auto-crime'.

          Detective Superintendent McKay will have an overall responsibility for
          crime ar*d CID Operations as a whole and duties of personnel are shown
          at Appendix *F'.
                                                                                (4)




3.E      DOG SECTION

3.E.1    Herrbers of the Dog Section will mainly be used as a deterrent before
         end after the natch on the routes to and from the stadium, at the
         coach parks, transit van parks, railway station, private vehicle
         perking areas and escorting supporters to and from the stadiixr.

3.E.2    Trey will not normally be used in public order situations but the
         Sector ComTender has the overriding discretion to use dogs in such
         circumstances where he feels a serious public order situation cay
         occur.

3.E.3    Duties of the Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix 'G'.

3.9      KXJNIED SECTION

         Hsmbers of the Mounted Section will be enployed outside the ground
         tr maintain order, segregate supporters and escort them from arc
         tc their transport.
                                                                          1
3.5.2    Dirties of the Mounted Section personnel are set out at Appenaxx

3.1C     CONTROL BOCM                                                       ^

3.1C.1   A Control Roan will be established at Sheffield Wednesday Football
         Sradium in the Police Control Box situate between the South and
         Vfest Stands.

3.1C.2   Superintendent Murray will be in overall control with the
         assistance of Officers shown at Appendix 'I'.

3.1C.3   Tbe Control Room will oversee the entire operation and will operate
         cn. both UHF and VHF channels.
                                                                                \
3.11     TRAFFIC CONTROL

3.11.1   Road Traffic Division will be responsible for traffic control
         arc will be producing a separate operational order.                .i
                                                                          11
3.11.2   'F* Division points are shown at Appendix 'J'.                   ’'

3.12     TRAVEL AND POLICING ARRAM3EMEJHS

3.12.1   The routes to the ground and designated parking areas for coaches,
         transit vans and private vehicles are shown at Appendix ’S’.

3.12.2   ROOTE SIQONG

         Signing of the routes to the ground has been arranged in conjunction
         witri Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. In the event of congestion,
         contingencies exist for detours to be implemented by menbers of the
         Road Traffic Motor Cycle Wing.
                                                                              (5)




3.12.3    BY TRAIN - LIVERPOOL

          Broadly speaking, Liverpool supporters will travel on 'special' trains
          and alight at Kadsley Bridge Railway Station where they will walk the
          half mile to the ground under Police supervision. Service trains will
          also be operating to Midland Railway Station and supporters using this
          service >>111 travel by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses, under
          escort, to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where they will alight.

3.12.4    Details of the train arrival /departure times and duties relating
          thereto are shown at Appendix 'K'.

3.12.5    BY TRAIN - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

          Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by train will alight at Midland
          Railway Station in the centre of Sheffield and travel the three mile
          journey to the ground by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses,
          uroer escort, and will alight on the Penis tone Road North side of the
          stadium.

3.12.6    Details of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto
          are shown at Appendix 'K'.                                           ^

3.12.7    BY COACH - LIVERPOOL                                                 V
                                                                               \
          Liverpool supporters ’who travel by coach will be encouraged to use the
          M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter at Tankersley (Junction 36).
          Duties relating thereto are shown at Appendix 'L'.

3.12.8    Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
          to the designated parking areas and not the stadiirn itself.

3.12.9    On arrival at the designated parking areas, where practicable, an officer
          will board each coach and inform the passengers of the restrictions
          inposed by law and the Ground Regulations. Supporters will then alight
          and walk to the ground under police supervision.                      \

3.12.10   BY CX»CH - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

          Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to,^
          use -the Ml motorway leaving at Tinsley (Junction 34). Duties relating I
          thereto are shewn in the 'D' Division Operation Order.              i \-

3.12.11   Coacnes found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
          to the designated parking areas and not the stadiun itself.

3.12.12   On arrival at the designated parking areas, where practicable, an officer
          will board each coach and inform the passengers of the restrictions
          imposed by Law and the Ground Regulations. Supporters will then alight
          and walk to the ground under police supervision.
                                                                               V
3.12.13   BY TRANSIT VAN - LIVERPOOL

          Liverpool supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicles will
          be encouraged to vise the M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter at
          Tankersley (Junction 36). However, it is not feasible to atterpt to
          channel such vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and it will be the duty
          therefore of all Serials outside the ground to check these vehicles and
          their occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M'.
                                                                                                                          (6)



3.12.24    All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
           sr_Dporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.15    ET TRANSIT VAN - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

           ?i-ttingham Forest supporters who travel by transit van or sirdlar
           \^nicle will be encouraged to use the Ml motorway, leaving et Tinsley
           {.junction 34). However, it is not feasible to attenpt to ciannel
           sr_c±i vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and it will be the cxjty, therefore,
           cf all serials outside the ground to check these vehicles aod their
           occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M'.

3.12.1c    All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
           sr_gporters will alight and walk to the ground under police s-jpervision.

3.12.1"    SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF AL0CH3L) ACT 1985 - AS AMENDED

           A precis of the Act is shown at Appendix 'O'(i). This legislation will
           be strictly enforced in relation to coaches and transit vans or similar
           V E C i d e s , as well as persons entering or attenpting to enter the ground.

3.12.IE    PETVATE VEHICLES - LIVERPOOL
           — »   . n i»   i— —   ..   ..i.   ...   —   .   ■ i—.i   ■   —   ■'   - i I.   i   ■ i —i -    tfe-
                                                                                                                            *

           Liverpool supporters who travel by private vehicle will be encourage^
           tz use the M62/M1 motorways leaving the latter at Tankers ley (Junctioi>
           3c ). They will proceed to the designated parking areas on the Parson v
           Cross/Foxhill estates.

3.12.1::   Cr arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
           vaUk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.21    It is envisaged that traffic will also approach the stadium via the
           Fla'jch (A616). There is a contingency plan should the volvrae of this
           traffic be such that it is impracticable to direct it to the designated
           perking areas referred to at paragraph 3.12.18.                        \

3.12.21    PRIVATE VEHICLES - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

           Krrtingham Forest supporters who travel by private vehicle will be
           etrrouraged to leave the Ml motorway at Tinsley (Junction 34) and procee^
           tc -the designated parking area in the Neepsend area of the city.     t’U
                                                                             'i. , s->
3.12.21    Or. arrival, supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police
           supervision.

3.12.22    CQftCHES AND TRANSIT VANS - RETURN JOUCTCY

           Coaches and transit vans will not leave their designated parking areas
           it— -n authorised to do so by Ground Control.  The return journey for
           these vehicles will be the reverse of that on the incoming journey.
                                                                                                                                N-
3.12.24    Q 3 B O E S AND TRANSIT VANS - GENERAL

           fc rcach or transit                                              van will be allowed to load, unload or park in any
           are- other than the                                              designated parking areas, nor will they be allowed
           tc use routes other                                              than those designated unless diverted by Police
           Officers, following                                              consultation with Ground Control.
                                                                                  (7)

3.12 *25   P A R Q 3 C RESTRICT!CK5

           Paridng of vehicles in the irrmediate vicinity of the ground =ci on main reads
           will be strictly controlled by use of parking cones.   These hr.'.', be set out
           during the early hours of the day in accordance with Appendirs P and Q.

3.12 .26   'The Emergency Services have been informed of all parking restrictions/
           arracoeirents.

3.12 .27   It vi.11 be the responsibility of Police Sergeant 102 Fidler *r ensure
            that These cones are in position before 0700 hours Saturday Irrc April
            1985.

3.12 .28   No cfzicer will a l l w any vehicle to park in contravention of trese or
           any ccher restriction without seeking the authority of Ground Icr.trol.

3.12 .29   REM3CSL OF VEHICLES

           Where a vehicle is parked in such a position as to warrant recrral, then
           this vill be arranged by the officer concerned through Ground Irr.trol
           following consultation with his supervisory Inspector. Two Er~ac recovery
           vehicles will be available to remove vehicles.                         |

3.12..30   Where a vehicle is parked in contravention of parking restricccns and poes
           not nssrit removal, then the driver may be dealt with in the     manner.

3.12. 31   CAR PARKING

           There vill be limited privately operated car parks in the vicinry of the
           ground. No assistance will be given in the operation of these commercially
           run car parks. It is intended that private vehicles will as fnr as
           practicable, use the designated parking areas shown at Append_r 'S'. This
           operation will be carried out by members of the Special Constadary whose
           duties are shown at Appendix 'R'. Parking will be permitted cr all roads
           where restrictions do not apply.                                       \

3.12. 32   SCOTS YORKSHIRE TRANSPORT BOSES                                              '

           South Yorkshire Transport vdll operate ’special buses’ frcm Mi c.and Railway
           Station to the ground. At the end of the match, buses for txa^ portaticpjpf
           Liverpool Supporters back to the railway station will be parkef in . j \-|
           Penistcne Road North freer. Kardsend Road North to Leppings Lane roundabout -
           facing towards city. Buses for transportation of Nottingham Fcrsst
           supporters back to the railway station will be parked in Peniscre Road
           North outside the ground and facing towards city.
3.12. 33   The routing of the South Yorkshire Transport buses both to and from the
           Stadiuc is shown at Appendix ’K ’.

3.12. 34   SHEFflfcU? WEDNESDAY FOCTEBALL CLUB - OFFICIAL CAR PARK

           Only drivers possessing official passes will be allowed access — this part
           of the ground which is situate at the rear of the South Stand. lertain
           coaches containing F.A. and Club officials etc, will be allcwef ~c enter
           the car park and drop passengers off before driving to a parkier area away
           frcm the ground (Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Training Grcrcd,
           Middlewood Road).
                                                                                (8)




3.12.35   -nber no circumstances will any .other vehicle, other than Pclice vehicles
          tie allowed access.

3.12.36   H!ne gates giving access to the South Stand Car Park will clrse at 2.00pm
          and vill not re-open until half an hour after kick-off. Ihis fact has
          been publicised to persons having legitimate access.

3.12.37   d u b Stewards will be enployed at the access points i nLepcings Lane
          a nd Penis tone Road North to control access and egress.

3.12.38   Vehicles owned by the television corrpany providing coverage of the game
          vr.1.1 be permitted to park in the South Stand car parkat bcth the
          Leppings Lane and Penis tone Road North ends.

3.12.39   JSRKDC - POLICE VEHICLES

          Aicthorised Police vehicles will park in the car park at the rear of the
          cv::iiasiijm accessed via the 'Gymnasium gate' adjacent to Gate 'O'. Only
          official vehicles will be allowed access and movement into end out of the.
          ground nust be kept to an absolute miniimn.

3.12.40   CESTKU2TICNS - OnHER THAN BY VEHICLES

                 Traders, Ticket ""routs' and any other person causing obstruct^pn
               be moved on. If they persist then they will be arrested and brought
          tc the Police Roam where they will be dealt with as outlined in paragraphs
          4.1.1. to 4.1.8 (Headed 'Prisoner Process’).

3.13.     RAZLKAY PROPERTY

          Trains vill carry Liverpool supporters to Wads ley Bridge Station. These
          trains and the Station will be manned by BTC Police who have the
          responsibility for policing this property. Officers should only enter
          the station for the purpose of police duties at the invitation of,
          arjc acoaipanied by, a merrber of the BTC Police. This also applies to
          ot~isr railway property, including sidings, cuttings, lines, etc.           ¥
3.14                 WEDNESDftY FOOTBALL CLUB GROUT® REGULATIONS

3.14.1    A precis of the Ground Regulations is shown at Appendix 'O'(ii).         i
                                                                                  I "I
3.14.2    Where an officer seizes property by virtue of the Ground Regulations
          he vill:-

          A)   Supply the person from whom the article has been seized vith
               his 'collar number'.

          B ) Inform that person that the item may be recovered on coupletion
              of the game from the Police Property Post at the rear -of the
              5pion Kop, in the case of Nottingham Forest supporters, end the
              Police Property Post at the rear of the West Stand, in the case
              of Liverpool supporters.

          C)   Affix a label to the item bearing the owners name and the officers
               "Collar nunber'.

          D)   Sisure that the item is taken to the appropriate Police Property
               Post and entered in the Property register.
                                                                                       (9 )


3.14.2.   It is a condition of entry to the ground that persons agree ir be
          searcned. Any person refusing to be searched will be in brea~ cf those
          conditions and vail be refused entry.

3.15      LICTHSED PREMISES

3.15.1    The great majority of licensees in the immediate vicinity of tie ground
          will either close their premises completely at lunchtime and erly ever*ing
          or operate a 'selective door' whereby football supporters are rrt
          admitted.

3.15.2    It will be the responsibility of all Serials outside the grocnf to
          identify those premises wnich remain open and to monitor the becaviour cf
          persons resorting thereto.

3.15.2    Additional attention must be given to 'Off Licence' premises erf
          consideration given to suitably advising proprietors should excessive sales
          of alttnol be evident.

3.15.4    Alcohcl is not available to members of the public inside the cr3_rd.

m         B-ERG3CY AND EVACUATION FR0CH30RES

3.16.1    In the event of an emergency situation arising (ie fire or bcc± call) ^
          which ray require evacuations of all or part of the stadium, trs procecrcre
          outlined will be follov^a:                                            ^

3.16.2    Ground control will pass the following message over the P A sysrsr. and ^
          this will indicate to Police personnel that a provisional emerreccy and
          evacuation procedure is in force:

                   "THE ATTENDANCE CF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY REQUIRED
                   AT POLICE CCNIRCL."

3.16.2    Should an emergency evacuation be necessary then an oral messsre will be
          passed to Police personnel via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants, giving
          specific instructions as to the action to be taken.                     \

3.16.4    In the event of an 'all dear'.situation, the following message will be '
          passed to Police personnel indicating that the necessity for emergency
          evacuation has ceased:

                   "MR MEADOWS IS ND’LONSER REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL."           i \%
                                                                             i,.   |
3.16.5    Evacuation procedures for various parts of the stadium are shofcr cn the
          appropriate serial order.

i         ADMINISTRATION

4.1       PRISONER PROCESS

4.1.1     All persons arrested or detained inside the ground will be taker, in the
          first instance, to the Police Roan at the rear of the North Stare. 1h£a&e
          arrester outside the ground will either be taken to the Police roar or
          Hammertan Road Police Station (in the case of Nottingham Forest
          supporters) whichever is cost convenient.

4.1.2     Three vehicles will operate in the area for the sole purpose of
          transportation of prisoners in order that mobile units may reman free far
          normal crjties.
                                                                                (10)




4.1.3    Where 3 priscxier is taken to the Police Room, details will be obtained,
         the prisoner searched, the arresting officer and prisoner photographed
         together and Form PACE 19 carrpleted. The arresting officer will then
         co-plete the necessary paperwork which he will hand to the Process
         Supervisor in the gyrmasium, which is adjacent to the Police Room.
         Once the paperwork has been checked, it will be handed to ice Officer
         in. Charge of the Police Room and will acconpany the prisoner and his
         property to the appropriate station for processing/chargin;.

4.1.4    Where a person is arrested for a criminal offence, the prismer will
          firstly be taken by the arresting officer to the CID point in the
          gymasiim or at the station, where the officer in charge will decide
          on. the further course of action.

4.1.5    The duties of the "Prisoner Process" teams engaged on this rperation
          are shewn at Appendix "I".

^1.6     Twc vehicles with detention facilities will be parked adjacent to the
          Police Room for the retention of prisoners and a further detention
          vehicle will be parked at each of the two Police Stations frr identical
          purposes.                                                          ^

4.1.7    After initial process, persons detained will be transferred to        \
          Hamerton Road Police Station (in relation to Nottingham Forest        ^
          supporters) and Ecclesfield Police Station (in relation to liverpool
          supporters).

4.1.8    Inspectors nust ensure that officers in serials under their conrnand do
          not go off duty without firstly submitting the requisite paperwork.

4.1.9    EJECTIONS

         Where circumstances are such that a person is to be ejected from the ,
         stadium for breach of the ground regulations, then he will not be     \
         phorograpned, etc. but will be taken to the Police Room where his details
         will be recorded on an 'ejection slip' for entry in the Police Room
         Register, prior to ejection.
                                                                                       -




4.1.10   COURT APPEARANCE                                                          ,

         Where an arrested person is charged and bailed to Court then the Court
         dates allocated to this operation will be strictly adhered to. On all
         occasions. therefore, the staff at the Charge Office Bridge Street,
         Sheffield -will be consulted as to availability of dates befcre a
         prisoner is released on bail following charge.

4.1.11   Provisional arrangements have been made should the nurrtoer of persons
         arrested and kept in custody or the seriousness of offences
         necessitate a Special Court being convened on Monday 17th April 1989.
          In trie event of such criteria being met then Chief Superintendent
         Ducksrrfield will be informed in order that this contingency can be put
         into operation.
                                                                           (11)




4.2     MtSSDC/KXJND CHILDREN

4.2.1   Reports of missing children will be passed via telephone to Ground Control
        in order that the necessary action can be taken.

4.2.2   Any child who has become separated from his parent/guardian will be
        taken to the gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand. Ground control
        vill then be informed via telephone in order that the required action
        can be taken.

4.3     FOUND PROPERTY


4.3.1   All found property will be taken to the Administration Desk in the gyrrssiurt,
        end the register conpleted.

4.4     PMIKSM

4.4.1   All South Yorkshire Police Officers will wear full uniform, incluiing
        belmet (with chin strap dcwn) and gloves. Anoraks will be worn in
        inclement weather. Female officers should wsar trousers and not fe
        sxirts.

4.5     TRANSPORT - POLICE PERSONNEL


4.5.1   Officers arriving in police transport will alight at Gate 'O' in
        Penis tone Road North and drivers of vehicles already nominated for use
        c-rring the police operation will report to Inspector Scarfe at tfcct
        location. That Officer will give direction as to relocation of
        vehicles, fti completion of the game and dispersal of the crowd,
        drivers will report to the Traffic Administration Desk in the
        cvniiasium to collect the vehicle keys in readiness for the return
        journey.
                                                                              s
4.5.2   Police vehicles which are not taken into use during this operation
        will be parked at the Road Traffic Division premises at Claywheels
        Lane, following consultation with the officer in charge of those      >
        premises. Keys for such vehicles will be handed in to the logistids|
        officer at that location.                                      4   t

4.6     KEFKESHMENTS

4.6.1   Twc meals (one hot) will be provided and these will be distributed
        at mealing locations prior to the allocated meal times.

4.6.2   Refreshments will be taken as indicated on the individual serial
        oroer at the venues stated.

4.7

4.7.1   Maps of the Ground and surrounding area are included in this order
        at Appendix 'S'.
                                                                                  (12)




    4.8      OPERATIONAL ORDER - DISTRIBUTION

    4.8.1    This C^erational Order will be issued to Inspectors and above.
             A Serial Order vill be distributed to all Sergeants.

    4.9      PRESS AND FUBUCnY

    4.9.1    Publicity has been given to traffic routes and parking arrangements
             for the event by the Football Liaison Officer and Press Liaison
             Department.

    4.9.2    All corments concerning the event and replies to enquiries from
             the madia vill be handled by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
             or through the Press Liaison Office which is under the cocrrol of
             Superintendent Pratt.

    4.10     OCMFLAINTS

®   4.10.1   Any corrplaints against the Police will be dealt with in accordance
             with Force Standing Order 5S. Corrplainants who approach Police
             Officers engaged on this operation will be directed to the Officer
             shown at Appendix 'I*. Complaints received at Hanmerton toad Police
             station and Ecclesfield Police Station will be dealt with by the V\
             Duty Inspector.                                                   \

    4.11     OGMMLKECATIONS

    4.11.1   All cormmications relevant to the event will be directed through
             Ground Control.

    4.11.2   lie following UHF/VHF channels will be utilised in re la tier, to this
             cpsration:-

             (A)   UHF personal radio channel 25 will be used by all               »
             supervisory officers, both inside and outside the ground.             V

             (E)   UHF personal radio channel 19 will be used by all CID
             personnel engaged on duties in the Parson Cross and Neepserd
             private parking areas.

             (C)   VHF radio channel 1 will be used by mobile patrols.       r   j ;J

    4.11.3   'FI' Sub Division’s operational functions will continue tc be
             transmitted on UHF personal radio channel 35.

    4.11.4   Personal radios will be issued at the Administration Desk in the
             gymasium to all supervisory officers.

    4.11.5   Srrict radio discipline will be naintained at all times. Massages
             m_st be kept as short as possible and, where this is not the case,
             Ground Control has the overriding option of cutting short any
             transmission, irrespective of rank.

    4.11.6   Ground Control can also be contacted on internal extension 3277.
4.12       VEDEO CAMERAS

4.12.1     Ir. addition to the static cameras sited at the Football Stadium,
           EErrtoers of the Underwater Search Unit will be operating e hand-held
           video carrera to monitor the arrival and departure of supporters.
           During the natch they will operate inside the stadium.

4.13       OVERTIME

4.13.1     All overtime claims will be submitted to supervisory officers and
           will be clearly marked "SEMI FUGL - LIVERPOOL v NOTTINSSM FOREST".

4.14       REPORTING OFF DUTY

4.14.1     It will be the responsibility of individual Inspectors tc report
           the whole of their Serials off duty, account for any mertter not
           present and ensure that all radios are returned. He will also
           submit the de-briefing form previously supplied to him. Serials
           1-21 will report off-duty at the Gyrmasiixn. Serials 22-64 will
           report off-duty at Claywheels Lane.

4.12.2    Authorisation will be sought via Ground Control before any Serial
          is 'stood down'.




CHIEF SOHERINTENEENr

'F* DIVISION                                                                       \
           APPENDICES




 Senior Officers Duties

 Inspectors Duties

 Sector 1 (Ground) Duties

 Sector 2 (Liverpool) Duties

 Sector 3 (Nottingham Forest) Duties

Specimen Tickets

CID Duties

Dog Section

Mounted Section

Adrrujiistration, etc.

Traffic Control

Trains

Coaches - Liverpool and Nottingham Forst

Transit vans - Liverpool

Transit Vans - Nottingham Forest

Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985
and Ground Regulations.

Cones

foute signing

Special Constabulary

Maps

Briefing siting ulan

Schedule of manpower
                                                          APPENDIX ’Ati)*


                         SENIOR OFFICERS DOTIES



Chief Inspectors and above will NOT use a call sign but will be identified
by their name and rank.


CVERALL GCW4AND                           Chief Superintendent Lucke.*ifield

                                          Liaison - Inspector Se-ell
                                                    Call Sign India 2£

GROUND CCNTRX                             Superintendent Murray


Sector 1 (Ground)                         Superintendent Greenwcoc

Sector 1A                                 Chief Inspector Beal

Serials 1-10

Sector IB                                 Chief Inspector Creaser           |

Serials 11-19

Reserve Serials 20/21


SECTOR TWO (LIVERPOOL)                    Superintendent Marshall

Sector 2A                                 Chief Inspector Waring

Serials 22-33 and 44, 46, 47 & 48

Sector 2B                                 Chief Inspector Purdy
                                                                                \
Serials 34-51 excluding 44, 46, 47 & 48


SECTOR THHEE (NJmNGHftM FOREST)           Superintendent Chapman

Sector 3A                                 Chief Inspector Surmer

Serials 52-56

Sector 3B                                 Chief Inspector Price

Serials 57— 64
                                                            APPENDIX •Adi)1



                                 INSPECTORS




SECTOR 1A - CHIEF INSPECTOR BEAL

                                                                      Call Sign

Sub Sector 1       (Serials 1-3)         Inspector Darling 'F'        India 1

Sub Sector 2       (Serials 4-6)         Inspector Harvey 'HQ'        India 2

Sub Sector 3       (Serials 7-8)         Inspector Calvert 'HQ'       India 3

Sub Sector 4       (Serials 9-10)        Inspector Booth 'E'          India 4




SECTOR 1(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR CREASER



Sub Sector 5       (Serials 11-12)      Inspector Woodward 'F'        India 5

Sub Sector 6       (Serial !
                           13)          Inspector Bullas 'HQ'         India 6

Sub Sector 7       (Serials 14-15)      Inspector White 'F'           India 7

Sub Sector S       (Serials 16-19)      Inspector   Sykes 1F'         India   8A
                                        Inspector   Purdy 'Trg'       India   8B\
Sub Sector Q       (Serials 20-21)      Inspector   Delaney 'F'       India   9A \
                                        Inspector   Beresford         India   9B '
                                                                          A F P Q G X 'A(ii)’




 B C F B C ftliS (O G N TD )


SECTOR 2A - CHIEF INSPECTOR WARING (LIVERPOOL)

                                                                                  Call Sign


Sub Sectcr        10           (Serials 22-25)   Inspector Hurrphries 'A'         India 10

Sub Sectcr        11           (Serials 26-29)   Inspector Selwcod 'E'            India 11

Sub Sectcr        12           (Serials 30-33)   Inspector Millett 'A'            India 12




SECTOR 2B - CHIEF INSPECTOR PURDY (LIVERPOOL)


Sub Sector 13                  (Serials 34/35)   Inspector Townend 'A'            India 1|

Sub Sector 14                  (Serials 36-38)   Inspector Ellis 'C'              India 1 ^

Sub Sector 15                  (Serials 39/40)   Inspector Brennan 'C'            India 15^

Sub Sector 16                  (Serials 41-43)   Inspector Broomhead 'C'          India 16




COACH KECEFTIGN         SEARCH SQUADS

Sub Sector 17              (Serial 44)           Inspector Wardle 'E'             India 17
                                                                                                \
Sub Sector 18              (Serial 45)           Inspector Morton 'E'             India 18



M3BILF. UNITS
                                                                                      <«■   t
Sub Sector 19              (Serials 46-48)       Inspector Walker 'Ops'

Sub Sector 2D              (Serials 49-51)       Inspector Robinson 'HQ'          India 20
                                                           APPPOIX •Adi)'



flElK'iCkS (OONT'D)



SECTOR 3A - CHIEF DSPECTDR SIMMER (NOTTINGHAM FOREST)

                                                                       Call Sign

Sub Sector 21         (Serials   52/53)   Inspector Charles 'C'        India 21

Sub Sectcr 22         (Serials   54—56)   Inspector Newsy 'C'          India 22




SECTOR 3E - CHIEF INSPECTOR PRICE - N30TIN3IAM FOREST



Sub Sectcr 23      (Serials 57/58)        Inspector Bateman 'C'        India 23

Sub Sectcr 24      (Serials 59/60)        Inspector Burgess '€'        India\24
                                                                             \

H3BILE UNITS



Sub Sector 25      (Serials 61-64)        Inspector Wallace 'E*        India 25


                                                                               \
LIAISON                                   Inspector Sewell 'F'         India 26

                                                                         i' r-i
AEKENISTOA-ICN                            Inspector Bennett 'F'        In&ia '27*


TRANSIT AIJjPCAnON/RESERVE SERIALS/
CQftCH SUPfc>VISION                       Inspector Scarfe 'Traffic'   India 28
                                                                      APPENDIX *B'
                                   SUB SECTOR 1
                                                                   Inspector Darling
              1                    PERIMETER TRACK

                               Phases 1 and 2 (Before and during natch)
     PS 45>4 Chapnen   'F'
  1) PC 1£>69 Kainc1e          Twenty Police Constables - perimeter track (Equidistant
  2) PC 2151 Karsoen
                               spread around ground). The Sergeant will remain in the
  3) PC 2-58 B-trkinshaw
                               vicinity of the player’s tunnel throughout this duty and
  4) PC 417 IllingnwDrth
                               the Officers on the track will follow his example by
  5) PC 1285 Sri.tr.
                               standing and facing the crowd at the follo-ing times
  6) PC 445 Grocrne
  7) PC 23~8 Hartsac           Before kick-off, half-time and full-time and also during
 8) PC 710 Hel 1iwe-11         any stoppage of play or when there is any crowd unrest.
  9) PC 442 Qjckscr.           This will be indicated during the game and shortly before
10) PC 21*46 Holmes            half and full-time by the sergeant leaving the player's
 11) PC 124/ Street            tunnel and standing near the touch line. Particular
12) PC 18-42 Brookes           attention should be paid to prevent any person climbing
13) PC 2S11 Kilsar.            the fence to gain access to the ground. The gates
14) PC 1412 Ler±j              most retain bolted at all times except when in use.
15) PC 23E7 Collir =           NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FRCM THE
16) PC £14 Firr>egan           TERRACES WITBOOT CONSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICES (EXCEPT
17) PC 312-4 Ricnardson        TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ATTENTION)
18)
19)  §  19~7 Fercring
20) PC 1C 79 Croot (Tmg)
                               Fhase 3 (After natch)

                               As' the ground clears, Officers of this serial will rdjrair.
                               in location until instructed otherwise.                 .
     Meal - staggered
     before ireter* ir. gym.   Brergency Evacuation Procedure                          \\

     SEATING FDR BHZEFING      In the event of such a situation arising (indicated at
     AS PE? PLAN (ATTACHED)    item 3.16 in the Serial instruction). PC's at either end
     APPE2CZX '7'              of the ground will take up positions at the fence gates.
                               These gates will only be opened if a specificmessage
                               to evacuate is given on the public addresssystem.
                               V WWWWWWS W *VIWWW
                               ■   ■   ^   ■   »   *   ■   ^




                               SOtHH STAND LOWER LEVEL                                      \

     Serial 2                  Phase 1 (Before natch)
     PS   235E Cox      *F'
                               A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 19-22 to
1)   PC   2051 Jacksoc
                               ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
2)   PC   1302 Pitt
                               items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,i\ |;
3)   PC   192c McGuinnsss      weapons or missiles) or alcohol.                     ' ■*
4)   PC   172 Sinpson
5)   PC   3235 Joberts         B) 2PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 33-36 to
6)   PC   341 Hall             ensure items shown above are not brought into the grourd.
7)   PC   157 Wast
                               C) Remaining PC's will patrol rear of terraces to
8)   PC   495 Parsley          maintain order.
9)   PC   446 Turner
D)   PC   2417 rotchell        Phase 2 (During natch)
                               All officers will be located at the rear of terraces
     PS 2425 HenzingwEy        and maintain order_as ■required.                     N.
     MEAL: Stsggered           Phase 3 (After natch)
     during catch in Gym.
                               This serial will take up a position in front of^hese
     SEATING FDR ERIZFTNG      terraces on the perimeter track to prevent a pitch invasion'
     AS PER FLAN ATTACHED      or ensure the safety of the natch officials and players.
     APPENDIX *T'
                               SOUTH STAND UPPER LEVEL

       Serial 3                Phase 1 (Before match)

                               A ) 2 P C 's will be situated at the rear of turnstiles
        PS 577 Gardner   »p»
                               23-28 to ensure persons entering these premises
  1)    PC 60 Godley
                               do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
 2)     PC 70 Whitelev
                               (Banners, etc., weapons or missiles) or alcohol.
 3)     PC 591 Tune
 4)     PC 1317 Bennett
                               B) Two PC's will be -situated behind turnstiles 29-32
 5)     PC 1340 Crookes
                               to ensure items shown above are not brought into the
 6)     PC 1584 Collier
                               ground.
 7)    PC 1949 Storey
 8)     PC 1962 F-Hirst
                               C) Remaining PC's will patrol the stand concourse to
 9)     PC 2817 Hudson
                               maintain order.
10)     PC 3341 Mitchell
                               Rvase 2 (During natch)
       PS 2777 Johnson
                               Officers will be located at the entrances to the stand
                               to maintain order as required.

                               Phase 3 (After match)

                               Remain until stand clears of all supporters.


       MEAL - Staggered
       during match            EMERGENCY EVACUATICW PROCEDURES
       In Gym
                               In the event of such a situation arising (Indicated at
    Seating for briefing
                               3.16 in the serial instructions) PC's in the upper
2S per plan attached
                               level of the South Stand will take up positions at the
topendix 'T'
                               internal partition gates and ensure they are open.
                               Those on duty on the lower level will ensure that exit
                               gates at either end of the stand are ccen.

                               Further instructions will be as directed by control     ,
                               or passed over the public address system.               \

                               Officers will be nominated for individual points
                               at the start of this duty.
                                    SUB SECTOR 2
                                                                      Inspector Barvey
      Serial 4                      SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (Penistooe Road end)

      PS 266 Jakes      *E'         Phase 1 (Before natch)
 1)    PC 302 Ski±rcrB
                                    A) 2 PC's will be located at the players ectrznce to
 2)    PC 723 Whittaker
                                    maintain order, ensure the safe entry of the teams and
3)    PC 385 Walter
                                    officials and prevent access by unauthorised persons in
 4)    PC 203 Baines
                                    conjunction with the Club's staff.
 5)    PC 2679 Astir.
 6)    PC 1200 Wcodwar-d            B) 2 PC's will supervise queues at turnstiles 29-36 and
 7)    PC .2621 Vo d c              prevent items prohibited by the ground rules (Barriers,
 8)    PC 1412 hfcZioucf^lin        etc., weapons or missiles) or alcohol being carried into
 9)    PC 3334 Duiiev-              the ground.
10)    PC 242 Childs
                                    C) 4 PC's to patrol in the area between the gates and the
                                    players entrance (in pairs) to maintain order.
                                    D) 2 PC's will assist club staff between the gates at
                                    Penis tone Road to prevent unauthorised access by vehicles.
                                    These gates will close for vehicle access fror 2.DQpm to
                                    3.30pri.
                                    Phase 2 (During natch)
                                    Remain on patrol in car park as above and prevent entry
                                    into this area by supporters without tickets. Cover whole
                                    of car park after half time *t>en Serial 5 are Dealing.
      MEAL                          Phase 3 (After natch)
      After kick-cff
      in gym                        Remain in this area until crt**3 clears, prevent movehpnt by
                                    vehicles until all spectators on foot have left the area.
      Seating for              as
      per plan atl                  ****************************-*
      (Appendix '7')
      Serial 5                      SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (Leppings   Lane end)

       PS   1084 Hod?=tt *E'        Phase 1 (Before natch)
 1)    PC   596 Smith
                                    A) 3 PC's will supervise queues at turnstiles 23-28 to
 2)    PC   933 Botley
                                    ensure persons entering these premises do not possess liters
 3)    PC   499 Carlrwrich-
                                    as above.                                             \
 4)    PC   769 Muter
 5)    PC   3131 Lewis              B) 3 PC's supervise queues at turnstiles 19-22 to prevent
 6)    PC   851 Wicker.             items shown above being carried onto the gro-jnc.
 7)    PC   1535 Faimlouah
                                    C) 4 PC's to patrol in the vicinity of the television5
 8)    PC   2512 Craigey
                                    control vehicles to ensure their security.
 9)    PC   1564 Mace                                                                    |l-S
10)    PC   1177 Davis              Phase 2 (During match)                           '   ’^

                                    Remain on patrol in the car park as above and prevent entry
                                    into this area of supporters without tickets. Prior to half
                                    time this serial has responsibility for the vbcle of the
                                    car park whilst Serial 4 are mealing.
  Seating for briefing
                                    Phase 3 (After match)
  as per plan artacraad
  (Appendix 'T'3                    This serial will be located in the area between the official
                                    car park and the exit frcm the enclosure at the rear "bf the
  MEAL                              West Stand to prevent Liverpool supporters entering the
  After half time                   Official car park and supporters who are leaving the South
  in gym.                           Stand frcm exiting other than via Penis tone fcad. This will
                                    be in conjunction with other serials and Mounted Dept.
     Serial 6                SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (Barriers)

      PS 729 Nortxrrr. 'E'   Riase 1 (Before natch)
  1 ) PC 28 Drewitt
  2) PC 2818 Marshall        lYiis serial will supervise the barriers tr be erected
  3) PC 861 Wadsworth        at either end of the roadway between turrsiiles A-G
 4) PC 3217 Allen            at Leppings Lane and the start of the Sour: Stand car
 5) PC 3162 Pears            park.
 6) PC 1159 Long
 7) PC 142 Long              1*iey vill prevent access to this area by cl1 Liverpool
 6) PC 99 Coe                supporters and any other persons without jsgitimate
 9) PC 515 Cawkwell          reasons (i.e. with tickets) from entering.
ID) PC 1828 Metcalfe
                             Vehicles will be prevented from entering tre car park
                             frcm Leppings Lane.

                             Phase 2 (During match)

                             4 PC's will remain in this area throughout the rratch
                             to supervise barriers and prevent access.

                             R a s e 3 (After match)

    Seating for briefing     Ensure barriers remain in position and opposing fan£
    as per plan attached     do not come into contact.Remain until area clears
    {Appendix 'T*)           all supporters.

     .VEAL
     Meal staggered          Bnergency Evacuation Procedure
     cjring game
     in gym                  In the event of such a situation arising (indicated
                             at 3.16 of the serial instructions) Officers on duty in
                             the car park will ensure that access gates et Leppings
                             Lane and Penis tone Road are clear and unobstructed and
                             no vehicles - except emergency services - rcve.
                              SUB SECTOR 3
                                                             Inspector Calvert
      Serial 7                SPION KOP TERRACES

                              Phase 1 and 2 (Before and daring match)
       PS 752 Batty *E’
 1 ) PC 8 1 5 r-iooiiol
                              PC's will be located at the entrances to the Scion Kop
 2)    PC 1103 Edwards        terraces in pairs to maintain order and ensure that these
 3)    PC 1782 Tenple         entrances retrain clear at all tirres.
 4)    PC 264 Hirst           In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining entry into
 5)    PC 2748 Abraharx       this end of the ground they will be contained et the
 6)    PC 734 Thornton.       extreme southern part of the terraces at the rear of Gate
 7)    PC 1183 West           1 to await transference under escort to their own area.
 8)    PC 2080 NettlesJrd_p   UNDER ND CIRCUMSTANCES will any supporters be transferred
 9)    PC 841 Gillett         frcm these terraces tc other parts of the ground via the
10)    PC 2321 Willi arson    perimeter track.
                              Riase 3 (After natch)
      MEAL: After kick off
      in gym.                 Remain in ground until these terraces are clear of all
                              supporters.

 Siting for briefing          ******************

 £^P>er plan attached
 (Appendix'T')
   Serial 8                   REAR OF SPICN KOP TERRACES

      PS   1203 Marples ’E'   Phase 1 (Before match)                              A
 1)   PC   411 Bellamy        A) 2 PC's will    be located behind turnstiles 37-42 ^Located
 2)   PC   41 Warmsley        in official car   park) to ensure persons entering the^e
 3)   PC   2975 Woodcock      premises do not   possess items prohibited by the ground
 4)   PC   1123 Thornhill     rules (Banners,   etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
 5)   PC   145 Tew
 6)   PC   3122 Andrews       B) Remaining officers will be at rear of turnstiles
 7)   PC   265 Fletcher       situated on Penis tone Road 43-76 to ensure that items as
 8)   PC   1267 Lougher       shown above are not brought into the ground.
 9)   PC   3200 Grey          Phase 2 (During match)
10)   PC   2656 Yardy
                              This serial will remain on patrol in the rear of the ,
                              Spion Kop terraces to prevent unauthorised access andV.
Seating for briefing          ensure security of kiosks, etc.                       \
as per plan attached
(Appendix 'T')                Phase 3 (After natch)

                              This serial will take up a position in front of the p@ion
                              Kop on the perimeter track to prevent a pitch invasjior|/
  MEAL: After half time       ensure the safety of natch officials and players. ’ v'
  in gym.
                              Brergancy Evacuation Procedure

                              In the event of such a situation arising (indicated at
                              3.16 in the serial instruction) PC’s on Serial 8 will
                              ensure al 1 exit gates are open. Further instructions
                              will be as directed by control either by radio or the public
                              address system.
                                                                                 s.-
                                                                                 Arnerdix




                                        F A CUP SEMI FINAL

                                        SPECIMEN TICKET




                                        THE FOOTBALL'ASSOCIATION’
     -J          hit                fl'CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL




              T O B E O V EN UP '   y             IM S PORTION TO BERETAIMEa .




GX OJR CODING - LIVERPOOL

BJOWS     -        NORTH STAND

KD        - WEST STAND

PORPLE    -        LEPPINGS LAfC TERRACES
                   (also overprinted *LIVERPOOL AREA")

CDEJQUR CODING - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

GRANGE -           SPITK KOP
                   (also overprinted *N0TITN3ifiM AREA")

KJOE      -        SOJTH STAND

C3SEN     -        S O C m STAND (UN30/ERED)
                                                            APPESDIX 'F'



                           CXD DOTIES


 33SIDE THE GROUND         Detective Inspector Towell - I / c
Gynnasiim                  DS 727 Lindley
                           DC 2968 Ball
                           TDC 570 Stoker
                           DC 2569 Blake
Pickpocket Squads         DS   517 Srith
                          DC   2540 Lindsay
                          DC   458 Hall am
                          DC   491 Lilley

                          DS   457 McSloy
                          DC   1108 Locking
                          DC   1209 Askew
                          DC   2812 Lawrence
outside tbe g r o u n d
                          Detective Inspector Scaife - I / c
M obile Response Car      DS 805 Buxton                                      1
                          DC 1788 Hirst                                     \ .
Motor cyclists            PC 420 Davies         )Motor cycles  tr be collided
                          PC 525 Bevington      ) from ’FI*Garage
Foot Patrols              DC 1600 Jones        Herries Road/Halifax Road
                          DC 735 Tuke

                          PC 2302 Powell       MiddlewDoc Road
                          DC 146 O'Brien

                          DC 2405 Dynes        Penistone Road tc include
                          DC 3119 Bagguley     CVlerton Stadiir: car park
                                                                               \
                          DC 366 Stevenson     Neepsend
                          PC 1^26 Kalton

                          TDC 1181 Drajling Hillsborough Car Fark
                          PC 1651 Moulding                        r        \
            CXD GENERAL SOB DIVISIONAL DOTIES




                     •FI' SOB DIVISION

DS 829 CXjghton - I/C                       8.00 am - 8.01 pm

DS 1094 Ellis                               8.00 am - 8.01 pm
DC 2202 Walker                              8.00 am - 8.DI pm
PC 2619 Mottram                             8.00 am - 8.01 pm


DS   1745   Sturgess                        Noon   to   midnirrt
DC   2088   Brcwn                           Noon   to   midni=rt
DC   3206   Lewin                           Noon   to   midni“
PC   1980   Nottingham                      Noon   to   midni“

DC 358 Hydes                                6.00 pn - 6.01 am



                     'F2* SOB DIVISION

DS 846 Williamson - I/C                     8.00 am - 8.0C pm

DC 649 Fox                                  8.00 am - 8.0C pm

DC 2270 Perkins                             10.00 am - 10.Cl pm
PC 3231 Harwood                             10.00 am - 10.1. pm

DS 1578 Holdemess                           Noon to nddniccr
DC 1161 Staniforth                          Noon to midnicrr:

DC 1152 McManus                             6.00 pm - 6.0C am
                                SUB SECTOR 4
                                                                    Inspector Booth
      Serial 9                  PENISTOfC: HDftD TURNSTILES

      PS    767 Jessop ’£'      fhase 1 (Before match)
 1)    PC   20I£ Ljasiaes
 2)    PC   2765 Goddari        This serial vill be responsible for turnstiles 43-54.
 3)   PC    147E Capes          Hiey will ensure persons entering these premises dc not
 4)    PC   3302 Slack          possess items prohibited by the ground rule; {Banners,
 5)    PC   32 E? Sutcliffe     etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol. They *111 also
 6)   PC    173 Holland         maintain order and ensure orderly queues ar= formed. This
 7)   PC    335 McKay           will be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers vtjc
 8)   PC    27£: Lowe           are on duty at this location.
 9)   PC    19: Firth
10)   PC    HE-? Welsh          R a s e 2 (During catch)

                                This serial vill be located at Entrance 'Z' to the Scior.
                                Kop.

 Seating f~r briefing           Hiase 3 (After match)
 as per plan attached (App T)
   MEAL i After                 At the commencement of Phase 3 this serial vill leave th=
   h ^ ^ tire                   ground and supervise loading of SYT buses iz Penistere
   in cr.rr                     Road.




  Serial 10                     PENISTONE KDftD TORTSTIIfS

      PS    1DBI Hoy land       fhase I (Before match)
 1)   PC    3142 Vfebb
 2)   PC    2197 Lsveraci'      This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 55-64. .
 3)   PC    Er2 Stokes          They will ensure persons entering these precises do not\ .
 4)   PC    1644 Gagg           possess items as shewn above. They will als: traintain *
 5)   PC    219C Harris         order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
 6)   PC    227 west            be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers who are
 7)   PC    949 Lovling         on duty in this location.
 8)   PC    2D97 Cousins
 9)   PC    32 E Froggatt       Phase 2 (During match)
10)   PC    55E Trxxrpson                                                             ll=
                                This serial will be located at Entrance 'Y' to the Spian
                                Ko d .
Seating for briefing
as per pLar. attached           Phase 3 (After match)
(Appendix *T')
                                At the commencerrent of Phase 3, this serial vill leave
  MEAL: After                   the ground and supervise loading of SYT buses in
  kick off                      Penistone Road.
  in gyn-..
                            SUB SECTOR 5
                                                          Inspector Ifoodxard
      Serial 11             N3RTH STAND - UPPER LEVEL

      PS 2279 Edwards *£•   Riase 1 (Before match)
 1'   PC 1074 Tickett
 2)      2857 Turner        A) Six PC’s will be located in the area at the rear of
 3)   PC 873 Cakes          turnstiles 1-8 (Leppings Lane end) to ensure that the
 4)   PC 1529 Friend        fans entering the ground are not in possession of items
 5)   PC 2571 Tittermr.     prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
 6)   PC 2409 Larkin        missiles) or alcohol.
 7)   PC 2209 Brohpy
 8)   PC 1847 Bungay        B ) A PC1s and 1 Sergeant will patrol or. the upper *
 9)   PC 1479 Wroe          level concourse to maintain order, paying particular
10)   PC 1506 Marsh         attention to refreshment bars.

11) PC 3116 Ellis           Fbase 2 (Daring match)

                            All Officers will be located on the upper concourse
                            to maintain order, paying special attention to
                            refreshment bars as trouble was experienced here last
                            year.

                            Fhase 3 (After match)

                            At the ccntnencemsnt of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before
                            end of game) All the serial will take up position at
      MEAL: After           the upper concourse exit gate (Top of ranp) to       \*
      kick off              Penistone Road to prevent supporters leaving and
      in gym.               entering Penistone Road.    ALL SUPPORTERS MUST BE
                            DIRECTED TO LEPPINGS LANE EXIT.
                               NORTH STAND - LOWER LEVEL

  Serial 12                    Riase 1 (Before Batch)

      PS   455 McCall 'J2 '    A) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of Gate 'O'
 1)   PC   463 Killer ' Z ’    (Penistone Road) to assist the stewards and prevent
 2}   PC   1615 Griff-ms *E'   unauthorised access.
 3)   PC   414 Led3e ' '
 4)   PC   2554 fejjs '5*1'    B) 2 PC's vill be located at the gate to the car
 5)   PC   2683 KLeld ’51'     park at the rear of the gymnasium (Penistone Road)
 6)   PC   384 Roach *TL'      to assist the stewards and prevent unauthorised
 7)   PC   3292 Vfcite r51'    access.
 8)   PC   688 Sreeriec'F2'
 9)   PC   1054 fevwocd 'D'    C) 2 PC's vill be located at the rear of turnstile-
10)   PC   3102 Tr^res ’D'     73-88 in Penistone Road to ensure persons entering
                               are not din possession of articles prohibited by the
                               ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or
                               alcohol.

                               D) 4 Remaining PC’s will patrol lowsr level
                               concourse of North Stand paying particular attenticn
Sea^Pg for briefz^ig as        to refreshment bars.
per plan attached .See
Appendix 'T'}                  Fhase 2 (During natch)

                               A) 2 PC's to refrain at Gate 'O' for duties outjinec
                               above.                                         \ •

                               B) 2 PC’s to rerrain at car park for duties outline;
                               above.

                               C) 6 Renaining PC’s will patrol concourse in pairs,
                               paying particular attention to refreshment bars.

                               Fhase 3 (After natch)

                               At the commencement of Phase 3 (10 minutes before enf of
                               game) all the serial will take up position at lovfer
                               concourse exit gates to Penistone Road to prevent\
                               supporters leaving and entering Penistone Road.   '

                               ALL SUPPORTERS HLBT BE DIRECTED TO LEPFDCS LANE EXIT
  MEAL: After                                                                   i
  half tiine                                                                  I
  in gym.                      Emergency Evacuation Procedures            i>   f

                               In the event of such a situation arising, PC's locar=c
                               at the gates at the end of each level giving access
                               to ranps leading to Penistone Road will ensure these
                               are open.

                               Officers will also take up positions at exit gates ir
                               Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure these are
                               open.                                          v
                               Further instructions vill be as directed by control
                               or passed over the public address system
                               Officers will be marinated for individual points
                               at the start of this duty.
                                 SUB SECTOR 6
                                                            Inspector Balias

  Serial 13                      WEST STAND

      PS   2001 Burner- ’E'      Fhase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   2592 Shimwell
 2)   PC   3088 Coupland         A) 2 PC's will be located at the North entrance
 3)   PC   1494 Naylor           gates to this stand to assist stewards ir.
 4)   PC   298 Scholey           supervising entry and where necessary preventing
 5)   PC   2167 Frost            entry of unauthorised persons.
 €)   PC   360 Schofield
 7)   PC   3170 Fairclcrjgh      B) 2 PC's will be located at the South entrance
 £)   PC   1618 Shearvood        gates to this stand to assist stewards ir.
 9)   PC   10 Mercer             supervising entry and where necessary preventing
10)   PC   2717 Savoury          entry of unauthorised persons.
11)   PC   928 Parkin
12)   PC   1423 Newbold.         C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse/bar area
                                 to maintain order.

                                 D) 6 PC's will be located at the front cf the
                                 Stand to prevent missiles being thrown/Stand tickets,
                                 being dropped to the terraces below or persons
                                 clinbing from the terraces to the stand and to
Seating for briefing             maintain order.                                 |
as per plan attached
(Appendix 'T' )                  Riase 2 (Durina match)
                                                                                \|   •




                                                                                 $
                                 PC's will be located at the entrances tc the stand
                                 to maintain order.

                                 fhase 3 (After catch)

                                 Refrain in stand until clear.

  *feal: After kick off in gym
  when relieved by Serial 16     PERGEJCy EVACUATION PROCEDURE

                                 In the event of such a situation arising indicat
                                 at 3.16 in the serial order. PC's will cake up
                                 positions at the emergency exits at the extreme
                                 front comers of the stand and ensure th= gates
                                 are unlocked. Other officers will take q? positions
                                 at the entrance steps to the stand and again    j\
                                 ensure the gates are open.                   “ ^

                                 Further instructions will be as directed by control
                                 or passed over the public address systen-

                                 Officers will be nominated for individual points
                                 at the start of this duty.
                                    SUB SECTOR 7
                                                                 Inspector Miite

       Serial 14                    IEPPINGS LAMS TERFUZE AND REAR E N C L O S E (SOJIM)

       PS   1341 Crawfcrf ’B ’      Fhase 1 (Before natch)
 1)    PC   2887 Grant
 2)    PC   2819 McManus            H u s serial will ensure that supporters entering
 3)    PC   136 Smallmar.           through turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession cf
 4)    PC   1777 Branstoc           items prohibited by the ground rules (burners, etc..
 5)    PC   2806 Butler             weapons, missiles) cr alcohol.
 6)    PC   75 Coy
 7)    PC   1002 Wild               They will also ensure order is main faired on the
 8)    PC   975 Washington          terraces.
 9)    PC   1964 Sewell
10)    PC   3232 Burton             Fhase 2 (Daring netch)

                                    This serial will be located in the central tunnel
 Seating for brief-:-rr as          to the Leppings Lane terraces to maintf.-- order as
 per plan attached !Appendix'T' )   required.

       MEAL:                        Fhase 3 (After natch?
       Ajter kick off
       Swgym                        Supervise exit of s-jsporters into Leppirns lane.




       Serial 15                    LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE AND REAR ENCLDSUg (NDKIHK

       PS 1757 B ums                R a s e 1 (Before- ipatdb)
 1)    PC 2342 Beard
                                    This serial will ensure that supporters entering
 2)    PC 1543 Aitkin
                                    through turnstiles 9-16 do not enter ir. possession cf
 3)    PC 107 Carling
                                    items prohibited by the ground rules (Berners, etc.,
 4)    PC 853 Burke
                                    weapons, missiles cr alcohol). They will also ensure
 5)    PC 2191 Llevellyr.
                                    order is maintained cr. the terraces.
 6)    PC 2654 Richardson
 7)    PC 78 Booth
                                    fhase 2 (During match)
 8)
 9).
       PC 1675 Rich
       PC2364 Ford                  This serial will be located in the tunn=l to the \
                                                                                           \
10)    PC 2605 Webster              North Pen in the Lescings Lane terraces, to maintair.
                                    order as required.
                                    Fhase 3 (After match)
                                                                                   mu
       MEAL:                        Supervise exit of supporters into Leppircs Iane.v
       In gym
       after half-time
                                    EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE
       Seating for briefing
                                    In the event of such a situation arisinr indicated
       as per plan attached
                                    at 3.16 in the serial order, PC's will take up
       (Appendix 'T')
                                    positions at the exit gates and ensure trey are oper.

                                    Further instructions vill be as directed by control
                                    or passed over the pdblic address syster.

                                    Officers will be ncrrir»2 ted for individual points at
                                    the start of this duty.
                                SUB SECTOR 8
                                                          Inspector Sytes/Trcspectar Purdy

                  16            LEPPINGS       TURNSTILES

      PS     1288 Payne         Phase 1 (Before natch)
 i)   PC     3066 Huckster:
 2}   PC     2980 Wright *      This serial vill    be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
 3)   PC     1715 Best          They will ensure    that persons entering do not possess
 4)   PC     115 Huckster       items prohibited    by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
 c. *
 —'/  PC     259 Coney          weapons missiles    or alcohol). They vill maintain
 e } PC      607 Taylor         order arrf ensure   orderly queues are formed.
      PC     963 Evans
 s; PC       620 Yates          Fhase 2 (During natch)
 9 '■ PC     2496 West
10) PC       2076 Cerrone       This serial vill be located in the West Stand and
                                relieve Serial 13.

                                Fhase 3 (After match)

        >5EAL:    In gym        At the ccrrmencement of Phase 3, this serial vill
                 half time      leave the ground and take up a position in Lepcings
                                lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit cf
        Seating for briefing    supporters and prevent disorder.
        es per plan attached
        (Appendix 'T')




        Serial 17               LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES

        pc   468 Whitlam *F2'   Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)      PC   2513 Oakland
2)      PC   2933 Wadsworxh     This serial will be responsible for turnstiles
3)      PC   3027 Tagg          They will ensure that persons entering do ncrt possess
n       PC   393 Pulfrey        items prohibited by the ground rules (as above}.
>)      PC   B09 Elson          They will maintain order and ensure that orderly
0       PC   B50 Whitton        queues are formed.                                 <
 )      PC   16 Wilson
 )      PC   43 Kirkby          Fhase 2 (During natch)
                                                                                    It
                                                                                   j ‘$
 )      P2   602 Moore
 )      PC   346 Thcrrpson      This serial will be located in the central ttn
                                to the Leppings Lane terraces.

         for briefing           Fhase 3 (After match)
  5 per plan attached
  Bee Appendix 'T' )            At the commencement of Phase 3, this serial vill
                                leave the ground and take up a position in Lacings
                                Lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit cf
              In Gym            supporters and prevent disorder.
        efrsr half time
  Serial 18                         1EPPXNGS LANS TURNSTILES

      PS   758 Morgan *F'           Fhase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   2961 Jenkins on 'F2'
 2)   PC   3118 Crookes             This serial vail be responsible for turnstiles 9-16.
 3)   PC   1639 McIntosh            They will ensure that persons entering dr not possess
 4)   PC   1171 Horsfield           items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
 5)   PC   513 Francis              weapons, missiles or alcohol). They will maintain
 6)   PC   159 Marsh                order and ensure orderly queues are fonred.
 7)   PC   1834 Scholey
 8)   PC   2172 Prince              Fhase 2 (During match)
 9)   PC   2960 Alexander
10)   PC   3342 Blount *F1'         This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
                                    North pen.

                                    Fhase 3 (After watch)

                                    At the ccnmencenent of Phase 3, this Serial will
                                    leave the ground and take up a position in Leppings
                                    Lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit of
  ^^LL: In gym                      supporters and prevent disorder.
  after kick off

Seating for briefing as
per plan attached {Appendix 'T' )



  Serial 19                         LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES

                                    Fhase 1 (Before match)
      PS   323 Proctor *F'
 1)   PC   611 Booth
                                    This serial will be located at Leppings Lane and
 2)   PC   2963 Sinc[h
                                    ensure that orderly queues form. They vill assist
 3)   PC   1124 Pratt
                                    other serials at this location as required and in
 4)   PC   2902 Roberts
                                    the event of vehicles, coaches, arriving, supervise
 5)   PC   3249 Jacksor.
                                    their unloading.                                 ^
 6)   PC   2333 English
 7)   PC   276 Robinson.
                                    Fhase 2. (During watch)
 8)   PC   2530 Lockley
 9)   PC   3135 Bumless
                                    This serial will remain outside the turnstiles until
10)   PC   776 Glaves
                                    half time before taking refreshments.          .
                                                                               ; \ I >;
                                    Fhase 3 (After natch)                      •' > *

                                    At the commencement of Phase 3 this serial will leave
  MEAL: In gym                      the ground and take up a position at Leppings Lane
  after half time                   roundabout and assist serials 30 and 31 in maintaining
                                    segregation of supporters at that location..
Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (Appendix 'T')
                                                                                  V
                                             SUB SECTOR 9
                                                                     Inspector Delaney 'F C&V'
                                                                     Inspector Beresfnrd 'E CSV’

      Serial 20                              GRDUND RESERVES
          PS   1066 Hioci=s
                                             Fhase 1 (Before catch)
  1)      PC   2D00 Ersyfttrd
  2)      PC   1398 Goodwill
                                             This serial will act as a Reserve Serial and retain
  3)      PC   2551 S - H ’-ns
                                             within the gymnasium unless directed otherwise.
  4)      PC   2E73 ifcitelam
  5)      PC   557 Salxav
                                             Fhase 2 (During match)
  6)      PC   2493 fcshst-r
  7)      PC   2281 Barker
                                             As above
  8)      PC   6S4 Ncr~tcr_
  9)      PC   722 Gee
                                             fhase 3 (After natch)
 10)      PC   2786 Itoore
                                             This serial will take up a position ir. front of the
     To have Transit available
                                             North stand on the perimeter track to prevent £
     MEAL: After fdcz. off in                pitch invasion/ensure the safety of rretch officials
           cym                               and players.
     Seating for ■— V - - - n g
     a s ^ ^ r plan et:taci~>ed (Appendix *T')




     Serial 21                               GROUND RESERVES

                                             Fhase 1 (Before match)
     PS   2607   Eddf-son *E C&V1
1)   PC   1141   Smitfi                      This serial vi.ll act as a reserve serial and
2)   PC   2064   F hi r— 1™ !!-r-            remain in the area adjacent to the Police
3)   PC   213C   Fros-                       control box between the South stand and
4)   PC   2304   Croctces                    Leppings Lane terraces.
5)   PC   2507   Kiltes
6)   PC   2577   Tewirs;                     Fhase 2 (During natch)
7)   PC   2330   Willsmer
S)   PC   2372   Justice                     As above.
9)   PC   2435   Griffiths
0)   PC   1040   Duffy                       Fhase 3 (After match)
                                                                                              i
To have Transit available                    This serial vill take up a position in front ofi \ J|
                                             the West Stand on the perimeter track to   “ ' >'
                                             prevent a pitch invasion/ensure the safety of
     MEAL: Afrer calf time                   match officials and players.
     in gym.

     Seating far briefing
     as per plan ertacned
     (Appendix 'T';
                                                                      APPENDIX 'C*
                                   SIB SECTOR 10
                                                               Inspector   Bunchries

 Serial 22                         PUBLIC ORTER - MIDCO^OCP BCftD

     PS   1544 Hodgitts     'Al'   R a s e 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   354 Clarke
2)   PC   2966 Cosgrr7.*e          PC's will patrol in pairs in Kiddlewcoc Road from
3)   PC   1390 Mussett             feds ley Lane to Crofton Avenue to maintain order and
4)   PC   2667 Finnerty            prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
5)   PC   3194 Beech               to side street parking and maintain security of
6)   PC   3160 Johnson             business premises, paying special attention to
7)   PC   2739 Long                local public houses and shops.
8)   PC   3337 Thcrrcson
                                   R a s e 2 (During natch)

                                   Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
                                   once authorised by natch control.

                                   R a s e 3 (After natch)

                                   On ccmrencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume
                                   patrol in location as above. Paying particular
Seating for briefing as            attention to shops and supermarkets and prevent
per plan attached (See             any clash of supporters.
Appendix 'T')




 Serial 23                         PUBLIC ORDER - MIDDLEHOOD ROfcD

     PS   2305 Loras ’Al'          R a s e 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   1698 Martin
2)   PC   703 Thornton.            PC's will patrol in pairs in Miodlewooc Road from
3)   PC   2862 Taylor              Wadsley Lane to Minto Road to maintain order and \
4)   PC   2158 Cran                prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
5)   PC   1889 Brant               to side street parking and nsintaln security of '
6)   PC   2993 Nugent              business premises, paying special attention to
7)   PC   469 Shaw                 local public houses and shops.
8)   PC   1758 Winfield
                                                                                        {*£>-
                                   R a s e 2 (During natch)                            \\X

                                   Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, cnce authorised by
Seating for briefing as            natch control.
per plan attached {See
Appendix 'T' )                     Phase 3 (After natch)

                                   fti coriTnencement of Phase 3, this serial vill resume
                                   patrol in location as above, paying particular ,
                                   attention to shops and prevent any clash of
                                   supporters.
     Serial 24                      PUBLIC ORDER - KIII3LEWOOD ROAD

                                    Fhase 1 (Before BBtcfa)
     PS   1628 Dclsr. 'Al'
1)   PC   2508 Mitchell
                                    PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
2)   PC   1837 Brocfcshew
                                    Minto Road to Hillsborough Precinct to maintain order
3)   PC   905 Butler
                                    and prevent any clash of supporters, paying special
4)   PC   2205
                                    attention to shops and in particular licensed
5)   PC   1741 Sewsrrv
                                    premises.
6)   PC   3011 Clifror.
7)   PC   1760 Snoudoc
                                    Fhase 2 (During natch)
8)   PC   552 Hartsbcme
                                    Refreshments in gymnasium when authorised by
                                    natch control.
Seating for briefing as per
plan attached (See Appendix
tT tj                               Fhase 3 (After match)

                                    On ccrmencement of Fhase 3, this serial will resume
                                    patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                                    to shops and licensed premises and prevent any
                                    clash of supporters.




     Serial 25                      PUBLIC ORDER - HILLSBOROUGH PKBCINCT

                                    Fhase 1 (Before match)
     PS   2640   Perry *A1
1)   PC   2800   Sines
                                    PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlevrood Road from
2)   PC   2225   Purvis
                                    Hillsborough Precinct to BradfieId Road and from \
3)   PC   3216   Smitr              Bradfield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.\
4)   PC   2909   Wile
                                    Patrols will also be requjred in the Hillsborough ‘
5)   PC   1351   Enwrigct
                                    Precinct, paying special attention to the
6)   PC   2537   Gibscn
                                    supermarkets where looting could take place.
7)   PC   3077   Weeks
8)   PC   1091   Foster                                                               j'6s
                                    Fhase 2 (During match)                           \u
                                                                               5,1
                                                                               * -
                                                                                     I IV*
                                    Refreshments at gymnasium when authorised by
                                    match control.
Seating for brierirjr as per
plan attached (See Appendix 'T' )
                                    Phase 3 (After netch)

                                    On cormencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume
                                    patrol in location as above, paying particular
                                    attention to shops and to prevent any clash of
                                    supporters.                                    N,
                              SUB SECTOR 11
                                                         Inspector Selsoad       ’E'

     Serial 26                PUBLIC ORDER - PARKSIEE RQftD/CATCHBftR LANE

     PS   2620 CropLey 'Al    Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   1442 Charters
2)   PC   1431 Jackson        PC's vill patrol in pairs in Parkside Road and
3)   PC   1882 Rirrmer        Catchbar Lane to maintain order and prevent any clash
4)   PC   1734 Foster         of rival supporters, paying special attention to
5)   PC   1789 Fla titan      shops and licensed premises. It is essential that
€)   PC   184 Geeson          vigilance is maintained on this road as it is the
7)   PC   2872 Harrett        main route between either end of the ground.
E)   PC   2354 Plunridge
                              Riase 2 (During natch)

                              Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                              Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half time when
                              you vill be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.

                              R a s e 3 (After match)
Seating for briefing as per
plan attached (See Appendix   On carnencement of Phase 3, this serial vill resume
                              patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                              to prevent any clash of rival supporters, bearing in
                              mind that Hillsborough Park (Parkside Road end) will
                              be used as a car park.




     Serial 27                PUBLIC OKCER - PENTSTJC RCflD/LEPPIMS LANE

     PS   1684 Mozlev 'Al’    R a s e 1 (Before natch)
i;   ?C   2054 Wilkes
2}   PC   2752 Jowitt         This serial will be responsible for m anning the barriers
2}   PC   2584 Musk           to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to i
A)   PC   1432 Wright         prevent access by supporters. It is essential that
5)   PC   2526 Ayres          access be prevented to all but residents. At similar
€;   PC   2042 Drury          events in the past considerable damage has been claused
7}   PC   598 Stubbins        by groups of supporters, both before, during and after
£}   PC   2711 Pattison       the gams:-
                              1)   Penistone Road North/Vere Road
                              2)   Penistone Road North/Fielding Road
Seating for briefing as per
                              3)   Leppings Lane/Vere Road
     attached (See Aopendix   4)   Leppings Lane/Fielding Road               ^         :15.
•T’)
                              R a s e 2 (During natch)

                              Recain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                              wtio are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
                              these roads.

                              R a s e 3 (After match)

 KIALS: Luring catch          Rerain until all crowds have cleared and consent*, to
 staggered at Cleywbeels      r e r o v e the barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It
 Lane to ensure cover for     is essential that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings
 pcints in Phase 2.           Lane until all supporters have cleared the area.
           28                  PUBLIC CFOER - PPGSTCNE RCW3/LEPPINGS IAME
                               Rase 1    (Before matrix)
 -   PS   2400 Wilson ’AI*
                               This serial vd.ll be responsible for nenrirg the barriers
1)   PC   2127 Smart
                               to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
2)   PC   2846 Smith
                               prevent any supporters gaining access. It is essential
3)   PC   761 Richards
                               that access be prevented to all but residents. At
4)   PC   1620 Pattison
                               similar events in the past, considerable carnage has been
5)   PC   40 Tcmlinson
                               caused by groups of supporters before befcre, during
6)   PC   373 Harbon
                               and after the game:-
7)   PC   2399 Wren
8)   PC   2644 Roberts         1)   Penistone Road North/Bickerton Road
                               2)   Leppings Lane/Bickerton Road
                               3)   Leppings Lane/Leake Road
                               4)   Leppings Lane/Famdale Road

                               Fhase 2 (During match)

Seating for briefing as per    Remain at locations given to prevent supporters who
plan attached (See aroendix    are unable to enter the ground gaining access to these
•T’)                           roads.

                               Fhase 3 (After match)

MEALS: Staggered <±^ring       Refrain until all crowds have cleared and consent to
natch at Claywheels Lane       remove barriers is given by the Sector Inspector, felt
to ensure cover for points     is essential that no vehicles be allowed into Lep^ings
                                                                               •ePRin
in Phase 2.                    Lane until all supporters have cleared the area.
                                                                                    u >


Serial 29                      PUBLIC ORDER - LEPPINGS LANE

     PS   1561 Reynolds *A2'   Fhase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   3145 Punton
2)   PC   1169 Kerr            This serial will be responsible for nanning the barriers
3)   PC   114 Bradley          to be placed at the mouths of the following roads ta
4)   PC   2668 Fletcher        prevent access by supporters:-                      \
5)   PC   214 Coulson
6)   PC   2915 Severn          1) Leppings Lane/Shenstone Road
7)   PC   2840 Pearson         2 ) Leppings Lane/Eskdale Road
8)   PC   1280 Hedridge        2 PC's on each road.                                     &
                                                                                      \"
                                                                             J l.

                               The remaining PC's will petrol Leppings Lare in        .<!
Seating for briefing as        to maintain order and prevent persons arriving at the
per plan attached (See         ground in coaches unloading.
Appendix 'T' )
                               R a s e 2 (During natch)

                               Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                               who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
                               the roads and to maintain order.
                                                                                V
                               R a s e 3 (After natch)

MEALS: EXiring match           Remain until all crowds have cleared and ccnsent to
Staggered at Claywheels        remove barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is
Lane to ensure cover           essential that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings
for points in Pinase 2         Lane until all supporters have cleared the area.
                                SUB SECTOR 12
                                                             Inspector Millett 'A*
Serial 30                       PUBLIC CRIER - IEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT

     PS   2627 Ashton *A2'      Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   1417 McDonald
2)   PC   2967 Frost            This serial vill be located at the roundabout at the
3)   PC   900 Eevson            junction of Leppings Lane/Penistone Road Nortr./Herries
4)   PC   243 landers           Hoad. They vi.ll ensure that Liverpool supporters who
5)   PC   631 Kitson            travel down Halifax Road/Penis tone Road Nortr firm the
6)   PC   174 Welch             motorway do not gain access to Herries Road cr that
7)   PC   2804 McFarlane        part of Penistone Road leading to the Spion Joe. They
8)   PC   2905 Greatorex        will also ensure that Nottingham Forest supporters
                                whose vehicles vill be parked in Herries Roar and
                                Penistone Road do not gain access to Leppings Lane
                                or Penistone Road North.

                                Riase 2 (During natch)

                                Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane         to
                                Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half-tir     when
                                you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for me^l.

                                Riase 3 (After natch)

Seating fcr briefing as per     Location as in Fhase 1 to ensure that supporters ^leaving
plan attached (See Appendix     the ground do not ccme into contact.
'T «)

                                **************************




Serial 31                       PUBLIC ORDER - LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT

     PS   2 851 Pearson *A2 '   Riase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   235 Blackham
2)   PC   919 Evans             This serial will have similar responsibilities as
3)   PC   2735 *ade             outlined in the serial above in relation to segregation
4)   PC   190" Kent             of supporters before the natch but will also have \
5)   PC   139 Langley           responsibility for ensuring that the traffic island
6)   PC   1239 Raybould         remains clear of traffic to allow convoys of Liverpool
7)   PC   1934 Smith            supporters coaches to round it to gain access to their
8)   PC   2359 woodcock         designated unloading/parking places. Unless dLLre^ed
                                otherwise, -they will prevent such coaches gairJLr»d[ access
                                to Leppings Lane.                            *- I \
Seating fcr briefing as
per plan attached (See          Phase 2 (During natch)
Appendix *7' )
                                Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane m a r to
                                Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half-tins
                                when you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.

                                Riase 3 (After natch)

                                At the end of the match they will prevent all traffic
                                travelling into Leppings Lane and that part cf Penis tone
                                Road leading from the ground until directed to allow
                                traffic to flow again by control.
  Serxal 32                   PUBLIC ORDER PATO3L - PEXTST3C ROAD H3RS

     PS   1295 Potts 'A3'     R a s e 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   2895 Thcnes
2)   PC   2103 Frost          This serial vd.ll be responsible for part of Penistone
3)   PC   831 Wright          Road North from the traffic island at th~ junctionwith
4)   PC   2298 Cooper         Leppings Lane to the Travellers Rest Public House.
5)   PC   3110 Edwards        Ifiis road will be extensively used by Liverpool
6)   PC   201 Olney           supporters en route from Wads ley Bridge ftation and
7)   PC   1968 Tams           coach parking areas in Clayv-heels Lane aod Penistone
8)   PC   3087 Kennan         Road North/Halifax Road. They will rrairrain order
                              and ensure that supporters do not possess items prohibited
                              by the ground rules (Banners, etc., missiles, weapons
Seating for briefing as       or alcohol).
per plan attached {See
Appendix 'T')                 A) 2 PC’s will be located at the top of Niagara Road
                              to prevent access into this road by footrail supporters
                              or any other unauthorised persons who trtss to gain
                              access to the Niagara Sports Ground.

                              B) Remaining officers will be located at static points
                              at the kerb edge or, if necessary, on th= central
                              reservation (dependant on the volume of traffic) to
                              ensure public order.
                                                                               &
                              Fhase 2 (During match)

                              Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Isie near io
                              Catchbar Lane for standby duties until hrlf-time when
                              you will be taken to Claywheels lane for meal.

                              Fhase 3 (After match)

                              Officers will be situated in locations a; given for
                              Phase 1. :



                                                                                \
 Serial 33                    PUBLIC ORDER PATROL - FEJttSTONE ROAD ICR S

                              Fhase 1 (Before match)
     PS   2228   Atkin 'A2'                                                      i
1)   PC   2576   McEwan       This serial will be responsible for the izrt .of l \ iv
2)   PC   1858   Griffin      Penistone Road North from the Traveller; Rest Pbb1' &c
3)   PC   3282   Peacock      House to Wardsend Road North. This road will be
4)   PC   2922   Denton       extensively used by Liverpool supporters en route frcm
5)   PC   2689   Lacey        Wads ley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
6)   PC   2063   Stevenscn    Halifax Road. They will maintain order =cd ensure that
7)   PC   2091   Highton      supporters do not possess items prohibited by the ground
8)   PC   2749   Allen        rules (banners, etc., weapons, missiles cr alcohol).
                              Officers will be located on static points at the kerb
                              edge or on the central reservation (depercant on volune
Seating for briefinr as       of traffic) to ensure public order.              V'
per plan attached (See
                              Fhase 2 (During match)
Appendix 'T')
                              Officers will join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane
                              near to Catchbar Lane for standby duties tntil half time
                              when you will be taken to Claywheels L a m for meal.
                              fhase 3 (After match)

                              Officers will be situated in the locations as given for
                              Phase 1.
                                SUB SECTOR 13

                                                            Inspector Townend 'Al'

     Serial 34                  CCftCH RECEPTION ~ CLAYWHEELS LANE

     PS   224 S Shf=— att 'A3   Phase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   50£ Garrt
2)   PC   1212 H d o c          This serial will supervise the unloading of
3)   PC   271B Vferf            Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane. PC's
4)   PC   20=5 Dnrrison         will ensure that supporters leaving the
5)   PC   2375 Tur-^-’"         coaches ao not possess items prohibited by tie
6)   PC   2     Brazrt          ground rules (banners, etc, weapons, missiles
7)   PC   775 Krx-^zlsy         or alcohol). Once Claywheels Lane is full,
8)   PC   323-4 Cnrr            this Serial vill be re-located and assist
                                Serials 39 and 40 in Halifax Road.

                                Fhase 2 (During natch)


•
Seating for briefing as
                                Refreshments at Claywheels lane, Traffic Dept.
                                At half time will be picked up by South
                                Yorkshire Police coach and taken to Leppings
per plan at tarried (See        lane near to Catchbar lane for standby duties.
Appendix *T')                                                            x
                                Fhase 3 (After match)                    \\

                                Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




                                                                             V
                                                                          I'5s
                                                                         i Ir
                                                                         I
     Serial 35                     COACH RECEPTION - CLAYVEEELS IAJE

                                   Phase 1 (Before match)
     PS   2936 Lindop 'A3
1)   PC   2527 Dewey               11115 serial will supervise the unloading of
2)   PC   106 Goss                 Liverpool ccaches in Claywheels          PC's
3)   PC   1130 B i m s             will ensure that supporters leancg the
4)   PC   130 Parkin               ooaches do not possess items prrr.-.cited by tie
5)   PC   1320 Wilson              ground rules (banners, weapons, nssiles or
6)   PC   1923 Staniforth          alcohol). ttice Claywheels Lane is full, this
7)   PC   2848 Robinson            Serial will be re-located and assist Serials
8)   PC   796 Muir                 39 and 40 in Halifax Road.

                                   Fhase 2 (Daring match)

                                   Refreshments at Claywheels Iar>=. At half tine
                                   will be picked up by the South Ycricshire
                                   Police coach and taken to Lepcir.gs lane near
Seating for briefing as per plan   to Catchbar lane for standby cni=s.
attached (See Appendix 'T')
                                   Fhase 3 (After match)

                                   At the caimsncement of Phase 3, tris Seri
                                   will take up a position at Leppinrs lane »
                                   roundabout and assist Serials 3C srd 31 in
                                   naintaining segregation of suppcnsrs at that
                                   location. Once the bulk of s-specrzzrs have
                                   passed this Serial will join Serial 34 in
                                   Claywheels Lane to assist with coach loading
                                   duties.


                                   ***********                                  ^
                                   NOTE:                                        '

                                   Claywheels Lane will be subject tr “No
                                   lurking" ccnes for its full ler>gm to allcw^
                                   Liverpool's coaches to park - THrs-ri MJST iBE|
                                   ENFORCED. Barriers will also be ~ ~ 1 able to
                                   prevent access frcm Penistone Rost.

                                   Access must be allowed for persons working at
                                   the various premises including th= brewery and
                                   bakery which vill be open on this 5sv.
                                    SUB SECTOR 14
                                                         Inspector Ellis 'C


Serial 36                           PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN REEEPTION/WADSLEY STATION

     PS   1829 Frarcs ’C ’          Phase -1 (Before match)
1)   PC   2403 Morror.
2)   PC   13 Rose                   This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted
3)   PC   72 Lipsky                 Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving
4)   PC   3185 Trcerr-              the trains at Wads ley Station. They will rrarshall
5)   PC   3044 Unmp-1               the supporters and only allow them to leave when all
6)   PC   1429 Ba<='“ '— th         have left the station premises. Where necessary,
7)   PC   2910 Caajuck              searches will be carried out to ensure that items
8)   PC   1266                      prohibited by the ground rules i.e. banners, missiles,
                                    weapons or alcohol, are not in their possession.

                                    Fhase 2 (During match)

                                    Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
                                    At half-time will be picked up by the Police coach
Seating for briefing                and taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar Lane
as     plan at tiered               for .standby duties.
(See Appendix T }
                                    Fhase 3 (After match)

                                    Resume location at Wadsley Station to ensure orcler
                                    is maintained and queues form in a proper manne^'




Serial 37                           PUBLIC ORDER - WADSLEY STATION/TRAIN RECEPTION

     PS   2407 Venailss       'C'   Fhase 1 (Before natch)    .                      V
1)   PC   451 Cooper
2)   PC   2969 Dunn                 This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted
3)   PC   1679 Qxley                Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving
4)   PC   3291 Scho£i=Qd            the trains at Wads ley Station. They will marshall
5)   PC   2547 Ramsder              the supporters and only allow them to leave when (*•
6)   PC   2929 Bennert              all have left the station premises. Where necessary,
7)   PC   260 Shiprnar.             searches will be carried out to ensure that'' supporters
8)   PC   211 Brickie-              are not in possession of items prohibited by the
                                    ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol.

                                    This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
                                    Hiif- roiTwin cfafir      1rv^ +■irvn
Seating for h n V - — ig as
per plan attached ;See              Fhase 2 (During match)
Appendix 'T')
                                    Refreshments at Clayv^eels Lane.               V
                                    At half time will be picked up by the Police coach
                                    and taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar Lane
                                    for standby duties.

                                    Fhase 3 (After match)

                                    Resume location at Wads ley Station to ensure order is
                                    maintained and queues axe formed in a proper manner.
 Serial 38                       MINI BUS RECEPTION -r WWRDSEND RQWD

     PS   182 Tiss inerton 'C'   Ftese 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   3136 Shf>rtT,r-n
2)   PC   3212 Nesbit            This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
3}   PC   1779 Will isnson       mini buses in Wardsend Road North. PC's vill ensure
4)   PC   1981 Butler            that supporters leaving the coaches uz oot possess
5)   PC   2790 Yarro-.-          items prohibited by the ground rules (tanners, etc.,
*)   PC   1917 Cooke             weapons, missiles or alcohol).
~)   PC   1477 Hill
S)   PC   1723 Bishcc            Ftese 2 (During natch)

                                 Refreshments at Claywheels lane.
                                 At half-time will be picked up by the JSY Police
                                 coach and taken to Leppings Lane near tz Catchber
                                 Lane for standby duties.

                                 Phase 3 (After match)

S^^ing for briefing as           Take up a position vith Serial 20 infract of the
per plan attached {See           North Stand on the perineter track tc prevent a .
topeniix 'T')                    pitch invasion/ensure the safety of ee .t ± officials
                                 and players.


                                 NOTEt-

                                 This road will be subject to 'No Parfanr* cooes
                                 and only mini buses, etc. will be allowed to
                                 park. Barriers will also be available rcr
                                 erection at the entrance to this road ts control
                                 entry.
                           SUB SECTOR 15

                                                      Inspector Brennan 'C'

      Serial 39            COACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX RCftD

      PS   2332 Dovie '    Fhase 1 (Before natch)
 1)   PC   2662 Shlsl
 2)   PC   2560 Ball       This serial will supervise the irloading of
 3)   PC   1927 Taylor     Liverpool coaches in Halifax Raai'Penistone
 4)   PC   2775 Wyer       Road North. PC's vill ensure th=t supporters
 5)   PC   126 Bell        leaving the coaches do not possess items
 6)   PC   578 Rowley      prohibited by the ground rules is banners,
 7)   PC   14 Quaiytm      missiles, weapons cr alcohol.
 8)   PC   535 Wain
                           R a s e 2 (During match)

                           Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
 Seating for briefing as
j g r plan attached (See   Phase 3 (After match)
^^pendix 'T')
                           Supervise loading cf supporters cnto coaches.,


                           * * * * * * * * * * * *




     Serial 40             COACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX RCftD

                           Phase 1 and 2 (Before match and airing natch)
      PS   965 Cloke 'C'
1)    PC   2056 Lister"    Duties will be identical to and vorked in
2)    PC   3311 Baker      conjunction with Serial 39 above.
3)    PC   1961 Lawrence
4)    PC   1149 Nash       Phase 3 (After match)
5)    PC   282 Davis
6)    PC   3150 Marsh      At the ccrtmencement cf Phase 3, this Serial\
7)    PC   2338 Was sell   will take 15) a position at Leppings Lane    \
8)    PC   903 Pearson     roundabout and assist Serials 30 2nd 31 in '
                           maintaining segregation of supporters at that
                           location. Once the bulk of supporters have
                           passed this Serial vill join Serial 39
                           assist with coach loading duties.            v

Seating for briering as
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T' )
                              SUB SECTOR 16
                                                   Inspector Brocxiead 'C*

 Serial 41                    PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX RCftD

    PS    642 Hudson 'C'      Fhase 1 (Before match)
 1) PZ    2153 Ek3»’jn>iri
 2} PZ    2763 Ley            This serial will patrol Halifax Road fron Wads Isj
3) PZ     €35 Gatbercole      Station to Southey Green Road. Officers will vzz
4} PZ     3176 Gilrxxir       in pairs to maintain order, etc.
5) PZ     443 Still ings
6 } PZ    1779 Watson         Riase 2 (During match)
7) PZ     SS4 Stonatch
8 ) PZ    3128 Devlin         Join SY Police coach in Penistone load North
                              near to SWFC Gate 'O' for standby duties until
                              half-time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane
                              for maal.

Seating for briefing as       Fhase 3 (After natch)
per z— sr. attached (See
Appendix *T' )                Patrol location outlined above.



Serial 42                     PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX RCftD
                                                                             1
     PS   2171 Keensn 'C'     Fhase 1 (Before natch)
1)   ?Z   2456 Canadine
2)   PC   134 £ Breeze        This serial will patrol Halifax Road fran Soufe
3)   PZ   1925 Suter          Green Road to Browning Road. Officers will w r y
4)   PC   104 Bovill          in pairs to maintain order, etc.
5)   PZ   2458 Mountf ord
6)   PZ   175 Sykes           Fhase 2 (IXrring match)
7)   PZ   3149 Wilkir^on
8)   PZ   3123 Osbourne       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clay-heels lane.

                              Phase 3 (After natch)

Seatinr for briefing          Patrol location outlined above.                    ^
as per p lan attached (See
Appendix 'T!

Serial -43                    PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX RQftD

     PS   L253 Grahan: 'C'    This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Brpwrlp
1)   PC   2=4 j Hou&e         Road to Deerlands Avenue. Officers will work *in
2)   PC   2£2c Harris         pairs to maintain order, etc.
3)   PC   1111 Hirst
4)   PC   2zl5 Smith          Fhase 2 (During natch)
5)   PC   314 McCoy
6)   PC   725 Whit tincbarn   Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
7)   PC   1170 Drarssfield
8)   PC   c-1 Collar          Fhase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing as       Patrol location outlined above.
per plzr attached (See
Appendix: *T' )

                              N3TE: These officers will ensure that Liverpool
                              supporters travelling in private cars are directed
                              to park in side roads on adjoining estates.
                                  SUB SECTOR 17
                                                      Inspector Wardle *E'


 Serial 44                        PUBLIC ORDER - OQftCH KECEPTION/SEAiCH SJJRD

      PS   1515 Hugb&s 'F2'       Wiase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   1042 Braddock 'Ai'
 2)   PC   710 Adams     'Al'     This serial will work in conjunction with Road
 3)   PC   2371 Bairstow Al       Traffic Officers on the A616 at CXjghtitridge on
 4)   PC   2216 Hillie.r Al       the one-way system to check at ranocr. coaches and
 5)   PC   2932 Brad', ey Al      mini buses carrying Liverpool supporters.
 6)   PC   3323 Ducker Al
 7)   PC   1484 Collins Al        Vehicles stopped will be checked to ens-jre
 8)   PC   1845 Zumnerf ield Al   passengers are in possession of tickets, are not
 9)   PC   1729 Sudcacrth Al      under the influence of alcohol or in possession
10)   PC   2778 Price Al          of alcohol and are considered fit to attend this
                                  event.

                                  Where this is not the case, or where they are
                                  in possession of alcohol or under it's influence
                                  consideration should be taken regarding action
                                  under the appropriate legislation or returning
                                  then to the motorway.
Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (SEE            All coaches/mini buses checked vill have a       .
Appendix 'T' )                    label,issued to sector ccrrcranders, affixed to t
                                  the windscreen prior to them being allowed to \ ‘
                                  leave.

                                  Riase 2 (During natch)

                                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels lane.

                                  Riase 3 (After match)

                                  At the end of the match this serial will join
                                  Serials 19, 30 and 31 at Leppings Lane traffic
                                  island to assist with the segregation of           \
                                  supporters.                                         -
                                  SUB SECTOR 18
                                                          Inspector Marian '£'


 Serial 45                        PUBLIC ORDER - CGftCH RErEPTICN/SEARCH SJUAD - Tankersley

      PS   960             'F2'   Fhase 1 (Before Batch)
  1) PC    2431 Jo n e s A2
  2 ) PC   2500                   This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
  3) PC    1216 G-rr^er A2        Officers on the A61 can the Sheffield side of the
  4) PC    2520 K~r~'rinrr        Tankers ley motorway junction (Exit 36) to check at
  5) PC    3203 Crsppezr A2       random coaches and mini buses carrying Liverpool
  6) PC    1629 fogan A2          supporters.
  7) PC    811 Heines A2
  8 ) PC   2350 Pedkover A2       Vehicles stopped vill be checked to ensure passengers
 9) PC     297 Barnes A2          are in possession of tickets, not under the influence
1 0 ) PC   571 H~r= A2            of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and are
                                  considered fit to attend this event.

                                  Where this is not the case, or where they are in
                                  possession of alcohol or under it's influence,
                                  consideration should be taken regarding action
                                  under the appropriate legislation or returning
                                  them to the motorway.
Seating foe         Lefir*g as
per plan att             (See     All coaches/mini buses checked will have a label
Appendix *T'                      (issued to sector comranders) affixed to the    \
                                  windscreen prior to them being allowed to leave

                                  R a s e 2 (During natch)                            \

                                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
                                  and then return to Tankers ley for standby duties
                                  with a view to deployment as a mobile unit.

                                  Fhase 3 (After natch)

                                  Remain in Tankersley as a mobile unit.

                                                                                      \
                                   SUB SECTOR 19
                                                       Inspector Walker       'Ops'

 Serial 46                         M3BILE PATK3L - CALL SIQ( "TANGO ONE"

      PS   1347 Hunt 'F2'          Fhase 1 (Before match)
1)    PC   1363 Smyfc
2)    PC   3089 Vferrilow          This serial will patrol the Stocksbridgs area
3)    PC   3168 Tcig=              paying particular attention to licensed premises
4)    PC   2041 Hone               and to maintain order.
5)    PC   782 HenswDrth
                                   Phase 2 (During Batch)

                                   Refreshments at Claywheels Lane 3.15pn>-3.45pm.
                                   Resune patrol 3.45pm.

                                   Phase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing as per        Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
plan attached (See Appendix
*T’)


Serial 47                          K B I L E PATROL - CALL SIQ* "TANQO TWO*

      PS   681 Hill *F21           Phase 1 (Before catch)
1)    PC   583 Davis
2)    PC   2378 Webster            This serial will patrol the Deepcar/Oughtibridc
3)    PC   844 Rees                area, paying particular attention to licensed
4)    PC   300 Hays                premises and to maintain order.
5)    PC   2628 Ch u m s
                                   Phase 2 (During catch)

                                   Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                   Meal 4pm-4.30pm, Patrol prior to 4pm.

                                   Phase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing as per        Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
plan attached (See Appendix                                                               \
*T*)

S e r i a l 48                     M 3 3 H E PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO THREE"
                                                                                       i'fc
      PS   1948 Miller ,F2'        Phase 1 (Before match)                             ill
                                                                                      \
:)    PC   1301 Cherry
2)    PC   320 Bradsnav            This serial will patrol the Wadsley/Kiddlswood
2)    PC   3278 Stage              area, paying particular attention to licensed
■S)   PC   3144 Robinscn-Povrell   premises to irBintain order.
5)    PC   893 Hague
                                   Phase 2 (During match)

                                   Refreshments at Claywheels Lane at 3.15pn.
                                   Resune patrol at 3.45pm in above area.

Seating for briefing as per        Haase 3 (After match)
d a n attached (See Appendix
T ’).                              Patrol in area as outlined above.
                                     SUB SECTOR 20
                                                             Inspector   fcbinscc *HQ Ccnps

Serial 49                            MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN *TAN30 KXJR*

      PS   2207 Shaw *F2'            Phase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   837 Carol
 2)   PC   2976 Willisras            Patrol Foxhill area, pacing special attention to
 3)   PC   333 Ogilvie               licensed premises.
 4)   PC   1822 Hutchinson Dr Sch
 5)   PC   407 Johnson Ops           Fhase 2 (During match)

                                     Meal at 3.15pm at Clay^reels lane, Traffic Dept.
                                     Resume patrol at 3.45pr Foxhill/Parson Cross area.
Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (See               Fhase 3 (After natch)
appendix 'T')
                                     Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




           50                        fCBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO FIVE*

      PS   1075 Hallbrook   Dr Sch   Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)    PC   1614 Lund        Pros
2)    PC   3052 Wilkes      Pros     Patrol Parson Cross area, paying special attention
3)    PC   1140 Bucklev     Pros     to licensed premises to maintain order.          :\
4)    PC   315 Roberts      Dr Sch
5)    PC   1106 Tatlev      Dr Sch   Phase 2 (During natch)

                                     3.00pm patrol Parson Cross/Foxhill area.
                                     4.00pm meal Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dert.
Seating for briefing as              Resume patrol 4.30pm.
per plan attached (See
appendix 'T')                        Phase 3 (After natch)

                                     Resume patrol as outlined in Phase 1.

                                                                                           \
Serial 51                            M3BILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO SIX*

   PS 760 Cressey Corps              Fhase 1 (Before natch)                                I'S
1) PC 2327 Hinchcliffe T m g                                                       t   l\*
2 ) PC *3387 Wilson    Ops           Patrol Grenoside area, paying special attention to
3) PC 2521 Clarke      Cps           licensed premises and to maintain order.
4) PC 599 Makin Dr Sch
5) PC 2609 Morgan Dr Sch             Fhase 2 (During natch)

                                     3.15pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dert.
Seating for briefing as              3.45pm resume patrol Grenoside.
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T' )                       Fhase 3 (After natch)

                                     Resume patrol as outlined in Phase 1.
                                                                 Apnmdix *D"
                              SUB SECTOR 21
                                                     Inspector Charles *C'


 Serial 52                    CGACH RBCEPTICN - HERRIES ROAD BUS G^GE/HEHRIES ICftD

     PS 959 ]Modok- —.^nn     R a s e 1 (Before tBtch)
 1) VC 278 :
                              This serial will supervise the unloai^r.c cf Nottiniiam
 25 PC 1974 Jones
 3 ) PC 2196 Smitb            Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Gerage. PC's will
 4 } PC 1344 Hanson           ensure thdt supporters leaving the ccaches do not
 C \ PC 2652                  possess items prohibited by the grounr rules i.e.
              Saps:5crd
 e] PC 2946 Daley             baniiers, weapons, missiles or alcohol.
 ~) PC 1508 Hirirt.
 E; PC 3138 Gearina           Any over-flow will be directed to part on tbe Socth
                              side of Herries Road South and Rawsor. Spring Road.

                              Fhase 2 (During match)
 S=atir>c for briefing as
 per pier, attached (See      Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept. At
                              half-time will be picked up by SY Police coach anf
 Appendix 'T '}
                              taken to Penistone Road North near to Gate 'O' S*7C
                              for standby duties.

                             Fhase 3 (After match)

                             Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




Serial 53                    COACH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD BUS GAStS/lSRRIES ROAD

     PS                      Phase 1 (Before match)
          1C73 Bounds   ’C
1)   PC   953 Muggles-rone
2}   PC   947 Uttley         This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
                             Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Garage. PC's will
3'   PC   3S9 Lawrence       ensure that supporters leaving the coaxes cc not
4}   PC   243 Lythali        possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.ei
5;   PC   1E5:1 Spurr        Banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol. Any overflow
6)   PC   2 0 : Hoyland      will be directed to park on the south side cf Herries
7)   PC   270 Irrmes         Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
8)   PC   520 Hogg
                             Phase 2 (During match)                            ,,g.

Seating for briefing as      Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept. ! ' *
per ~lan attached            At half-time will be picked up by SY Police coach and
(See* Appec*ix 'T' }         taken to Penistone Road North near to fete 'C' SWTC
                              for standby duties.

                             Phase 3 (After match)

                             Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



                             NOTE;- Herxies Road and Wardsend Road vill be
                             subject to *Hd Parking" restrictions which will be
                             strictly enforced in relation to private cars.

                             SYT buses will park on Herries Road on the ocposite
                             side to their garage.
                            SUB SECTOR 22
                                                   Inspector   Newey 'C*

     Serial 54              EUS/OQftQi RECEPTION - HERRIES R3AD SOOTH

                            Phase 1 (Before natch)
     PS   2934   Doyle
1)   PC   2177   Kelly
                            This serial will ensure that Herries Road South
2)   PC   3097   Allen
                            remains clear of all parked cars to allow the
3)   PC   1573   Moran
                 Riley      unloading of SYT buses carrying Nottingham supporters.
4)   PC   3243
                 Mangles    Coaches will unload on the North side of this road,
5)   PC   1216
                            having travelled along Penistone Road fran the
6)   PC   2043   Glenieki
     PC   3146   Norton     Midland Station.
7)
8)   PC   1104   Taylor
                            They will supervise unloading and ensure that
                            supporters are not in possession of items prohibited
Seating for briefing        by the ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles
as per plan attached        or alcohol.
(see Appendix 'T')
                            They will also supervise the unloading of any
                            Nottingham coaches who may be directed to unload and
                            park on the hard shoulder in this road (south side)
                            as an overflow from other parking locations.
                            Fhase 2 (During natch)
                            Refreshments    at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                            At half-time    will be picked up by SY Police coach
                            and taken to    Penistone Road North near to SWFCV'
                            Gate ’O ’ for   standby duties.
                            Fhase 3 (After natch)
                            Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches/buses




     Serial 55              OQftCH RECEPTION - HERRIES RCftD SCUIH
                            Fhase 1 (Before natch)

1)
2)
     PS
     PC
     PC
          2467 Carter 'C'
          1511 Barren
          3332 Tyler
                            This serial will be located at the junction of
                            Herries Road and Herries Road South to ensure tha
                            Nottingham coaches arriving at this location are
                                                                              A
3)   PC   3051 Westwood     directed to the car parking areas at SYT bus garage
4)   PC   503 Gough         in Herries Road. Any overflow will be directed to
5)   PC   1198 Washington   parking on the South side of Herries Road South and
6)   PC   2738 Moran        Rawson Spring Road.                        r j*
7)   PC   337 Baldwin
          732 Yates         Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to the
8)   PC
                            parking area in Rawson Spring Road.
                            They will ensure that passengers do not unload until
                            they are in the appropriate parking area.
Seating for briefing
                            Phase 2 (During natch)
as per plan attached
;See Appendix 1T ')         Refreshments    at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                            At half-time    will be picked up by SY Police coach
                            and taken to    Penistone Road North near.to SWFC
                            Gate 'O' for    standby duties.
                            Fhase 3 (After natch)
                            Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.


                            NOTE:- Herries Road South will be subject to "NO
                            PARKING" cones to allow Nottingham coaches to park.
                            THE RESTRICTIONS WILL BE ENFORCED- Crwr*~c .~ ti w
     Serial 56                MINI BUS RECEPTION - RAWSCN SPRING R O D

     PS    2140 Tayler ' -'   Fhase 1 (Before ca tch)
1)   PC   660 Dexter
2)   PC   84 Hunt             This serial will supervise the unloading of
3)   PC   2155 Edwards        Nottingham Forest mini buses in Rawscr Spring
4}   PC   340 Kaldrtr.        Road.
5)   PC   877 Hubbard
6)   PC   1775 Humphries      PC's will ensure that supporters leaving
7}   PC   951 Kinter          the buses do not possess items prohibited by
8)   PC   2523 Burrows        the ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles
                              or alcohol.

                              Phase 2 (During natch)

Seating fcr briefing as       Refreshments   at Claywheels lane, TrafiLc Dept.
per plan artachsd             At half-time   will be picked by SY Police coach
(See Appendix '7')            and taken to   Penistone Road North near to SWFC
                              Gate 'O' for   standby duties.

                              Phase 3 (After natch)

                              Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.
                                                                                 I




                              NCTTE:-   This road will be subject tc
                              ‘No Parking' cones and only mini buses, vans,
                              etc., will be allowed to park. Barriers will
                              also be available for erection at the entrance
                              to this road to control entry.
                                  SUB SECTOR 23
                                                       Inspector Batman *C'


 Serial 57                        PUBLIC OREER - HERRIES ROAD

     PS   1771 Johnstone 'C       Riase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   1143 Rockett
2)   PC   271 England             This serial vail be responsible far petrolling
3)   PC   1513 Reeves             Herries Road (PC's in pairs) fnorr ire railway
4)   PC   3015 Parks inon         viaduct to the Five Arches Public iiruse, to
5)   PC   2694 Pellegrine         maintain order and ensure that any parking
6)   PC   2040 FaiLasrforth       restrictions are enforced. Direct Scttingham
7)   PC   1805 Latfcarr.          Forest supporters in private vehicles to
8)   PC   1539 West               park in locations in side roads.

                                  Riase 2 (During natch)

                                  Join SY Police coach in Penistone Jcad North
                                  near to SV7FC Gate 'O' for standby drries until
                                  half-time when will be taken to Cl^jveieels Lane
                                  for meal.

                                  Riase 3 (After natch)
     Seating for briefing
     as per attached plan         Patrol in the area outlined above rr rraintain
     (See Appendix 'T' )          order.                                        J




 Serial 58                        PUBLIC OREER - HERRIES RCftD

     PS   2928 Williamson Pros.   Riase 1 (Before natch)
1)   PC   1966 Mitton Trg
2)   PC   1839 Powell Trg         This serial will be responsible for patrolling
3)   PC   1709 Spooner Trg        Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from rre Five Arches
4)   PC   3237 His lop Ops        Public House to the traffic island    the junction
5)   PC   794 Palmer C            with Moonshine Lane/Shirecliffe Roar to rraintajji
6)   PC   2323 Mitton C           order and ensure that any parking restrictions '
7)   PC   507 Gilberthorpe C      are enforced.
8)   PC   1947 Longford C .
9)   PC   1914 Royale             Direct Nottingham Forest supporters in private .
                                  cars to park in locations in side rrads.    t ^|
                                                                               \\i
                                  Riase 2 (During match)

                                  Join SY Police coach in Penistone lead North
                                  near to SWFC Gate 'O' for standby fx.rti.es until
                                  half-time when will be taken to Cl^j^heels Lane for
  Seating for briefing            meal.
as per plan attached
  (See Appendix *T' )             Riase 3 (After natch)

                                  Patrol in the area outlined above rr rsintain
                                  order.
                                  SUB SECTOR 24
                                                             Inspector   Burgess   'C*


 Serial 59                        PUBLIC OREER - PENIST3C HOAD

                                  trase 1 (Before natch)
      PS   2037 Versailles
 1)   PC   2343 Gardiner     A3   PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
 2)   PC   8 McCtxne.11      A3   Parks ide Road to Borough Road to traintain order
 3)   PC   3325 Grecson      A3   and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct
 4)   PC   675 Lev           A3   supporters to side street parking and neintain
 5)   PC   1952 Vfeir.       A3   security of business premises. Special attention
 6)   PC   2917 Batecsn      A3   to be given to the enforcement of parking
 7)   PC   2783 Va llrnce    A3   restrictions on Eenistooe Road.
 8)   PC   2169 Lowr-i-      A3
                                  R a s e 2 (During catch)

                                  Join SY Police coach in Penistone Road North
                                  near to SWFC Gate 'O' for standby duties
                                  until half-time when vill be taken to Claywheels
                                  lane for meal.

 Seating for brii^ing             R a s e 3 (After natch)
 as per plan attached
 (See Appendix ’7 ’)              On corrmencement of Piase 3, this serial will resume
                                  patrol in location as above and prevent any cla^h
                                  of supporters.                                 \ •




 Serial 60                        PUBLIC ORDER - PENISTONE RCftD

                                  Phase 1 (Before natch)
     PS 2019 Thcrpson *E'
1)   PC 76 Durbarr. A3            PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road frcm\
2)   PC 2828 Lightac A3           Borough .Road to Burton Street to maintain order '
3)   PC 2292 I^nefieljd A3        and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct
4)   PC 1891 Staniforth A3        supporters to side street parking. Maintain
5)    PC 2593 Russcr. A3          security of business premises.                    ^
6)    PC 682 Love El                                                             i\ v
7)    PC 1278 Lang El             Phase 2 (During natch)                      n. f \
8)    PC 2012 Eustace El
                                  Join SY Police coach in Penistone Road North
                                  near to SWFC Gate 'O’ for standby duties until
                                  half time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane
                                  for meal.

                                  R a s e 3 (After natch)

 Seating for briefing             On ccmrencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume
 as per plan attached             patrol in location as above and prevent any clash
 (See Appendix ’7*                of supporters.
                                      SUB SECTOR 25
                                                           Inspector Wallace *E’


       Serial 61                      fCBILE PATROL - CALL SIQi "TANGO SEV>y

       PS   870 Chapman Trg           Fhase 1 (Before match)
1)     PC   904 Ga mer Qps - Driver
2)     PC   3262 Halleit Ops          Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention
3)     PC   2923 Dalryrple    A1      to licensed premises.
•4)    PC   2497 Serhatlic   A1
5)     PC   2942 Williarson   A1      Fhase 2 (During natch)

                                      3.15pm meal - Claywheels lane
                                      3.45pm resume patrol Firvale/Southey I       area.

                                      Fhase 3 (After natch)

Seating for briefing as               Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
per plan attached (See Appendix
•T' )


       Serial 62                      MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO E K 2 T

       PS   894 Brown Trg             Phase 1 (Before natch)
1)     PC   93 Turner Cps- Driver                                                     t
2)     PC   1236 Smith Cps            Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention
3)     PC   2389 Martin A2            to licensed premises.
-? )   PC   80 Marvin A2
~)     PC   1414 Gordon A2            Fhase 2 (During natch)
£)     PC   2649 Bashforth A2
                                      3.00pm Patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
                                      4.00pm—4.30cm Meal - Claywheels Lane.

Seating for briefing                  Fhase 3 (After natch)
as per plan attached
 See Appendix 'T' )                   Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1,

                                                                                          V
   Serial 63                          MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANC3D N D E *

    PS 932 Beattie Cps                                                                    'ft
                                      Fhase 1 (Before match)                               %■
1 ) PC 740 Rowbotbarr  Dr Sch
-' PC 3173 Kirk Pros                  Patrol Hillsborough/Langsett Road paytrc special
- } PC 390 Leach Pros                 attention to licensed premises.
-? PC 1940 Pattisoc Ops
- PC 1691 Wcmack B 3                  Fhase 2 (During match)

                                      3.15pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
Seating for briefing                  3.45pm resume patrol Hillsborough
£5 per plan attached
>See Appendix 'T1)                    Fhase 3 (After match)                           *•*.

                                      Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
S ^ i a l 64                 K B I L E PATROL - CALL SIGN "TAMX> T O T

     PS   2737 Hallett Ops   Ffoase 1 (Before match)
1)   PC   56 Firth    Trg
2)   PC   718 Pont Cos       Patrol CVlerton/Neepsend area, paying special
3)   PC   808 Rosevear Ops   attention to licensed premises.
4)   PC   162 Gillett
5)   PC   3197 Dearoen Trg   Fhase 2 (During natch)

                             3.00pm patrol Ctolerton/T'feepsend areas.
                             4.00pm-4.30pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic dept
Seating for briefing
as per plan attached         Phase 3 (After natch)
(See Appendix '7’ )
                             Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
                                                                                                Aocendix




                                    F A CUP SEMI FINAL

                                    SPECIMEN TICKET




  p ! f T ® 7 i f l f g f ; THE FOOTBALL? ASSOCIATION
     - H m ‘.n         ^ CHALLENGECUP SEMI-FINAfci
 •sTf'j ^!_^v;f       T         ^         -    I-.UVERPOOL f:f.4-Ti. ?                          |?I;
                                                                       :   i' : J^-.- -t T   i. t-,

                                                                             i        V-?
                                              NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                                                  HEJLSEOROUGH STA D fiJM :




             TOBEOVEN Up .                     THIS PORTION TO 8ERETAMEO




CDIXXJR CEDING - LIVERPOOL

BROWN    -        NCETH STAND

FED      -        WEST STAND

PURPLE   -        LEFPINGS LAIC TERRACES
                  (also overprinted ‘LIVERPOOL AREA*)

CPLCUR CODING - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

CHANGE -          SPTDN KGP
                  (also overprinted "NOTTINGHAM AREA")

BLUE     -        SCCTH STAND

GREEN    -        SOCTH STAND (UNCOVERED)
                                                                AFPSS JK *F*



                               CID DOTIES


INSIDE TOE GROUND              Detective Inspector Tcwell - I/C

Gyranasiun                     DS 727 Lindley
                               DC 2968 Ball
                               TDC 570 Stoker
                               DC 2569 Blake

Pickpocket Squads              DS   517 Suith
                               DC   2540 Lindsay
                               DC   458 Hallam
                               DC   491 Lilley

                               DS   457 M=£lcy
                               DC   1108 Lacking
                               DC   1209 Askew
                               DC   2812 Lawrence

c p i s h e :tbe c t o u k d   Detective Inspector Scaife - I/C

Mobile Response Car            DS 805 Buxton
                               DC 1788 Hirst

Motor cyclists                 PC 420 Davies         ) Motorcycles trbe collectef
                               PC 525 Bevington      )f^cm 'FI' Garaze
Foot Itetxols                  DC 1600 Jaoes        Herries Road/Halifax Road
                               DC 735 Tuke

                               PC 2302Powell        Middlewood Road
                               DC 146 O ’Brien

                               DC   2405    Dynes Penistone Road tcinclude
                               DC   3119    Baaguley    CV/lerton Stadiincarpark

                               DC 366 Stevenson Neepsend
                               PC 1826 Walton

                               TDC 1181 Ecajling Hillsborough Car Park
                               PC 1651 Moulding
            CID GENERAL SOB DIVISIONAL DOTIES




                     •FI' SOB DIVISION

DS 829 CXightor. - I/C                      8.00    am - s.o: pm

DS 1094 Ellis                               8.00    am - £. 0 . p*n
DC 2202 Walker                              8.00    am - P.01 pm
PC 2619 Mattrsm                             8.00    am - 8.01 pm


DS   1745   Sturgess                        Noon    to mid^izct
DC   2088   Brcwn                           Noon    to midzizrt
DC   3206   Lewin                           Noon    to midnicr.t
PC   1980   Nottingham                      Noon    to Tm n.. . —

DC 358 Hydes                                6.00    pm - 6.01 am



                     *F2* SOB DIVISION

DS 846 Williamson - I/C                     8.00    am - 8.01 pm

DC 649 Fox                                  8. 00   am - 8.01 pm

DC 2270 Perkins                             10.00 am - 1C .10 pm
PC 3231 Harvrood                            1 0 . 0 0 am - 1 C.10 pm

DS 1578 Holdemess                           Noon to midni±r:
DC 1161 Stanifarth                          Noon to midnicrr

DC 1152 McManus                             6.00    pm - 6.01 am
                                                          APPENDIX *G*



                           DOG SECTION


Msfrbejrs of the Dog Section will be deployed as follows:-


DOG V M                        AREA



  2                            Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

  1                            Lappings Lane Traffic Island

  1                            Herries Road Coach Park

  1                            Leppings Lane Turnstiles

  1                            Penistone Road/Parkside Road

  1                            Penistone Road/Bradfield Road

  1                            Hillfoot Bridge

  1                            Penistone Road to City Centre

  1                            Middlevrood Road/Hillsborough Comer

  1                            Middlewood Road/Wads ley Lane

  1                            Middlevrood Road/Deepcar

  1                            Stocksbridge/Oughtibridge

  1                            Tankersley



In addition to the above, two handlers together with 'explosives' cogs

will parade at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 8 am on Saturday

15th Acxil 1989 to search the interior of the ground.
                                                APPENDIX 'H'




                  M3UNTED SECTICN




Members of the Mounted Section will be deployed as follows:-



BOSES                    AREA



   6                     Leppings Lan=

  ID                     Penistone Road Northturnstiles

   6                     Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

   4                     Halifax Road*

   4                     Herries Road*



 3D




 * At Phase 3, two merrbers of the Mounted Section will
 be deployed in Hillsborough Park. Tie remaining two
 will take up a position at Leppings lane traffic island.
                                                                 APPENDIX ’I*

                        ACMPtLSTRATIGK, OCWTOOL AND CUSTODY STAFF

JtfXDaSTRATICM

Inspector Bennett
PE 467 Sewell
PC 3018 Shelton
PC 3082 Fletrrier

ppgpggTY LIVERPOOL                                        PROPERTY MXFgJMaWt FOREST

P£ 1153 Boctt                                             PC 3063 Marshall
PC 3253 Carnpbell                                         Mrs Drabble
                                      * * * * * * *


PS 102 Fidler       )    Cones, barriers, )                SECTOR DRIVERS
PC 538 Horn         )     meals           )
                                                           Chief Supt:   PS 459 fiodakinson
                                                           Sector 3:     PC 1E53 Baxter.

Inspector Lewson         | Logistics Claywheels Lane
PS 2264 Hewitt.

G R U C CONTROL                                            CELL BOSES GROUND 9.00 m
                                                           1.   PS 2514 Naylor       V
PS   €16 Goddarn
                                                                PC 1467 Glover       \
PC   1035 Ryan
PC   1370 Bichard
                                                           2.   PS 526 Langdale
PC   1421 Guest *                                               PC 701 White

CUSTODY (GRCOSD)                                           TRANSIT ALLOCATION
                                                           RESERVE SERIALS
Inspector Bark=r                                           CCftOB SUPERVISION GROCH)
PS 1164 Colley
P£ £38 Long                                                Inspector Scarfe
PS 1127 Hard}*                                             PS 2450 Hickle                »
PC LrlO Hulley
PC 1403 Jones                                              PRISONER TRANSIT VAKS **      \
PC.1577 Barden
PC 766 Marshall                                        (1 ) Ground - PC 2954 Morledge
                                                       (2) Leppings Lane roundabcut - <
                                                                       PC 750 Sirens I'fe
                                                       (3 ) Bradfield Road - PC 5,21 terje^sway

Director's Entrance                                        ** At Phase III Nos 1 and 2 to
                                                              take up position at Lepcings Lane
PC 3271 Stephens                                              roundabout and No.3 in Catchbar
?C 3138 Cruttenden                                            Lane adjacent to perk to provide
                                                              forward holding areas in case
                                                              of arrests.
 Process Supervision - Inspector B u m s

 PRISONS? PROCESS                                PRISONER PROCESS
 (E?*M3?iaS RCftD PCLICE STATICN                 HXUSSFTEID


 tfettirKfeBE Forest                            LIVERPOOL

 Inspector Aicheson                             Inspector Wilson
 DS 952 CharleswDrth                            DS 510 Kcxner
 PC 744 Eirrst                                  PC 428 Hutchinson
 PC 621 Bell                                    PC 1784 Donohue
 PC 2524 i?j*ers                                PC 253 Riles
 PC 1776 Ercwn                                  PC 2031 Codling


 CELL BOS                                       t^KUi BUS
 HAMMERTOE ROAD POLICE STATION                  BOCLESF1EU)
 10.00 am                                       10.00 am

 PS 1579 Kann                                   PS 804 Webster
 PC 1404 Ackers                                 PC 1185 Krajuski




                       OOMPIAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE


Inspector r Riley - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (gymnasium)




                                                                           \



 ALL STAFF SUBJECT TO APPENDIX 'I' WILL TAKE THEIR HOT MEAL AT 1HE DIRECTION

 OF INSPECTOR BENNETT
                                                      APPE5CIX 'J'




TRAFFIC POINTS



The following list denotes traffic points within 'F' Division
%±iicri require coverage by unifonr, personnel:

1.      A61 - Grenoside traffic liahts

2.      Halifax Road/Kilner Way TL

3.      Halifax Road/Foxhill Road TL

4.      Halifax Road/ClaywheeIs Lane TL

5.      Penistone Road North /Herries Road South TL

6.      Penistone Road/Parkside Road TL

7.      Penistone Road/Bradfield Road

8   .   Penistone Road/Neepsend Lane

Personnel deputed to man these points will parade at 10.00 ar. on 15
Apr±2 1989 at the South Yorkshire Police Driving School, Brightside Lane,
Sneffield, for briefing by Inspector Walker prior to deployment.     Road
Traffic Division will be responsible for mealing and transportation to
and from traffic points.




                          * * * * * * * * *
                                                                APPETOIX *K*



TRAINS

1.   >PIT IH 3gM FOREST

Five special trains carrying Nottingham Forest supporters will arrive at Midland
Station; the tizsss will not be available until the week of theseed-final and
therefore will be given at briefing.

Each train has a capacity of 550.

The fare for these special trains is inclusive of the bus fare to the ground.

SYT will run busesfrom the Station to the ground using a route along Penistone Road
and unloading ir. Herries Road South; these buses will be under motor cycle escort.

After the mater, a similar operation will take place to return Nottingham Forest
supporters to t±ae railway station , loading in Penistone Road North opposite the
ground and usinr an identical route back to the station.

^^>arture times vill be given at the briefing.

There is the fanility to delay the trains in the event of extra time being played.
                                                                                    1



2.   LIVERPOOL

 3   special trains carrying Liverpool supporters will arrive at Viadsley Bridge
Station at times yet to be arranged; these will be madeavailable at briefing.

Each train has a   capacity   of    550.

Departure times vill also be given at the briefing.

Again there is a   facility   to    delay the trains in theeventofextra timebeing
played.

As the support for Liverpool is widespread, it is anticipated that supporters will
travel by service train from all parts of the country to Midland Railway Station.
Arrangements have therefore.been node for those arriving at Midland Station to be
transported by SYT buses to the ground by a route separate from that vised by tfotniftgham
Forest supporters, travelling along Langsett Road, Middlewood Road and arriving 'at*
Leppings Lane where they will unload.

At the end of the gams, SYT buses will be available to return any person arriving in
this manner back to the Midland Railway Station. These buses will be located in
Penistone Road fcrth on the 'to city' carriageway outside Beeley Wood Special School.
                                                           APPENDIX *L'


                                    OOftCHES


LTVERPOGL


    1       All Liverpool coaches should leave tie Ml Motorway at Exit 36
            (lankersley) and travel via the A61 to designated parking areas.

    2       *2ae geographical location of Liverpool, coupled with the countrywide
            support enjoyed by the Club, suggests that coaches could veil approach
            trae -stadium by other routes, particularly the A616. If this is the
            case, then they must be brought to the designated coach perking area.

    3        IZae serials engaged on duty at Tankers ley and Ought ibriage will
            operate selective stop and search procedures to ensure (e) passengers
            fceve tickets, (b) they are not in possession of alcohol end (c)
            t±aey are not drunk. When this has been done, each coach vill have
            ez. adhesive sticker placed on the nearside of the windscreen and it
            vill be allowed to proceed to the designated parking area.

    4        All coaches will be allowed to travel to the ground without specific
            escort, although merrbers of the Road Traffic Motor Cycle King will
            be providing overall mobile supervision. All coaches will be directed
            tc the traffic island at Leppings Lane where in the first instance^,,
            trey will park in Claywheels Lane. Ctoce this area is full then
            coaches will be directed to park on the 'out lane' of tbs dual
            carriageway in Halifax Road, parking to oontnence at the top of the'
            cLel carriageway and then work tcrwarus the stadium.

    5        All coaches will park before being permitted to set down passengers
            thereby ensuring that the occupants know exactly where tc return to
            cn ccnpletion of the football match.

    6    icere it is discovered that passengers cm a coach are not in possession
         cf tickets, or are in breach of legislation concerning alcohol at
         Sporting Events, then Ground Control will be informed for consideration
         es to returning such vehicles out of the Force area under escort. \
                                                                              t
    7   frosre individual passengers only are involved who have consumed alcohol
         in such amounts that they are drunk, or are in possessior. of alcohol,
         tnsn they should be arrested and detained pending transpcrt.         ^
                                                                           iI *
WTITDCSaK FOREST                                                       *. { \*>~

    8    lirrtingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to
          ise the Ml ’motorway leaving at Exit 34 (Tinsley). This aspect of the
          operation will be dealt with by 'D' Division Officers and is the
          subject of a separate order.

    9    Tbe.se coaches will be parked in the South Yorkshire Transport Garage,
          Herries Road South and, if necessary, Rawson Spring Road.
                                          APPENDIX *M'



       TRANSIT VANS - LIVERPOOL




Transit vans, etc. carrying Liverpool supporters vill
be encouraged to travel via the M62 and Ml motorways
leaving the latter at Junction 36 (Tankersley).
However, it is envisaged that such vehicles will also
approach the stadium from the Flouch (A616).


Such vehicles will be -stopped and thoroughly
searched to ensure that they are not carrying
alcohol and the passengers have not consumed the
same to an extent where they are drunk.


All passengers will be checked to ensure that they
are in possession of tickets.


The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Wardsend Road North where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.


It is not feasible to attenpt to channel such
vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and therefore
it will be the duty of all serials on duties outside
the stadiun to monitor and check such vehicles and
their occupants.


Should any vehicle arrive, without having been
checked on the outskirts, which is found to be
carrying passengers without tickets or in breach of
the legislation relating to the carriage and
consumption of alcohol en route to sporting events,
then Ground Control will be informed for consideration
as to returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort;.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way
of summons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.
                                        APPENDIX 'N'



     TRANSIT VANS - NOTTINGHAM FOREST




Transit vans, etc. carrying Nottingham, Forest supporters
will be encouraged to travel via the K 2 motorway
leaving the latter at Junction 34 (Tinsley).


Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and the
passengers have not consumed the same to an extent
where they are drunk.


All passengers will be checked to ensure that they
are in possession of tickets.


The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Rawson Spring Road where passengers
will.alight and walk to the ground.


It is not feasible to attempt to channel such vehicles
through one 'checkpoint1 and therefore it will be the
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadium tc
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.


Should any vehicle arrive, without having been
checked on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the
legislation relating to the carriage and consurrptior.
of alcohol en route to sporting events, then Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way cf
surmons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.                                             V
                                                  APPENDIX *0*(i)


         SPORTING EVENTS (OONITOL OF AL0CH3L) ACT 1985

           AS AMENCED BY TOE PUBLIC ORDER AT 1986


VEHICLES

(A)   It is an offence for an operator to knowingly carry alcohol
      or allow it to be carried on a public service vehicle or mini bus/
      van or train, etc. travelling to or from a football natch.

(B)   It is an offence to possess alcohol on a public service vehicle
      or mini bus/van or train, etc. when travelling to or free a football
      natch or to be drunk on six* a vehicle.

(C)   A Constable may stop and search a public service vehicle, or icini
      bus /van or train etc. where he has reasonable grounds tc suspert
      alcohol is being carried.


PfTKY INTO GROUND

(A) It is an offence to possess alcohol when entering or attempting A>
    enter a football ground.                                        \ •

(B) It is an offence to enter or attenpt to enter a football grouni ’fc^en
     in possession of bottles, cans, etc. (or part of) which are capable
    of causing injury. This includes drinking glasses but not therrxss
     flasks.

(C)   A Constable may search any person he suspects is attenpting tc enter
      the ground with articles mentioned.


CONDUCT IN GROUND

It is an offence to enter, attenpt to enter or be in a football grand '
                                                                            \
when, drunk.


SALE OF ALOOHOL IN GROUND                                               ,\
             •                                                      4
                                                                    ’   \\a.
(A)   Alcoholic drink may only be sold in those parts of the ground
      designated which -'will be out of view of the pitch. Alcchol ney
      not be taken out of the designated areas.

(B)   A Constable in uniform may cause a bar in a football grand tc
      close if he believes the continued sale of alcohol is detrimental
      to good order or public safety.

PYROTECHNICS

It is an offence to possess fireworks, smoke bombs, etc. when in or
entering/leaving a football ground.

P0WE3S

In addition to the povrers of search, a Constable rrey arrest any persor.
cdnritting or who has ccrrmitted an offence under the Act
                                             APPENDIX ’C* (ii)




                 G80UND KEX3JLATTCHS




1          Unauthorised persons are not permitted to entsr
           upon the field of play.

2         The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands arc
           other buildings in the ground is forbidden.

3.        The consumption of intoxicating liquors is
          permitted only in authorised places and in
          accordance with the Sporting Events (Control zf
          Alcohol) Act 1985.

4         Fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glasses,
           cans, flags, banners, poles and other similar
          articles or containers including anything
          which could or might be used as a weapon, are
          not permitted within the ground, and any persm
           in possession of such an article or container
          nay be refused entry or ejected frcm the grourc.

5         Under no circumstances is it permitted to threw any       „
          object onto the pitch.                                    v

6         Any person who fails to ccnply with instructing
          frcm a steward may be ejected from the ground.

7         Any persons who remains in a gangway may be ejected from
          the ground.

8         The Club reserves the right to refuse admissicc
           to or eject any persons who refuses to be searched       \
          by a Police Officer.                                      \
                                                                     \
9         The Club reserves the right for its servants e e gaents
           to remove from this ground any person -who does not
          ccrrply with Ground Regulations and with the R_Les
          and Regulations of the Football Association arc The
          League or whose presence on the Ground is or cxild.
          reasonably be construed as constituting a souths of
          danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.


NOTE:     Item 8 above outlines the contractual agreement between the
football supporter and the Club. It does not create a pover to search
arn any search mist be with the consent of the individual supporter.
Refusal is merely a bar to entering the ground and not a criminal offence.
Vtaare a search is conducted with consent, it is a search vithin ttys
meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. Section 3(i ) of the
Art requires an officerto make a record of the search in writing unless
it is not practicable to do so and large scale searches srh as those at
football matches fall within this section. There is not therefore a
requirement to ccrrplete a Form PACE/ 1.
                                                      APPENDIX 'P'


                              PARKING RESTRICTIONS



 IO    R H K D C CONES

      perking 1 cones will be placed in the following locations prior to 7 ani
 an Ssm rd ay 15th April 1989 by civilian staff under the direction of Police
 Sera*— n t 102 Fidler:-

 1)        Halifax Road - out of city lane frcm Parson Cross Road
            to Cowper Avenue.

 2)        Foxhill Road - out of city lane frcm Halifax Road to
            Parson Cross Road.

 3)        Wards end Road North - both sides.

 4)        Penistone Road North - from Claywheels Lane to Railway
            Bridge - both sides

 5)        Claywheels Lane (including one way system) from Penistone
            Road North to Lirrestone Cottage Lane (Both sides)               1

 £)        Niagara       Road - both sides.

 ^)        Leppings Lane - both sides.

 £)        Herries Road - from PenistoneRoadNorth    toWordsworth
            Avenue - both sides.

 5)        Herries Road - Wordsworth Avenue toGalsworthy    Road (Away
            from ground side only).
II)        Wardsend Road - Both sides.

11)

12)
           Herries Road South

           Galsworthy Road.
                                    - both sides.
                                                                                 V
13)        Rawson Spring Road       - both .sides.
                                                                          If
14 )       Parks ide Road - from Penistone Road to Catchbar Lane         j :$
            one side only - alongside park.

15 )       Catchbar Lane from Parkside Road to Leppings Lane - one
            side only - alongside school.

1? !       Middlewood Road - one side only (alongside park) from
            Parks ide Road to Hawks ley Avenue.

            Penistone Road North/Penistone Road - both sides from
            Leppings Lane island to Neepsend Lane.

1- ‘       Liversey Street - one side frcm Penistone Road car park entrance.

I-         Penistone Road North - from Wins ter Road to Vere Road - inside
            lane to be coned with 1Jumbo Cones'.
                                                                APFEH3S *Q


                                   K X H E SIGNING


LIVERPOOL CCSiZH AEP CAR RODTES

1.   Priirary rtxite signed by AA in consultation with Operations and Traffic
     Division

2.   A57-A62S   Hayfields crossroad - Derbyshire, to indicate route focrzaU
                traffic is to follow. A628 to be placed out by Road Traffic during
                night of 14 April 1989

3.   A628/A61£ to be placed in location by Deepcar officers

MJITJJNGHAW FOREST COfiCB AND CAR RPOTES

All Nottinghsr. Forest vehicles vill use a route frcm the motorway, a    ing at
fright side I^rne. At this point, cars will be directed along Saville Szreet East,
Sutherland S-Treet, Gower street, Bumgreave Road, Mina Road, Rutland lead to
Neepsend Larj=.

Coaches and '^=ns will travel via Up*ell Street, Firvale and Herries Rr=d to tAe
ground.                                                          \
                                                                               \
Prinary route will again be signed by AA in consultation with Operasirrs and Traffic
Division.

Additional s^gns indicating car parking areas will be in position by £_C2 am and
will be placed out by civilian staff responsible for parking cones.




                                  * * * * * * *
                                                            APPENDIX ’R’




                    SPECIAL CCNSTABUIAHY DUTIES



Spec^-il Constables will be on duty in connection with this event to
sxccZLsment the Regular Officers. They wi 11 in particular be involved
in connection with the control of traffic away frcm the iimediate
vic^rrity of the ground.

They -will parade at 9.45am in the Gyrmasiun for briefing arid take up
tbe±r duties as soon as possible.

Refreshments will   be   available in   th e   gyrmasivrr. during   th e   K e tc h .


Radius will HJT be issued to members of the Special Constabulary
       supervisory ranks.
e x c e rr




                                DUTIES

(a)             Henries Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Longley, Norwood and Shirecliffe
                Estates by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(b)             Langsett Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                the area between Langsett Road and Infirmary fbad
                by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(c)             Neepsend Lane - encourage and supervise parking in
                the area around old gas works by Nottingham Forest
                supporters.

(d)             Halifax Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Parson Cross/FoxhiH estates by
                Liverpool supporters.

(e)             Middlewood Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Marlcliffe and Wisewood estates by
                Liverpool supporters.                             '''

(f )            Herries Road South - patrol length of road frcrr.
                Penis tone Road North to Five Arches to prevent
                parking of vehicles on hard shoulders (Both sides).
                This duty to commence at 10.30ar..
                                     APREJPIX 'S'




            m a p s




          Division of stadiun



 (ii)
          Liverpool routes and parking areas


 (iii)    Sector 2



 (iv)
         Nottingham Forest routes and parking aress      |


(v)      Sector 3



(vi)
         CVerarL Peking areas (Sectors 2 & 3 )


(vii)
         location of mobile units (T1-T10)
                                                          \


                                                         I!£i
                                                    t   l\j
  Sheffield l/Vednesday F. C.
                Ilsborough Ground                              First-Aid R oo m ''
                                                                                      A'\-0 ?v\\
                                                                                      o'
                                                                                       ■<> \ »> ■ ' '

                                                                                      % ^          \
                                                                                       •» > O s*.
                                                                                        *>* tP\' kU
                                                                                                                  •77-88
                                                                                                                   . 73-76
                                                                                                        \\   ''
                                                                                                                    65-72
                                                                                                                    \/
                                                                                                                     j                          t
                                                                                                                                                    ■

                                                                                                                                  fV0 -

                                                                                                                   V O



                                      .




                                                           P ia y r $
                                                           Tunnml
Aw a y F a n s E n t r a n c e                                                                                                              •   5   -




    and E n c l o s u r e s




                                               It!   m




                                                                                                                                                &
           MX
                                          D i m e t m a E n tra n c e                NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPOR1ERS
           TunNSTii r s . . , , m m


                                                                                                                     C./.O. F#«w# 12 / 6«
                                                              tSEMI
                                                              k      FINAL 1989
                                                               -------------  —   ,       M
                                                    LIVERPOOL ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS    f


VAN/MINI BUS PARKING   (

WiRESEND ROAD




                                                                     Crown Inn" P.H.


                              fOQACH PARKING   CLAYWHEELSLANE




                                  CAR PARKING - K3XHILL ESTATE




                                                           COACH PARKING - HALIFAX ROAD
                                          QO*U


                       CAR PARKING - PARSON CROSS ESTATE

                                                           M.1. MOTORWAY JUNCTION 36 - TANKERSLEY


   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

          Football Club
                                                                               Appendix S(lil)

                                        SEMI FINAL 1989 . t

                                        SECTOR 2 - LIVERPOOL


                                                                                    HALIFAX ROAD



                                                     LIVERPOOL COACHES


                                               LIVERPOOL CAR PARKING - *
                                               FOTHTTJ. AND PARSON CROSS^|iSTSTES




                                                        *n
                                                        O
                                                        x



    VADSLEY BRIDGE
                             wadsleystatt^ j     ;
                             iSvERPOOL TRAIN


                              British Roil
                             W a d s ley Bridge


                                                                             sBUS/VAN 4\ .,
                                                                la^^OOL^MINI -



LIVERPOOL COACH PARKING                                                                l
                                                                                       \ .1:




             LIVERPOOL CAR PARKING J
             WISEWOOD AND MARCLIFFE I
             ESTATES
                                                                    SEMI FINAL 198 9

                                                    NOTTS FOREST ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS


                                                                                                NORTH

        NIAGARA
          Ground                                                                                       TINSLEY
                                                                                                       VIADUCT
                                                                                                      Juncti on 3^;

                                                                                                             SO U TH
                                     SHEFFIELD   WEDNESDAY   £ C.
*o °o




                         'oA Coach Parking
                            \ SYPTE Garage and
                             \ Merries Road South                                       < ST,




                                                                            V

To M a n c h e s t e r
       A 57




                                                                                                  South   Yorkshire PoTic.
                                                                                                      P L A N S D£PT.
                                           SEMI FINAL 1989                           Appendix S(y)
                                    SECTOR 3 - NOTTINGHAM FOREST



                                                                           Notts Forest
                                                                            loach Park




                                                                                     Notts Forest
                                                                                     Coach and Mini bu,



              ■O.D-J         f a

     c^ p lto n **0 -
                        3
y   i A s t
                                   PARK S/

                                                                            R. Don
       LE NNOX ROAD

     D otiOTHY   K oadZ J
                                    I s b or o
                  O         ZD                                             Owlerton
                                                                           Stadium



       L Ea °ER Ftp   J                                                          V
                                                                     Car parking




                                                        ©FIELD


                                                                   Car parking
                      FA CUP SEMI FINAL       PARKING AREAS                       Appendix S(vi)


                                                               -
                                                                    >
                                                                        y*—   ^



                                                              ~^k

                                                  Liverpool Car, Parking >
              Liverpool Car
                 n-




                                                                                                          if'




                                                         Notts Fst

    CarParking



                                                                                          • ft’t.»tH
                                                                                                  E r'          -

                                                                                                   e£w
                                                                                          — >wiu m -c i    •.
                                                                                          trw^ .; .if; ;




                                          &



    Z   A




'   rr^T^^z
Taribo                     1        Tango 6 /   /                                 Appendix S(vii)                 '
Sti                                                                               ~   n i   '             •   ^


Tiingo 2
Csapcar
                                                                                            /A
           V*nv -
a-* r




                    >—

                                                            Jyv, Tango 5 7




                         VAT)




                                                                       Tango 8




                                                                                                Tango 7

                                                                                    ^y\

                                                *




                                                                   {   Tango 10

                                                                                  ? 3 » g




                               ■A CUP SEMI FINAL 1989 ’ £

                                   ««»W’^"T7V
                                            "       t
                                   MOBILE UNITS     /   ^s<
                                                                                                 AHP0CHX T

                                             SKIING R /N FOR BfflBFUG

Seats 167-178                                                               Seats 183-194
Row 38 - Specials
Row 37 - CCD                                                                CD)
Row 36 - CID                                                                cn>
Row 35 - 1 Insp. 2 PS 10 PC’s (serials 61, 62)                              2 PS 10 PC's (serial 63 & 64)
Row 34 - 1 Insp 1 FS 8 PC’s (serial 59)                                     1 15 8 PC’s (serial 60)
Rev 3 3 - 1 Insp 1 PE 8 PC's (serial 57)                                    1 PS 8 PC's (serial 58 )
Row 32 - 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 555                                            1 15 8 PC's (serial 56)
Row 31 - 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 53)                                            1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC's (serial 54)
Row 30 - 2 PS's 10 PC's (serials 50 & 5 D                                   1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC's (serial 52)
Row 29 - 1 Insp 2 PS’s 10 PC’s (serial 46 & *47)                            1 Insp 2 PS's 10 PC's (serials 48 L 49)
Row 28 - 1 Insp 1 FS 10 PC's (serial 44)                                    1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 45)
Rcw 27 - 1 PS 8 PC's (serial 42)                                            1 PS 8 PC's (serial 43)
Row 26 - 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 40)                                            1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 4.1)
Row 2 5 - 1 0 PC's (serial 38)                                              1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 39)
Row- 2 4 - 1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC's (serial 36)                                  1 PS 10 PC's (serial 37)
Row 23 - 1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 34)                                     1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 35)
Row- ?2 - 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 32)                                           1 PS 8 PC's (serial 33)


Row 21 - 1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC's (serial 30)                                     1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 31)   1*
Row 20 - 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 2c)                                            1 PS 8 PC's (serial 29)   \ ‘
Row 19 - 1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC's (serial 26)                                     1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 27)    \
Row 18 - 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 24)                                            1 PS 8 PC's (serial 25)     '
Row 1 7 - 1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 22)                                    1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 23)
Row 1 6 - 1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC's (serial 20)                                   1 PS 1C PC's (serial 21)
Row 15 - 1 PS 10 PC's (serial 16)                                           1 PS 1C PC’s (serial 19)
Rcw 1 4 - 1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 16)                                   1 PS 10 PC's (serial 17)
Rcvt' 13 - 1 Insp 1 FS 10 PC's (serial 14)                              -   1 PS 1C PC's (serial 15)
Row 12 - 1 RS 10 PC’s (serial 12)                                           1 Insp 1 PS 12 PC's (serial 13)
Row 11 - 1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 10)                                           1 Insp 1 FS 10 PC's (serial 11)
Row 10 - 1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 8 )                                           1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 9)
Row’ 9 - 1 FS 8 PC's (serial 6 )                                            1 Insp 1 FS 10 PC’s (serial 7^
Rcw 8 - 1 PS 10 PC’s 1 Insp (serial 4)                                      1 PS 1C PC's (serial 5)       V
Row 7 - 1 PS 10 PC's (serial 2)                                             1 PS 10 PC's (serial 3)       '
Row 6 - 1 Insp 1 PS 20 PC’s (serial 1)                                      as Row 6
Row 5 -
Rev 4 - Senior Officers                                                     Senior Officers             ,tJt
Row 3 -
                                                                                                  V    l\i




                                                 BRIEFDC AREA

 S ea ts 167-178                                                            Seats 183-194

 Rcws 22-38 to use entrance R L Q                                           Rows 22-38 to use entrance Q & P
                                                                                                       V
 Rcws 3-21 to use entrance N I K                                            Fbws 3-2* to use entrance H & L
        •
    *

.
    1
                                                                         APPENDIX 'U*




                                SCHEDULE OF TOTAL MANPOWER


                           Ch Sqpt     Supt    Ch Insp       Insp   PS    PC
            GfUN)           1           1        2            9     19   200

            CONTROL ETC                 1                     8     16    30
            PUBLIC CREEK               2         4           13     33   274
            MDBHES
                                                              3     10    50
            C3D                        1                      2      4    22

            RESERVE                                           2      2    20




                            1          5         6           37     84   596
    •/


                                                                               O O         Gr



                         A P P E N D I C E S


A(i)                  Senior     Officers      duties

A( ii )               Inspectors          duties

B                     Sector     1    (Ground)       duties

C                     Sector     2    (Liverpool)       duties

D                     Sector     3    (Nottingham       Forest)      duties

E                     Ticket     colour      coding

F                     CID    duties

G                     Dog    Sjpf^lon

H                     Mounted        Section

I                     A d m i n is t ration* e t c

J         •"S3SS   P ^ T r a rSa^^Co n tro 1

K                     Trains

L                     Coaches     - Liverpool          and    Nottingham      Forest

M                     Vans    - Liverpool

N                     Vans    - Nottingham           Forest

O

P
                      Sporting

                      Cones
                                     Events    (Control        of   Alc ohol) Act   1985
                                                                                         \
Q                     Route    signing

R                     Special     Constabulary                                         i',-

S                     Ground     Regulations

T                    Maps

U                    Schedule        of   manpower


                                                                                        v-
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                    'F' DIVISION



OPERATION GREET? 'F'   2/88                                 DAJE: 28 FftRCH 1988


                                F A CUP - SEMI FINAL
                              HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD


                         LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                               SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988

1.     INFORMATION

1.1    The F. A. Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
       Football Clubs will take place at th=> Sheffield Wednesday Football

•       Stadium, Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday 9th April 1988, kick-off
        at 3.00pm.   Tne gates allowing access to the ground will open at
        12 noon and admission will be granted to ticket holders only.
                                                                                     fc
                                                                                     *v

1.2    In an effort to minimise traffic and spectator congestion and to             ^ ...
       maximise segregation, th*= stadium has been divided in accordance             ^
       with Appendix 'T' .                                                      ^

1.3    Liverpool supporters have been allocated tickets for the West Stand
       and Terraces and the North Stand and access will be via the turnstiles
        in Leppings Lane. i’

1-4    Nottingham Forest supporters have been allocated tickets for the
       Spion Kop and the South Stand and access will be via the turnstiles
        in Penistone Road North and at the rear of the South Stand.

1.5    The tickets have been colour coded and details are shown at Appendix 'E‘\
                                                                                              J
1.6    A sterile area has been created betw?en the turnstiles at the rear of
        the South Stand and those in Leppings Lane.                                   Q & iz d '

1.7    To further assist in the segregation of opposing supporters within the |’f*
       ground, tickets have been allocated to 'neutral' supporters (i.e. Ppotb-al^L
       Association and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club) in the North Stand ' v
       (Penistone Road end) and the South Stand (leppings Lane end).

1.8    The routing of vehicles and spectators has generally been ctesigned to
        ensure that the approach of respective supporters will present them
        at the end of the stadiurn appropriate to their particular ticket.

1.9    Extra time will be played in the event of a draw at full time.

1.10   If, following extra time, the match remains drawn, then the replay will*'
        take place at Aston Villa Football Stadium.

2.     INIEWnCN

2.1    It is the intention of the Police to allow this match to take place and
        to ensure public order and safety both inside and outside the football
                                                                                        U)




        ground, to segregate and control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary
        obstruction of thy? highway and da-THcp to property. This will be
        attained and displayed with a high standard of smartness and professionalism.

3       METIHX)

3.1     Chief Superintendent Mole will be in overall ccrrrrand of the event f
        assisted by Chief Inspector Oughton.

3.2     The operation will be in three phases, as follows

3.2.1   Ptiase 1 - Before the match (1000 - 1500hrs )

3.2.2   Ffcese 2 - During the match (1500 - 1630Hrs) **

3.2.3   Phase 3 - After the match (1630Hrs until stand down) **

        **   Subject to 30 minutes "extra time".

^^.4    The operation will be divided into three sectors, each of which will be
        designated to a Senior Officer who will have responsibility for that
        Sector.  The Sector areas are shown on the map at Appendix 'T' ana the
        Senior Officers are:-                                                  »

        SECTOR                                          OFFICER
                                                                                  \I\
        Sector 1      (Sheffield Wednesday              Superintendent Marshall
                                                                                   \
                       Football Stadium)

        Sector 2     (Liverpool Supporters)             Superintendent Greenwood

        Sector 3     (Nottingham Forest Supporters)     Superintendent Chapman

3.2.5   Each sector will be further divided into Sub Sectors with a Chief Inspector
        in charge, as shc*m at Appendices A(i) and A(ii).

3.2.6   Separate Operation Orders have been prepared by “D" and Traffic Divisions
        in respect of Policing arrangements for Sheffield City Centre and the
        Ml motorway.

3.3     PEE EftTCH BRIEFING                                                        .^
                                                                            ;     rf
3.3.1   The event is being policed by Officers, some of whom have never visited*'*
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium previously and who, therefore, will
        be unfamiliar with the ground and locality.

3.3.2   In an effort to alleviate this problem, a pre match briefing will take
        place at 10.00am on Friday 8 th April 1988 at Sheffield Wednesday Football
        Ground, entry via the " G y m a s i u m Gate" in Penistone Road North. All
        supervisory officers of the rank of Inspector and above should attend.

3.4     REPORTING FOR DUTY                                                        V

3.4.1   All Officers shown in the attached Appendices will, unless otherwise
        stated, attend tte gyrmasiun at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at
        9.45am for briefing at 10.00am pronpt on Saturday 9th April 1988.
        Entry to' the stadiun will be via the “Gyrmasiun Gate" in Penistone Road
        North-
                                                                                     (3)




4.2    Oi arrival, each Inspector will report to the Adfninistration Desk situate
       inside tt*? entrance to the gymnasium and will report his serials present.

4.3    Police Officers attending in their cwn vehicles must find their own parking
       facilities outside the football ground.

4.4    The parking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane,
       Sheffield will not be used.

5      BRXEFDC - ERTCH DAY
                                                                                               T-
5.1   After reporting for duty at the gymnasiun, all officers will be briefed
      as to ti>? general requirements of the day and will commence duties in
      accordance with the instructions of their individual Inspector.

5.2   Inspectors will ensure that officers under their ccrrrrand disperse to their
      respective places of duty with a minirrrjr. of delay.

5.3   ^ ^ c k ~ d meals will be provided and will be taken at the appropriate time
       and place, dependant upon the exigencies of duty.

5.4   Sergeants will brief members of their respective serials as to their
      individual duties as outlined in Appendices B, C and D.
                                                                                        I
6     GROUrp SECURITY                                                                  V'

6.1   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be responsible for the overnight
                                                                                           >
       (8th/9th April 1988) security arrangements at the ground.

6.2   Inmediately following briefing, two 'explosives' dogs will search the
      stadiim assisted by the serials scheduled for duty inside the ground.

7     CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION EEPAKPCNT

7.1   _Members of this department will be on duty at the ground.  A irenned CID
      post will be situated in the gymnasium at the ground and at Hanmerton Road
      Police Station and will deal with all ccnplalnts of crime and arrests for            \
      criminal offences made in connection with this event which do not require
       immediate attention. Any such corrplaints will be directed to whichever
      of the above locations is most convenient.

7.2    In addition, teams of Officers will operate from Parkside Section Station,
      Wadsl^y Bridge Section Station (Halifax Road) and the Police Control
      Caravan (Hillfoot Bridge/Neepsend Lane).

7.3   .Detective Superintendent McKay will have an overall responsibility for
      Crime and the CID Operation as a whole and duties of personnel are
      sho^n at Appendix 'F'.

8     DOG SECTION

8.1   Members of tte Dog Section will mainly be used as a deterrent before and
       after the match on the routes to and from the stadium, at the coach parks,
       transit van parks, railway station, private vehicles parking areas and
      escorting supporters to and from the stadium.

8.2   T t e y will not nornrelly be used in public order situations but the Sector
      Ccmmancter has the overriding discretion to use dogs in such circumstances
      w h e r e he feels a serious public order situation may occur.
                                                                                            v•*/




  8.3           Duties of the Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix 'G' .

  9             fPJNTED SECTION

  9.1           Mentors of tty? Mounted Section will be employed outside the ground to
                maintain orcter, segregate supporters and escort them from and to their
                transport.

  9.2           Duties of Mounted section personnel are set out at Appendix 'H'.

  10            OCMERDL BOOH

  10.1          A Control Roan will be established at Sheffield Wednesday Football
                Stadivrn in the Police Control Box situate between the South and West
                Stands.

 .10.2           Superintendent Murray will be in overall control with the assistance
                p f Officers shown at Appendix 'I'.

 .10.3          The Control Root, will oversee the entire operation and will operate on
                both IMF and VHF channels.

 . 11           TRAFFIC CONTROL

 . 11.1         Traffic points will be worked both before and after the match by the
                personnel shown at Appendix 'J'. Fluorescent sleeves will be worn.

 .1 1 . 2       It will be necessary to switch certain traffic lights off in order that
                tt>? flow of traffic can be maintained.    These lights are identified at
                Appendix 'J' together with the officer responsible for ensuring that
                they are turned ' o f f at the conmencement of the operation and 'on' at
                its conclusion: Keys will be supplied to the relevant officers for this
                purpose.

 .12        '   TRAVEL AND POLICING ARRANGEMENTS

3.12.1          The routes to the ground and designated parking areas for coaches,
                transit vans and private vehicles are shewn at Appendix 1T' .

3.12.2          ROUTE SIGNING
                                                                                                   1
                Signing of the routes to the ground has been arranged m conjunction with ^ \ t;
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.  In the event of congestion contin-"    ' .*
                gencies exist for detours to be implemented by members of the Road Traffic
                Motor Cycle Wing.

3.12.3          lb assist in identifying traffic problems,  a fixed wing aeroplane will be
                taken into use from 1300 to 1500hrs and from 1630hrs to the close of the
                operat ion.

3.12.4          BY TOAIN - LIVERPOOL

                Broadly speaking, Liverpool supporters will travel on 'special' trains
                and alight at Wads ley Bridge Railway Station where they will walk the
                half mile to the ground under Police supervision.    Service trains will
                also be operating to Midland Railway Station and supporters using this
                service will travel by ’special' South Yorkshire Transport buses to
                the Leppings Lane end of the ground where they wall alight.
                                                                                               (5)




3.12.5       Details of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto are
             shour-. at Appendix 'K'.

3.12.6       BY TRAIN                               - N0nTIN3iAM FOREST

            Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by train will alight at Midland
            Railway Station in the. centre of Sheffield and travel the three mile
            journey to the ground by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses and
            will alight on the Penistone Road North side of the stadium.

3.12.7      Details of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto are
            she*,-, at Appendix 'K'.

3 *1 2 -8   BY COACH - LIVERPOOL

            Liverpool supporters who t r a w l by coach will be encouraged to use the
            M62/JC motorways, leaving the latter at Tankers ley (Junction 36).
            EXities relating thereto are shown at Appendix 'L' .

3.12.9      Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
            to the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.
                                                                               V*
3.12.10 Oi arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight an<4 *'
                                                                                 •
        walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.H      BY CQfrCH - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

            Nottingham Forest supporters who trawl by coach will be encouraged to use
            the Ml motorway leaving at Tinsley (Junction 34). Duties relating thereto
            are shown in the 'D1 Division Operation Order.

3.12.12      Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
            to the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

3.12.13 On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and V
        walk to the ground under police ..supervision.                          '

3.12.14 BY TRANSIT VAN - LIVERPOOL

            Liverpool supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicles will'!
            be encouraged to use the M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter at I. j ^-3 .
            Tankersley (Junction 36). However, it is not feasible to atte.Tpt to
            channel such vehicles through one "checkpoint" and it will be the duty,
            therefore, of all Serials outside the ground to check these vehicles
            and their occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M' .

3.12.15 All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
        supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.16 BY TRANSIT VAN - NOTTINGHAM FOREST
               ----------------------------- ---------- *   — —   "   ■   "   '■   ■   f   •




            Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicle
            will be encouraged to use the Ml motorway, leaving at Tinsley (Junction
            34). Hov**ever, it is not feasible to channel all such vehicles through
            one "chec)q?oint" and it will be the duty, therefore, of all Serials
            outside the ground to check these vehicles and their occupants as outlined
            at Appendix *N' .
                                                                                            (6)




 3.12.17   All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
           supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision,

 3.12.18   SPORTING EVEJTO5 (QOKTTROL OF ALCGH3L) ACT 1985 - AS AMJTCED

           A precis of the Act is shown at Appendix 'O' and the legislation will
           be strictly enforced in relation to coaches and transit vans or similar
           vehicles.

 3.12.19   PRIVATE VEHICLES - LIVERPOOL

           Liverpool supporters who travel by private vehicle will be encouraged to
           use the M62/M1 motorways leaving the latter at Tankers ley (Junction 36).
           They will proceed to the designated parking areas on the Parson Cross
           and Foxhill est ates.

3.12.20    On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight and
           walk to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.21    It is envisaged that traffic will alsr approach the stadium via the
           Flouch (A616). There is a contingency plan should the volurrp of this
           traffic be such that it is impracticable to direct it to the designated
           parking areas referred to at papragraph 3.12.19.

3.12.22    PRIVATE VEHICLES - NOTTINGHAM FOREST                                    \ •

           Nottingham Forest supporters who trawl by private vehicle will leave V
           the Ml motorway at Tinsley (Junction 34) and proceed to the designated
           parking area in the Neepsena area of the city.

3.12.23    On arrival, supporters will alight and walk to the ground under Police
           supervision.

3.12.24    COACHES AND TRANSIT VANS - RETURN JOURNEY

           Coaches and transit vans will not leave their designated parking areas\
           until authorised to do so by Ground Control. The return journey for \
           these vehicles wil be the reverse of that on the incoming joumey.       '

3.12.25    CXVOIES AND TRANSIT VANS - GENERAL
                                                                                        \

           No coach or transit van will be allowed to load, unload or park in an^f
           area other than the designated parking areas, nor will they be aliow4cJ'^tc use
           routes other than those designated, unless diverted by Police Officers,
           following consultation with Ground Control.

3.12.26    PARKING RESTRICTIONS

           Parking of   vehicles in the irrmediate vicinity of the ground and on main
           roads will   be strictly controlled by use of parking cones. These will
           be set out   during the early hours of the day in accordance with
           Appendices   P and 0-

3.12.27    The emergency services have been informed of all parking restrictions/
           arrangements.

3.12.28    It will be the responsibility of Police Sergeant 102 Fidler to ensure
           that these cones are in position before 0700hrs Saturday 9th April 1988.
       •
                                                                                           in

.




     3.12.29    No Officer will allow any vehicle to park in contravent ion of t h e s e
                restrictions without seeking the authority of Ground Control.

    3.12.30     REM3VAL OF VEHICLES

                Where a vehicle is parked in such a position as to warrant removal, thpn
                thus will be arranged by the Officer concerned through Ground control
                following consultation with his supervisory Inspector. Two Brimec
                recovery vehicles will be available to remove vehicles.

    3.12.31    Where a vehicle is parked in contravent ion of parking restrictions and
               does not merit removal, then the driver msy be dealt with in the usual
               manner.

    3.12.32     CAR FORKING

               There will be limited privately operated car parks in the vicinity of
               the ground. No assistance will be giver, in the operation of these
               c o m e r cially run car parks. It is intended that private vehicles will,
               as far as praticabie, us- the designated parking areas shown at
               Appendix 'T' . This operation will be carried out by merrbers of the
               Spec_ai Constabulary whose duties are shown at Appendix 'P' . Parking
               will be permitted on all roads where restrictions do not apply.

    3.12.33    SCJJm YORKSHIRE TRANSPORT BUSES

               South Yorkshire Transport will operate 'special buses' frcrr. Midland v*-
               Railway Station to the ground. At the end of the rretch, they will be
               parked in Penistone Road North (Adjacent to Wadsley Bridge and facing
               towards City centre)and Penistone Road North (Directly outside the
               ground and facing tcvards City Centre) for transportation of Liverpoc
               and Nottingham Forest supporters respectively. EXiring the match they
               will be parked in Penistone Road and Herries Road Bus Depot and the
               former will be the only vehicles allowed so to park.

    3.12.34    The routing of South Yorkshire Transport buses both to and frcn the
               stadiim is shc**n at Appendix 'K'.
                                                                                            \
    3.12.35    SHEFFIELD WEET*SI»Y FOOTBALL CLUB - OFFICIAL CAR PARK

               Oily drivers possessing officia l passes will be allowed access to this s
               part cf the ground "which is situate at the rear of the South Stand.   ^
               Certain coaches containing F A and Club officials, etc. will be ailov^a.i
               to enter the car park and drop passengers before driving to a parking
               area away from the ground (Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Training
               Ground, Middlewood Road).

    3.12.36    Under no circumstances will any other vehicle, other than Police vehicles,
               be allowed access.

3.12.37        The gates giving access to the South Stand Car Park will c l o s e at 2.00pm
               and will not re-open until half an hour after kick-off. This fact has^
               been publicised to persons having legitimate access.

3.12.38        Club Stewards will be enployed at the access points in leppings Lane and
               Penistone Road North to control access and egress.

3.12.39        Vehicles owned by the television conpany providing coverage of the game
               will be permitted to park in the South Stand Car Park at both the Leppings
               Lane and Penistone Road North ends.
                                                                                           (8)




 3.12.40    PARKING - POLICE VEHICLES

            Police vehicles will park in the car park at the rear of the gymnasium,
            accessed via the "Gyrmasiun Gate* adjacent to Gate 'O'. Only official
            vehicles will be allowed access and movement into and out of the ground
            mist be kept to an absolute minimum

 3.12.41    OBSTRUCTIONS - OTHER THAN BY VEHICLES

            Street traders, ticket 'touts' and any other person causing obstruction
            will be moved on. If they persist then they will be arrested and
            brought to the Police Roar, where they will be dealt with as outlined in
            paragraphs 4.1.1 to 4.1.7 (Headed ’Prisoner Process').

 3.13       RAHWAY PROPERTY

           Trains will carry Liverpool supporters to Wadsley Bridge Station. Thes®
           trains and the Station will be manned by BTC Polio* who h a w the
           responsibility for policing this property. Officers should only enter
           tb=- station for the purposes of police duty at the invitation of,
           and accompanied by, a mert>=r of th=* ETC Police. This also applies to
           all other railway property, including sidings, cuttings, lines, etc.

3.14       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB GROUND REGULATIONS                    A

3.14.1     A precis of the Ground Regulations is shown at Appendix 'S'.            ^

3.14.2     Where an officer seizes property by virtue of the Ground Regulations
           he will:-

           A)   Supply the person frcrr. when the article has been seized
                with his 'collar number' .

           B)   Inform that person that the iter, rrey be recovered on
                ccnpletion of the game from the Police Property Post at the
                rear of the Spion Kop, in the case of Nottingham Forest
                supporters, and the Police Property Post at the rear of the
                West Stand, in the case of-Liverpool supporters.
                                                                                       \
           C)   Affix a label to the item bearing the owners nane and the
                Officer's "collar nunber".

           D)   E>.sure that the item is taken to th° appropriate Police          1 11
                                                                                  1 ^-■*
                Property Post and entered in the Property Register.

3.14.3     It is a condition of entry to the ground that persons agree to be searched.
           Any person refusing to be searched will be in breach of those conditions
           and will be refused entry.

3.15       LIC& gE D PREMISES

           The great majority of licensees in the immediate vicinity of the ground
           will either close their premises corrpletely at lunchtime and early
           evening or operate a 'selective door' whereby football supporters are
           not adnitted.

3.15.2     It will be the responsibility of all Serials outside the ground to
           identify those premises which remain open and to monitor the behaviour
           of persons resorting thereto.
                                                                                          (9)



 3.15.3   Alcohol is not available to members of the public inside tt*3 ground.

3.15.4    A precis of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985 is shown
           at Appendix 'O' . This legislation will be strictly enforced both in
           relation to vehicles and in relation to persons entering or attenpting
           to enter the ground.

3 .16     EMERGENCY AND EVACUATION PROCEDURES

3.16.1     In the event of an emergency situation arising (i.e. fire or boot) call)
           which may require evacuations of all or part of the Stadium, the
           procedure outlined will be followed

3.16.2    Ground Control will pass the following message over the P A system and
          this will indicate to Police personnel that a provisional emergency
          and evacuation procedure is in force:-

                       "THE ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY
                       REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL"

3^.
3.T6.3    Should an emergency evacuation be necessary then an oral message will
          be passed to Police personnel via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants,
          giving specific instructions as to the action to be taken.
                                                                                 i
3.16.4    In th° event of an "all clear" situation, the followinc messao= will fee
                                                                   -     -        ^   •

          passed to Police personnel that the necessity for emergency evacuation^
          has ceased:-

                       "MR MEADOWS IS NO LONGER REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL"

3.16.5    Evacuation procedures for various parts of the stadium are shown on the
          appropriate serial order.

4         AEMDGSTRATICN

4.1       PRISONER PROCESS

4.1.1     All persons arrested or detained inside the ground will be taken, in tt
           first instance, to the Police Roan at the rear of the North Stand. Those
           arrested outside the ground will either be taken to the Police Room or
           Hammerton Road Police Station (in the case of Nottingham Forest supporters)
           and Ecclesfield Police Station (in the case of Liverpool supporters) »<&
          whichever is ‘most convenient.                                        f ' :1
                                                                                ? \'*
4.1.2     Where a prisoner is taken to the Police Roan, details will be obtained,
           the prisoner searched, the arresting officer and prisoner photographed
           together and form PACE 19 completed. The arresting officer will then
           complete the necessary paperwork which he will hand to the Process Super­
          visor in the gymnasium, which is adjacent to the Police Room. Once the
          paperwork has been checked, it will be handed to the office: in charge of
           the Police Roan and will acconpany the prisoner and his property to the
          appropriate station for processing/charging.

4.1.3     Where a person is arrested for a criminal-offence, the prisoner will
          firstly be taken by the arresting officer to the CID point in the gymnasiun
          or at the station, where the office in charge will decide on the further
          course of action.
The duties of the "Prisoner Process" teams engaged on this operation are
shown at Appendix "I".

Two vehicles with detention facilities will be parked adjacent to the
Police Room for the retention of prisoners and a further detention vehicle
will be parked at each of the two Police Stations for identical purposes.

After initial process, persons detained will be transferred to        on
Road Police Station (in relation to Nottingham Forest supporters) and
Ecclesfield Police Station (in relation to Liverpool supporters).

Inspectors must ensure that officers on serials under their canrand do not
go off duty without firstly submitting the requisite paperwork.

EJECTIONS

Where circumstances are such that a person is to be ejected from the
Stadium for breach of the Ground Regulations, then he will not be photo­
graphed, etc but his details will be recorded on an 'ejection slip1 for
entry in the Police Roan Register, prior to ejection.

COURT APPEARANCE

W h er e an arrested person is charged and bailed to Court then the Court    *
dates allocated to this operation will be strictly adhered to. On all       t
occasions, therefore, the staff at the Charge Office, Bridge Street,          '
Sheffield, will be consulted as to availability of dates before a           S.
prisoner is released on bail following charge.                               *

Provisional arrangements have been made should the number of persons
arrested and kept in custody or the seriousness of offences necessitate
a Special Court being convened on Monday 11th April 1988. In the event
of such criteria being met then Chief Superintendent Mole will be informed
in order that this contingency can be put into operation.

MISSING/FOUND CHILDREN

Reports of missing children will be passed via telephone to Ground Control
in order that the necessary action can be taken.                          '

Any child who has become separated fran his parent /guardian will be taken
to the gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand. Ground Control will thei^
be informed via telephone in order that the required action can be takemi v
                                                                     -  i ;»
FOUND PROPERTY

All found property will be taken to the Administration Desk in the gymnasium
and the register completed.

UNIFOffri

All South Yorkshire Police Officers will wear full uniform, including
helmet (with chin strap down) and gloves. Anoraks will be worn in      *•*.
inclement weather. Female Officers should wear trousers and not skirts.
                                                                                        (11)




4.5      TRANSPORT - POLICE PERSONNEL

4.5.1    There are no parking provisions for officers arriving in privatevehicles.

4.5.2    Officers arriving in police transport will alight at Gate '0' in
          Penistone Road North. Drivers of police transits will report to the
          Administration Desk situate inside the entrance to the gyrmasium for
          instructions as to the utilisation of their polio? vehicle. Where su ch
          vehicles are used for purposes not involving the personnel carried
          therein, then, on completion of the game and dispersal of the crowd,
          the driver will return to the Administration Desk to collect the
          vehicle keys in readiness for the return journey.

4.5.3    Police vehicles which are not taken into use during this operation will
         be parked at the Road Traffic Division premises at Claywbeels Lane,
         following consultation with the office: in charge of those premises.

          REFRESHMENTS

i.T.]
4.6.1    Packed lunches will be provided ana there will be distributed et
          mealing locations prior to th^ allocated meal times.

4.6.2    Refreshment will be taken as indicated on the individual Serial Order £
          at the venues stated.                                                ^
                                                                               %
4.7       MAPS                                                        ^

4.7.1    Maps of the ground and surrounding area are included in this Order
          for information purposes.  (See Appendix 'T').

4 -8     OPERATIONAL ORDER - DISTKEBOTION

4.8.1    This Operational Order will be distributed to Inspector Level and above
          only. A Serial Order will be distributed to all Sergeants involved in
          the operation.                                                        i

4.9      PRESS AND PUBLICITY                                                        \

4.9.1     Publicity has been given to traffic routes and parking arrangements for
         . the event by the Football Liaison Officer and Press Liaison Department. t

4.9.2    All comments concerning the event and replies to enquiries from the j
                                                                                 rv
         media will be handled by Chief Superintendent Mole or through the Press
         Liaison Office which is under the control of Superintendent Pratt.

4.10     COMPLAINTS

4.10.1   All corrplaints against the Police will be dealt with in accordance with
          Force Standing Order 5S. Complainants who approach Police Officers
          engaged on this operation will be directed to one of the Officers shown
          at Appendix “I".                                                      *

4.ii     ccmKicmcre

4.11.1   All ccmrmonicat ions relevant to the event will be directed through
         Ground Control.
                                                                                           (12)




4.11.2           The following UHF/VHF channels will be utilised in relation to this
                 operation:-

                  A)     UKF personal radio channel 25 will be used by all super-visory
                         officers, both inside and outside the ground.

                  B)     UHT personal radio channel 19 will be used by all CID personnel
                         ertgagea on duties in the Parson Cross and Neepsend private
                         parking areas.

                  C)     VHF radio channel 2 will be used by mobile patrols.

4.11.3           "FI" Sub Division's operational functions will continue to be transmitted
                 on UHJ personal radio channel 35.

4.11.4          Perso’-.al radios will be issued at the Adninistration Desk in the
                 gymnasium to all supervisory officers.

4.1^1           Strict radio discipline will be maintained at all times. Messages must be
                 kept as short as possible and, where this is not the case, Ground Control
                 has tr*r overriding option of cutting short any transmission irrespective
                 of rav..

4.11.6          Ground Control can also be contacted on internal extension 3277.

4.1.2           AUDIO VISUAL AIDS UNIT

  4.12.1         Four members of this Unit will attend 'Match Day' briefing, Thereafter,
                 they will be operating in the Wads ley Bridge Station, and coach and
                 transit van parking areas of both team supporters before and after the
                 game. During the netch they will operate inside the stadium.

4.13            WERTPC                \

4.13.1          All overtime claims will be submitted to supervisory officers and will
                 be clearly marked "SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST".            \

4.14         ‘ REPORTING OFF DOTY                                                            '

4.14.1          It will be the responsibility of individual Inspectors to report the
                 whole of their Serials off duty, account for any member not present and.
                 ensure that all radios are returned.    He will also submit the de-brief
                 form previously supplied to him.     Serials 1-22 will report off dufty > S"*
                 at thr Gymnasium. Serials 23-66 will report off duty at Claywheels Lane.

4.12.2          Authorisation will be sought via Ground Control before any serial is
                 "stood down".




C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e f it
"F" Division
                                                                 APPENDIX ♦A(i)1


                          SENIOR OFFICERS DUTIES


OVERALL OCH-ftND                                   Chief Superintendent Mole
                                                   Call sign "FY1"

                                                   Liaison - Chief Insp. Oughton
                                                   Call sign "FY2"

GROUND CONTROL                                     Superintendent Murray
                                                   Liaison - Inspector Calvert

SECTOR 1 (GROUND)                                  Superintendent Marshall
                                                   Call sign "FX1"

SECTOR 1A                                          Chief Inspector Brayfora
                                                   Call sign "FV1"
Serials 1-10

^ f c o R IB                                       Chief Inspector Creaser
                                                   Call sign "FV2”
Serials 11-19

Reserve Serials 20-22                              Liaison - Inspector SewelJ^
                                                   Call sign "India 28"     y

                                                                                V
SECTOR TWO (LIVERPOOL)                             Superintendent Greenvrocxi
                                                   Call sign "FX2"

SECTOR 2A

Serials 23-35 & 46                                 Chief Inspector Waring
                                                   Call sion "FV3"

SECTOR 2B
                                                                                \!
Serials 36-45 & 47                                 Chief Inspector Beal
                                                   Call sign* "FV4"
                                                                               t
Serials 48-53 (Mobiles)                            Liaison - Inspector Delaney^
                                                   Call sign "India 29“^    j\



SECTOR THREE (M7ITINGHAM FOREST)                   Superintendent Chapman
                                                   Call sign "FX3*

SECTOR 3A

Serials 54-58                                      Chief Inspector Price
                                                   Call sign "FV5"

SECTOR 3B

Serials 59-62                                      Chief Inspector Sumer
                                                   Call sign "FV6 "

Serials 63-66 (Mobiles)                            Liaison - Inspector Donnelly
                                                   Call sign "India 30”
                                                                     Appendix 'A(ii)*

                                     INSPECTORS



                   SECTOR 1(A) - CHIEF INSPECTOR BRAYFORD
                                                                              Call sign
Sub Sector 1       (Serials 1-3)           Inspector Howland (F)               India 1

           2       (Sex'ials 4-6)           Inspector Taylor (E)               India 2

           3       (Serials 7-8)            Inspector Vickers (E)              India 3

           4       (Serials 9-10)           Inspector Wilson (E)               India 4




           SECTOR 1(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR CREASER

Sub Sector 5       (Serials 11-12)         Inspector Gray (B)                  Indie k5
                                                                                    \
           6       (Serial 13)             Inspector Hooley (B)                Indialb

           7       (Serials 14-15)         Inspector Walker (OPS)             Incna \ 7

           8       (Serials 16-19)         Inspector Sykes (F )               India 8 A
                                           Inspector Brocmhead (C)            India 8 B

                   (Serials 20-22)         Inspector Selwooa (E)              India 9
                   (Reserves)
                                                                   Appendix 'A(ii)*




                                   INSPECTORS



                SECTOR 2(A) - CHIEF INSPECTOR W A R D C (LIVERPOOL)
                                                                           Call sign
Sub Sector 10    (Serials 23-35)         Inspector Cooke (C)               India 10

           11    (Serials 26-27)         Inspector hfcore (C)              India 11

           12    (Serials 28-31)         Inspector Turner (C)              India 12A
                                         Inspector Townena (A)             India 12B

           13    (Serials 32-33)         Inspector Grace (C)               India 13

           14    (Serials 34-35)         Inspector InghaT, (A)             India 14




                                                                                I


                SECTOR 2(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR BEAL (LIVERPOOL)

           15   (Serials 36-37)         Inspector Finch (A)                India 15

           16   (Serials 38-40)          Inspector Scholey (C)             India 16

           17   (Serials 41-42)         Inspector Robinson (Ops)           India 17

          18    (Serials 43-45)          Inspector Bullimore (C)           India 18


                                                                                   \
                                                                                       !
                                                                                i<£i
                MDBILE UNITS
                                                                           ■ ill
                                                                           •' ! v*
          19    (Serial 46)             Inspector Bullas (OPS)             India 19

          20    (Serial 47)             Inspector Steel (A)                India 20

          21    (Serial 48-50)          Inspector P Smith (E)              India 21

          22    (Serials 51-53)         Inspector Purdy (Qps)              India 22

                                                                               V
                                                                   Appendix fA(ii)1



                               INSPECTORS



                SECTOR 3(A) - CHIEF INSPECTOR PRICE (NOTTINGHAM FOREST)



                                                                              Call sig-i

Sub Sector 23   (Serials 54-55)             Inspector Meek (HQ)               India 23

           24   (Serials 56-58)             Inspector Armitage (E)            India 24




                SECTOR 3(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR SUMMER (NOTTINGHAM FOREST)

          25    (Serials 59-60)             Inspector McDowell (HQ)          India 25

          26    (Serials 61-62)             Inspector Haycox (HQ)            InaiA 26

                                                                                  \
                MOBILE UNITS


                (Serials 63-66]             Inspector Hudson (F]             India 27




                LIAISON INSPECTORS
                                                                                      \

                                                                                   I'?•
                Sector 1                    Inspector Sewell (F)             Indijal 28

                Sector 2                    Inspector Delaney (F)            India 29

                Sector 3                    Inspector Donnelly (HQ)          India 30
                           SUB SECTOR 1                                          —
                                                             Inspector Howland
    Serial 1               PERIMETER TRACK

     PS 758 Morgan         Phases 1 and 2 (Before and during natch)
)    PC 2954 hfcirledge
)    PC 1669 Walpole       Eighteen Police Constables - perimp ter track (equidistant
)    PC 750 Simons         spread around ground). Hie Sergeant will remain in the
)    PC 2289 Green         vicinity of the players tunnel throughout this duty and th=
     PC 1910 Huiley        Offioers on the track will follow his exarrple by standing
    PC 417 I llingworth    and facing the crowd at the following times:-
    PC 1265 Smith
                          Before kick off, half time and full time and also during any
    PC 759 Bradshaw
                          stoppage of play or when there is any crowd unrest. This
    PC 2439 Bocking
                          will be indicated daring the game and shortly before half and
    PC 44 6 Groom°
                          full timp by the sergeant leaving the players tunnel and
    PC 700 Helliwell
                          standing near th= touch line.   Particular attention should
    PC 442 Cookson
    PC 2348 Hanson        be paid to prevent any person climbing the fence to gain
    PC 1247 Street        access to the ground, the gates must remain bolted at all
    PC 931 Greenway       times except when in use. No-one is to be allowed access to
                          the track from the terraces without consent of a Senior
    PC 814 Finnigan
    PC 1402 Lame          Officer (except to receive medical attention)
    PC 21^^ Dransfi^Id
                           Ft»ase 3

                          As the ground clears, officers of this serial will rece:
                          location until instructed otherwise.                    ^

                          Emergency Evacuation Procedure

                          In the ev»=nt of such a situation arising( indicated at it<
MEAL - Staggered          3.16 in the Serial instruction). PC's at either end of the
before match              ground will take up positions at the fence gates. TTy^se
in gym                    gates will only be opened if a specific message to evacuate
                          is given on the public address system.
                          ***********************************************



    aerial 2         .    SOUTH STAND LOWER LEVEL                                      .

    S 1322 Tindle         Phase 1 (Before match)                                       \
    C 1058 Thcrras
    C 403                 A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 19-22 to ensure
    C 1210 Walker         persons entering these premises do not possess items
    C 429 MrCorrreck      prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons opji
    - 3034 Richardson     missiles) or alcohol.                                  I \-I
                                                                                     \ v>
    T 964 Davis
    - 2022 Markham        B) 2 PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 33-36 to
    ' 2865 Hobson         ensure items shown above are not brought into the ground.
    '432 Jones
    - 64 St ubbs          C) Remaining PC's will patrol rear of terraces to maintain
                          order.

                          Phase 2 (Daring retch)

                          All Officers will be located at the rear of these terrace's
                          and maintain order as required.

                          Phase 3 (After match)

                          Hiis serial will be prepared if instructed to take up a
                          position in front of these terraces on the perimeter track to
                          prevent a pitch invasion or ensure the safety of the match
    ered during match     officials if necessary.
     ti
                        SOUTH STAND UPFER LEVEL

 Serial 3               Phas p 1 (Before match)
                   FI
                        A) 2 PC's will be situated at the rear of turnstiles 23-28
     2425 Herrmingway
                        to ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
     548 Roberts
                        items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
     2554 Hagu°
     414 Loacp          or missiles ) or alcohol.
     184 Whittaker
     2987 Hallett       B) Two PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 29-32
     1637 Leslie        to ensure items shown above are not brought into the
                        ground.
     230 Borkett
     2813 Smith
                        C) Remaining PC's will patrol the stand concourse to
     570 Stoker
                        maintain order.
     153 Hunter
     408 Shutt
                        Phase 2 (During match)

                        Officers will be located at the entrances to the stand to
                        maintain order as recruired.

                        Phas° 3 (After match)

ME1AL *                 Remain until stand clears of all supporters.
Staggered during
match                   EMELRCENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES
X*”' '"TVT»
                        In tfv ev^nt of such a situation arising (Indicated at ^
                        3.16 in the serial instruct ions) PC's in the upper level
                        of the South Stand will take up positions at th=- internal
                        partition gates and ensure th^y are open.    Those on duty
                        on the lower level will ensure that exit gates at either
                        end of the stand are open.

                        Further instructions will be as directed by control or
                        passed over the public address system.

                        Officers will be nominated for Individual points at they
                        start of this duty.                                    *
                                    SUB SECTOR 2
                                                                                               Inspector            Taylor
       Serial 4                     SCXTH STAND CAR PARK (Penistone Road end)

       PS   2419 Charles            Phase 1 (Before natch)
L>     PC   774 Johnson
->)    PC   860 Cooper              A) 2 PC's will be located at the players entrance to
3)     PC   2657 Jepson             maintain order, ensure the safe entry of the teams and
;)     PC   712 Selwood             officials and prevent access by unauthorised persons
■■)    PC   1074 Thickett           in conjunction with the club's staff.
>)     PC   1343 Weight
')     PC   2707 Hamilton           B) Supervise queues at turnstiles 29-36 and prevent
 )     PC   2424 Stockfor           items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., w a p o n s
 )     PC   2830 Dakin              or missiles) or alcoholbeing carried into the ground.
■)     PC   493 Ratisaen
                                   C) 4 P C ’S patrol in the area b^tw^en the gates and the
                                   players entrance (In pairs) to maintain order.

                                   D) 2 PC's will assist club staff at the gates at Penistone
                                   Road to prevent unauthorised access by vehicles. These gates
                                   will close for vehicle a c c e s s from 2pm to half an hour after
                                                                                          kick-off
                                   Phase 2 (IXrring match)

                                   Re.-rain on patrol in car park as above and prevent entry
                                   into this area by supporters without tickets. Covervfxple
                                   of car park after half time when Serial 5 are mealing^
      MEAL
                                   Phase 3 (After match)
      After kick off
      in gynr.
                                   Re.-rein in this area until crowd clears, prevent movement by
                                   vehicles until all spectators on foot have left the area.

                                   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



                                   SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (Lepplngs                               Lane         end)

      Serial 5                     Phase 1 (Before match)
                              E
      PS    2607 Eddison           A) 3 P C ’s will s u p e r v i s e queues at turnstiles 23-28 to
      PC   2409 Larkin             ensure persons entering these premises do not possess it'ems
      PC   2209 Brophy             as above.
      PC   1615 Griffiths
      PC   1619 Holt               B). 3 P C ’s supervise queues at turnstiles 19-22 to p r e W p t
      PC   3 2 Rawt h o r p        items shcvn above being carried onto the ground.             '
  PC       222 Troman
  PC       26 Rathbone             C) 4 PC's to patrol in the vicinity of the television
  PC       3310 Fretwell           control vehicles to ensure their security.
  PC       1506 Marsh
  PC       2080 Nettleship         Phase 2 (IXiring match)

                                  Remain on patrol in the car park as above and prevent entry
                                  into this area of supporters without tickets. Prior to
                                  half time this serial has responsibility for the whole of
                                  the car park whilst Serial 4 are mealing.

                                  Phase 3 (After natch)

                                   T h i s serial will be located in the area between the official
 MEAL:                             car park and the exit from the enclosure at the rear of the
 After half time,                 West stand to prevent Liverpool supporters entering the
 in gym                            official car park and supporters who are leaving the South
                                  Stand from exiting other than via Penistone Road (This will
                                  -ke i n conjunction w i t h other s e r i a l s and M ounted D e p t . )
  Serial 6              E   SOUTH STAND CAR PARK (lappings     Lane   end)

  PS   1678 Royal           Phase        1   (Before netch)
) PC   2571 Titterton
) PC   1564 Mace            This serial will supervise the barriers to be erected at
) PC   1478 Capes           either end of the road*3 y between turnstiles A-G at Leppings
) PC   41 Warms I**y        L a n e and the start cf the South Stand Car Park.
) PC   477 Batty
) PC   19 Duce              They will prevent access to this area by all Liverpool
) PC   1687 Millins         supporters and any other persons without legitimate reasons
) PC   556 Pattimore        (i.e. with tickets) frcm entering.
) PC   1177 Davis
) PC   1813 Pashlev         Vehicles will be prevented from entering the car park frcr.
                            Lappings Lane.

                            Phase 2 (During match)

                            4 PC's will remain in this area throughout the match to
                            supervise barriers and preventacess.

                            Phase 3 (After matcr.)

                                   barriers rerrain in position and opposing fans do t c t c c x t f
                            E n s u re
 MEAL                       into contact.    Remain until area clears of all supporters.
 Meal after half time
 in gym
                                                                                        i
                            EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE                             y ,
                                                                                  %
                            In the event of such a situation arising (Indicated at^-3.16
                            of the serial instruct ions) Officers on duty in the car park
                            will ensure that access gates at Leppings Lane and Penistone
                            Road are clear and unobstructed and no vehicles - except
                            emergency services - move.
                       SUB SECTOR 3
                                                                                     DEFECTOR     Vickers
                      SPICK FDP TERRACES

Serial 7              Phase 1 and 2 (Before and during natch)

                      PC's will be located at the entrances to the Spion Kop
PS   1203 Harpies
                      terraces in pairs to maintain order and ensure that these
PC   815 Moghul
                      entrances re-rein clear at all times.
PC   3167 Farrar
PC   1782 Ttenple
                      In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining entry into
PC   2748 Abrahams
                      this end of the ground they will be contained at the
PC   734 Thornton
                      extreme southern pert of the terraces at the rear of G a t e                                     1
PC   1103 Edwards
                      to await transference under escort to their own area.
PC   264 Hirst
                      Under NO circumstances will any supporters be transferred
PC   69 Pearson
                      frorri these terraces to other parts of the ground via the
PC   1783 Brahm
                      perimeter track.
PC   1183 West
                      Phase 3 (After natch)
MEAL
                      Rerrain in grounc unt                    J. t h e s e     terraces ar=      cie<       all
After:   ick off
in                    suDocrters.

                      * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



                      REAR OF SPICN KDP TERRACES

Serial 8              Phase i (Before natch;

PS   2001 Burrran                                                           J
                      A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 37/42 (Locate:
PC   620 Yates        in official car park) to ensure persons entering these
PC   2226 Walker      premises do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
PC   3061 Schofield   (Banners, etc., v*?apons, missiles or alcohol)
PC   861 Wadsworth
PC   1494 Naylor      B) Remaining officers will b»= at the rear of turnstiles
PC   2238 Poole       situated on Penistone Road (43/76) to ensure that items
PC   2498 Scholey     as shown above are not brought into the ground.
PC   2658 Roper-
PC   2499 Capes       Phase 2 (EXirina net
PC   2167 Frost                                                                                                    \
                      This serial will remain on patrol in the rear of the Spion
                      Kop terraces to prevent unauthorised access and ensure
                      security of kiosks, etc.
                                                                             |*5*
                      Phase 3 (After match!
                                                                                                            '■ IV5
                      Re-rain in ground until these terraces are clear of all
'■GAL                 supporters.
After half tirr>^.
in gym                EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                      In the event of such a situation arising (Indicated at
                      3.16 in the serial instruction) PC's on serial 8 will
                      ensure all exit gates are open.   Further instruct ions will
                      be as directed by control either by radio or the public*-
                      address system.
                           SIB SECTOR 4
                                                                                                    Inspector Wilson
                           PENISTONE ROAD TURNSTILES

Serial 9                   Phase 1 (Before natch)

                          This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 43-54. Th?y
PS   176 hfcrrison
                          will ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
PC   543 Boule
                          items prohibited by th= ground rules (Banners, etc. ,'weapons
PC   2725 PI urmer
                          or missiles) or alcohol.   They will also naintain order
PC   2979 Ward
                          and ensure orderly qjeues are formed.   This will be done in
PC   2330 Wilsner
                          conjunction with Mounted Officers who are on duty at this
PC   2290 Saxton
                          location.
PC   1500 SiTmons
FC   874 Williams"        Phase 2 (IXirinc match)
PC   1847 Bungay
PC   2572 Cooper
                          This serial will be located at Entrance "Z* to the Spion
PC   394 Earnshaw
                          Kop.

                          Phase 3 (After match'

                          At the                              it of Phase 3 this serial willleavp the.
A-ter half tin-           around and su                        =e loading of SYPTE buses in Penistone Rose
in cvrr.


                          * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                                                                                                       V



                          PEMLSTCKE ROAD TURNSTILES

Serial 10                 Phase 1 (Before natch)
                      I
                          This serial .will be responsible for turnstiles 55-64.
^ 2597- Thistlevood
                          They will ensure persons entering these premises do n
""C 2456 West
                          possess items as shown above. They will also maintai
    2635 Hill
                          order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
^C 3229 Price
                          be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers who are on
^C 9 Evans
                          duty in this location.
*C 121 Needham
>C 1364 Feamehough
                          Phase 2 (Darina natch)                               i\
C 1653 Davidson                                                                I r*
C 2857 Turner
                          This serial will be located at Entrance "Y" to the Spion
C 148 Jarman
                          Kop.
C 2785 Lo\ve
                          Phase 3 (After match]

                          At the corrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
GAL                       the ground and supervise loading of SYPTE buses in
Vfter kick off.           Penistone Road.
-n gym
                             SUB SECTOR 5
                                                            Inspector   Gray
                             NORTH STAND - UPPER LEVEL

 Serial 11               B   Phas^ 1 (Before rcetch)

  PS   2379 Swift            A) Five PC's and 1 Sergeant will be located in the area
) PC   975 Washington        at the rear of turnstiles 1-8 (Leppings Lane end) to ensure
) PC   2639 Wheelhous-       that the fane     entering are not in possession of items
) PC   4 KcTwalski           prohibited by the groind rules (Banners, etc., ■weapons,
) PC   2819 McManus          miss iles or alcohol)
) PC   2893 Jamieson
) PC   2806 Butler           B) Ten PC's and 1 Sergeant will patrol (in pairs) on tl>=
) PC   2887 Grant            upper level concourse to maintain order.
) PC   3232 Ttxxrpson
) PC   3347 Cornes           Phasp 2 (During match)
) PC   3270 Saynor
) PC   2834 Hudson           All Officers will be located on the upper concourse to
i PC   2542 Hewitt           maintain order.
! PC   1445 Priestley
  PC   2195 Oxl^y            Phas- 3 (After match:
  PC        si sol*
         * St
                             A) At th e conTnence.TFnt of Phase 3 (T^n minutes before end
 PS 595 Pric^                of gat>=) 1 Sergeant and £ PC's will tak^ up position at
                             th^ upp=r concoursc e>:it gate (Top of ra-rp) to Peniston^
                             Road to prevent supporters leaving and entering Penistone
                             Road.   All supporters must be directed to Leppings La^e
 MEAL                        exit.                                                   %-
 After kick off
 in gym                      E)   Re.Taininc PC's Datrol until stand is clear.      \\
                              JOTOi STAND - L3WER LEVEL

 Serial 12                    Phas° 1 (Before natch)
                          B
  PS   1381 Goddard           A) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of Gate “O"
) PC   2608 Hyde              (Penistone Road) to assist the stewards and prevent
) PC   2709 Norris            unauthorised access.
} PC   2521 ClaRKE
) PC   2814 Cclnan            B) 2 PC's will be located at thegate tothe car park
) PC   12 Taylor              at the rear of the gymnasimi (Penistone Road) to assist
) PC   136 Srrallnan          the stewards and prevent unauthorised access.
) PC   2589 Kenny
) PC   2774 Wild"             C) 2       PC's will located at therear ofturnstiles
) PC   1884 Derby             73-88   in Penistone Road to ensurepersonsentering
) PC   77 Schofield           are not in possession of articles prohibited by the
) PC   2753 Scattergcod       ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or .
) PC   1807 Broome            alcohol.
) PC   1989 Birchail
) PC   2930 Ashforc           D) Remaining PC's will patrol low=r level concourse
' PC   2£l Grayson-           of North Stand.

 PS 1972 Fowl*:               P h ase 2 ( D u rm c mat ch )

                              A) 2 PC’s to remain at          Gate   *o” for duties outlined
                              above.                                                       ^

                              E) 2 PC's to remain at car park for duties outlined
                              above.                                            ^

                              C)   Regaining PC's will patrol concourse in pairs.

                              Phase 3 (After natch)
 NJTE:-
 1 Sergeant will t>=          At the carriencement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before end
 responsible for              of game) 1 Sergeant and 8 PC's will take up position a t
 A, B, and C in               lower concourse exit gates to P e n i s t o n e Road to
 Phase ,i                     prevent supporters leaving and entering P e n i s t o n e Read.

                              ALL supporters must be directed to Leppings Lane exir^.

                              B)   Remaining PC's will patrol until stand is clear.
 MEAL
 After half tim=-                                                                         it4
 in cvm.
                              E>ERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                              In the event of such a situation arising, PC's located
                              at tha gates at the end of each level giving access
                              to raTps leading to Penistone Road will ensure these are
                              open.

                              Officers will also take up positions at exit gates in
                              Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure these are
                              open.

                              Further instructions will be as directed by control
                              or passed over the public address system.

                              Officers will be nominated for individual points
                              at the start of this duty.
                          SUB SECTOR 6                   Inspector   Haoley

                         WEST STAND

 Serial 13               Phase 1 (Before natch)

  PS   1341   Crawford   A) 2 PC's will be located at the North entrance gates
) PC   3198   Akred      to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry
) PC   2083   Packer     and where necessary prevent ing entry of unauthorised
) PC   1002   Wild       persons.
) PC   2502   Kilby
> PC   2102   Eustaoe    B) 2 PC's will be located at the South entrance gates
■ PC   1226   Sirrpson   to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry7 and where
  PC   1772   Tyler      necessary preventing entry’ of unauthorised persons.
  PC   1278   Lang
  PC   2398   Moss       C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse/bar area to maintain
  PC   2367   Sykes      order.
  PC   2062   Boocock
  PC   3055   Saunders   D) 6 PC's will be located at the front of the stand
                         to prevent missiles being thrown/stand tickets being
                         dropped to the terraces b^low or persons eliding frorr th=
                         terraces to thr stand and to maintain order.

                         Phase 2 (Darina r ra tc h ’

                         PC's will be located at the entrances to the stand to t
                                                                               i-
                         rraintam order .                                      \

MEAL                     Phasc 3 (After natch)
After kick off
when relieved by         Refrain in stand until clear.
Serial 16
in Gym
                         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                         In the event of such a situation arising indicated at 3.16
                         in the serial order. PC's will take up positions at the
                         emergency exits at the extreme front comers of the stanc
                          and ensure the gates are unlocked.   Other officers will
                         take up positions at the entrance steps to the stand and '
                         again ensure the gates are open.

                         Further instruct ions will be as directed by control or
                         passed over the public address system.

                         Officers will be nominated for individual points at the
                         start of this duty.
                              SUB SECTOR 7                          Inspector   Walker (ops)

                             LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (SOTOi)

 Serial 14                   Phase 1 (Before retch)
                        B
                             This serial will ensure that supporters entering through
  PS 1483 Higgins
                             turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession of items
) PC 78 Booth
                             prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
) PC 1453 Philips
                             missiles or alcohol).
) PC 1425 Vtoofinc^'.
) PC 120 Harris
                             They will also ensure order is maintained on the terraces.
) PC 601 Townenc
) PC 1885 Wake
                             Phase 2 (During natch)
)PC 3191 Turner
) PC 2348 Fletcher
                             This serial will be located in the central tunnel to the
) PC 2345 Saunders
                             Leppings Lane terraces to maintain order as required.
) PC 2712 Wood
 MEAL                        Phase 3 (After match)
 After kick off
 in gym                      Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.


                             *************************************




                            LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE AND REAP ENCLOSURE (N3KIH)

 Serial 15                  Phase 1 (Before match)                                           &
 PS   1576 Boulton          This serial will ensure that supporters are entering             >
                                                                                            through
 FC   185 Connell           turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession of items
 PC   2939 Davis            prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
 PC   1728 Cooper           missiles or alcohol).
 PC   1893 Smith
 PC   1540 Lockvood         They will also ensure order is maintained on the terraces.
 FC   771 Turnbull
 PC   117 Southern          Phase 2 (IXxring match)
 PC   2825 Ford
 PC   1271' Gregory         This serial will be located in the tunnel to the North \
      397 Tirigg            Pen in the Leppings Lane terraces, to maintain order as \
                            required.
 °S 637 Hirst   (Ops
 EAL
                            Phase 3 (After match)          .
 ifter                                                                                           >’f
                            S u p e r v is e   exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.   -    |
 alf time
 n Gvm

                            E^gRGE^*CY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                            In the event of such a situation arising, indicated at
                            3.16 in the serial instruct i on s, PC's will take up
                            positions at the exit gates and ensure they are open.

                            Further instructions will be as directed by control
                            or passed over the public address system.

                            Officers will be nominated for individual points at the
                            start of this duty.
                             SUB SECTOR 8                     Inspector Sykes
                                                              inspector Broontead
                             LEPPINGS LANE TURtCTILES

 Serial 16                   Phase 1 (Before match)
----------              C
PS   2171 Keener            This serial will be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
PC   451 Cooper             They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
PC   654 Kettleborough      items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
PC   10S5 Slater            weapons missiles or alcohol). They wrill maintain order
PC   72 Lipski              and ensure orderly queues are formed.
PC   1679 Oxley
PC   3130 Brown             Phase 2 (Durina natch)
PC   1144 Reynolds
PC   3291 Parkes            This serial will be located in the West Stand.
PC   1027 Yeomans
PC   3390 Stea              Phase 3 (After natch)

                            At the conmencement of P h a s e 3, this serial will leave
MEAL                        th» ground and take up a position in Leppings L a n e
Aftej^balf tine             opposite the turnstiles to await exit of supporters and
in                          prevent disorder.




                                                                                             V
                            ★★★★★★★★★★★★★★♦★★★★★★★★★★★★★♦★★IT*****




                            LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES

S e r i a l 17              Phase 1 (Before natch)
      ;----         C
 PS 229 Cable               This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 1-8.    ^
PC 128 Lynsky               They will ensure that persons entering dc not possess   \
PC 2831 Dransfield          items prohibited by the ground rules (As above).
PC 1177 Castleton           They will maintain order and ensure orderly queues are forrrpc
PC 1440 Charlesworth
PC 2981 Barnes              Phase   2 (During natch)
PC 1277 Smith                                                                     'I.
                                                                                             I!>
PC 205 Beardsall            This serial will be located in the central   tunnel         to
PC 990 Thcrrpson            the Leppings Lane terraces.
PC 138 Saunders
PC 2528 Hughes              Phase 3 (After natch)

                            At the corrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
                            the ground and take up a position in Leppings Lane
                            opposite the turnstiles to await exit of supporters
                            and prevent disorder.
MEAL
After half time
in Gym
                              LEPPINGS L W C TURNSTILES

      Serial 18               Phase 1 (Before match)

      PS   1378 Pledge        This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 9-16.
1)    PC   84 Hunt            They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
2)    PC   2260 Srruth        items prohibited by the ground rules. (Banners, etc.,
3)    PC   1931 Winter        weapons, missiles or alcohol.   They will maintain
4)    PC   2643 EXmphey       order and ensure orderly queues are formed.
5)    PC   1143 Rockett
6)    PC   1839 POW=>ll       P h ase   2 (EXiring match)
7)    PC   1976 Taylor
8 )   PC   2155 Edwards       This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
9)    PC   2338 Wassell       North Pen.
0 )   PC   3309 Robinson
                              Phase 3 (After match)

                              At the ccrrmencement of Phase 3 this Serial will leave
                              the ground and take up a position in Leppings Lane oppos
                              the turnstiles to await exit of s-jpporters and prevent
      Afte? ki:               disorder.
      in gyrr



                              ***************************************                 V
                                                                                          t
                              LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES

      SariaT 19               Phase 1 (Before match)

      PS   182 Tissingtcr     This serial will    located at Leppings Lane and ensure
      PC   1051 Hobson        that orderly queues form. They will assist other
      PC   2518 Shelton       Serials at this location as required and in the event
      PC   1723 Bishop        of vehicles, coaches, etc. arriving, supervise th=ir \
      PC   1927 Taylor        unloading.                                            \
      PC   1477 Hill
      PC   1190 Celton        Phase 2 (EXiring natch)
      FC   377 Hibbard
      PC   3017 Smalley       This serial will be located in the Vtest Stand
      PC   3020 O s b o r n                                                           ri
      PC   2662 Shiel
                              Phase 3 (After match)

                              At the commencement of P h a s e 3 this serial will leave
                              tl>? ground and take up a position in Leppings L a n e
      MEAL                    opposite the turnstiles to await exit of Supporters
      After half time         and prevent disorder.
      kick off
      in gym.
                                   SUB SECTOR 9                 Inspector   Sewell/Sel*ood

                                GROUND RESERVES

    Serial 20             £     Phase 1 (Before netch)

    PS 1288 Payne                    serial will act as a Reserve Serial ana remain
)     PC 2190 Harris           within the G y m a s i i n unless direct otherwise.
)     FC 2435 Griffiths
)     PC 2717 Savoury          Phas^ 2 (Purina match)
)   PC 2592 ShijTwell
)   PC 1991 Baker              ^     above
)   PC 3217 Allen
)   PC 62 Cooper               Pbas- 3       (After mater,)
)   PC 3162 Pears
)   PC 1618 Sherwood           ^    ab ove.
-   PC 3170 Fairclo-jgh

                               **************************************
    At 12 noon In gyr..




                               GROUND RESERVES

    Serial 21                  Phas° 1 (Before match)

 Inspect or Selvsooc           This serial will act as a Reserve serial and
 PS 842 Hudson                 r ere in in th= area adjacent to th= Police control
 PC 2512 Craigi^               box between the South stand and Leppings Lan=-
 PC 2372 Justice               terx aces.
PC 2577 Trewick
PC 1619 Schofield              Phase 2 (Eurinc match)
PC 190 Firth
PC 1990 Cuff                   As above
PC 2019 Laisides
PC 2130 Frost                  Phase 3 (After match)
PC 2112 Basford
PC 25‘J ;                      As above
                                                                                       \
      After half t n



                                                                                      11
                              CTPJND RESERVES

Serial 22            FI 'F2   Phas° 1 (Before match)

PS    454 Chapman             This serial will act as a Reserve serial and rerrain
PC    525 Bevinaton           in the area betv*?en tlv? South Stand and th? Spion
PC   2683 Nield               kop unless directed otherwise.
?C   143 Bates
PC   11 Short                 Phase 2 (During match)
?C   157 West
=C   3301 Cook                As above
"C   1124 Pratt
XT   611 Booth                Phase 3 (After match)
'C   3231 Lagha
^ 474 Gilding                 As above

^EAL
'ifter k ic k o f f i n
                                                                                    APPENDIX *C
                                      SUB SECTOR 10                           Inspector Coofee

                                      PUBLIC OREER - M I D C L B O O D ROM)

      Serial 23                       Phase 1 (Before match)

       PS    1005 Wood                PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Wads ley
1)     PC    1429 Bashforth           Lane to Crofton Avenue to maintain order and prevent any
2)    PC    2910 Catnock              clash of supporters.   Direct supporters to side street
3)    PC    2929 Bennett              parking and maintain security of business premises, paying
4)    PC    260 Shiprran              special attention to local public houses and shops.
d )   PC    1266 Addsead
^)    PC    3183 Treck                Phase 2 (Poring retch)
■')   PC    947 Uttley
j)    PC    1779 W i l l i a n s m    Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
■)    PC    953 Mugglestcr-y?
1)    PC    1996 Tarry                Phase 3 (After retch)
  )   PC    14 Qe.iya.Ti
  )   PC    2969 Dunn                 On ccrrrriencernent of Phase 3, this serial will resime patrol
                                      in location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                                      and supermarkets and prevent any clash of supporters.

                                      ***************************************

                                      PUBLIC ORDER - MIDDLSODOD ROAD

      Serial 24                       Phase 1 (Before retch?                                       %
                                                                                                  \
  PS    329 Wilson                   PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlevood Road from Croflspn
  PC    219 Purnell                  Avenue to Winn Gardens to maintain order and prevent aAy
  PC    282 Davies                   clash of supporters. Direct supporters to side street
  PC    2369 Burke                   parking and reintain security of business premises, paying
  PC    1917 Cook                    special attention to local public houses and shops.
  PC    2403 Morton
  PC    389 Lawrence                 Phase 2 (Daring retch)
  PC    500 Crossland
  PC    3212 Nesbit                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane

                                     Phase 3 (After retch)

                                                                                                       V
                                     On c a m e n c e m e n t of Phase 3, this serial will resume patrol in
                                     location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                                     and prevent any clash of supporters.

                                     ****************************************                         I'6*
                                                                                                  V \ %.
                                                                                                  \ \*
                                     PUBLIC ORDER - MLDCLEWOOD ROAD

  Serial 25                          Phase i (Before retch)

        1843 Thorrpson               PC's will patrol in pairs in M i d d l e w o d Road from Wads ley
  C 376 Simmons                      Lane to Minto toad to maintain order and prevent any clash
  -C 2145 Benton                     of supporters.   Direct supporters to side street parking
  c 2740 Bennett                     and maintain security of business premises, paying special
  c 160 SacLique                     attention to local public houses and shops.                   '*•
  C 807 Johnson
  C 3311 Baker                       Phase 2 (IXxring retch)
  f' 2005 Hamilton
     2056 Lister                     Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
     1537 Me H o r s
     2519 Birkinshar-                Phase 3 (After match)

                                     On carmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume patrol
                                     in location as above, paying particular a t t e n t i o n to shops
                          SUB SEETCR 11                       Inspector Mxare

                           HJBLIC CFEER - KLDCLEMOOD ROAD

  Serial 26                Phase 1 (Before rretcft)

   PS    1956 Biggins     PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Minto
) PC    3138 Geary        Road to Hillsborough Precinct to rreintain order and
) PC    2515 Smith        prevent any clash of supporters, paying special attention
) PC    2317 Elackb—      to shops and in particalar licensed premises.
) PC    162 Gillett
)' PC   270 Ja.Tes        Phase 2 (Purina retch)'
) PC    2946 Daley
) FC    660 Dexter        Refreshments at    Hrrmertcn Rocd
) PC    2652 Saosford
) PC    3305 Gibson       Phase 3 (After match)
) PC    520 Hoga
                          On cciTTTPncement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
                          patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                          to shops and licensed premises and prevent any clash
                          of supporters.



                          ************************************


                                                                                1


                          PUBLIC OREER - HILLSBCROU® PRECINCT
                                                                                V-
 Serial 27                Phase 1 (Before match!

 PS     2557 Eam sh s w   PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
 FC    58 Hoy land        Hillsborough Precinct to Bradfield Road and frcr.
PC    440 Eaves           Braafield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.
PC     3304 Rickley       Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
PC     1371 Barnes        Precinct, p>aying special attention to the supermarkets
PC    2426 B r a d e n    where looting could take place.
PC    2196 Smith
PC    1757 Thcrres        Phase 2 (EXiring match)                                   \
PC    2232 Sweet ing
FC    3202 Bowler         Refreshments at HaTmerton Road.
PC    2775 Bowring
PC    2775 Wyer           •Phase 3 (After match)                                If
PC    211 Brickley                                                            \ \ X
                                                                              !  i>
PC    3147 Sherwooc       On carrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resum^ v
FC    1344 Hanson         patrol in location as above, paying particular attention
FC    1507 Walker         to shops and to prevent any clash of supporters.
FC    88 Dalton

PS 1059 Bowers
                            SUB S E C K jK 12                  Inspector     Turner
                                                               Inspector     Townerri


                            PUBLIC ORCER - PAKFSITE RQAD/CAICHBAR LftNE

Serial 28                   Phase 1 (Before natch)

PS   1512 Gibson            PC's will patrol in pairs in Parksiae Road and
PC   2897 Deville           Catchbar Lane to maintain order and prevent any clash
PC   2738 Moran             of rival supporters, paying special attention to
PC   1020 htexwell          shops and licensed premises. It is essential that
PC   2331 Robinson          vigilance is rraintained on this road as it is the
PC   2891 Woodward          mein route betv^en either end of the ground.
PC   1198 Washington.
PC   3056 Sloane            Phase 2 (Purina match)
PC   1511 Barron
PC   90 Southall            Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
PC   2694 Pellegrime
                            Phase 3 (After match)

                            Cr-: ccrrrpnce.-rpnt of Phas= 3 this serial will r'-r'jr
                            patrol in location as- above, paying special attention
                            to prevent any clash of rival supporters.



                                                                                         V*

                            PUBLIC ORDER - P E M S T C N E RQAD/I£PPINGS   lane
                                                                                         >
Serial 29                  Phase 1 (Before match)

PS 2620 Croplev            This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
PC 2711 Patteson           to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
PC 1837 Brookshaw          prevent access by supporters.  It is essential that
PC 3337 Walker             access be prevented to all but residents.  At similar
?C 1091. Foster.           events in the past considerable danage has be^n causedi
PC 2283 Oliver             by groups of supporters, both before, during and after \
?C 1760 Snowden            the gat*?.    _                                          \
PC 1162 Martin
~C 1698 Martin             1)   Penistone Road North/Vere Road
?C 2508 Mitchell           2)   Penistone Road North/Fielding Road
-C 1965 Wood               3)   Leppings Lane/Vere Road                                  1'|*
                           4)   Leppings Lane/Fielding Road                             | *■

                           Phase 2 (Poring mat c h )

                           Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                           who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
-IEALS Poring mat ch       these roads.
Staggered at Claywheels
^ane to ensure cov^r       Phase 3 (After natch)
 or points in Phase 2
                            Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove the
                            barriers is given by Sector Inspector.  It is essential
                          * that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
                            supporters have cleared the area.
                               R E L I C GREER - PEKLSTOfC HQAD/LEPPUCS L M C

Serial 30                      Phase 1 (Before natch)

 PS   2640 Perry               This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
}FC   184 Geeson               to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
 PC   552 Hartshorn            prevent any supporters gaining access.        It is essential
 PC   249 Yates                that access be prevented to all but residents.         At
 PC   1166 K i b o u m e       similar e v e n t s in the past considerable dare?-- has been
 PC   1211 Redpath             caused by groups of supporters both before, during and
 PC   3257 Crookes             after the g a r r *:-
 PC   2497 Serbatlic
 PC   1734 Foster              1)     Penistone Road North/Bickerton Road
 PC   1845 Zorrmerfie;         2)     Leppings Lane/Bickerton Road
 PC   2644 Roberts             3)'    Leppinas Lane/Intake Road
                               4)     Leppings Lane/Famdal° Road

                               P h a s e 2 (During match)

                               R e n e m at lccat ions given tc prevent supporters who are
                               unable to enter th= around aainina access tc these road:

                              Phase 3 (After m a t c h )
MEALS During mate
                                                                                     i
S t a g ^ r e a at Cla*>      Re.Texn until all cxxy^ds have cleared and consent to jteqcv0
La-t^ to ensure c x r .-^ z   barriers is given by the sector Inspector.    It is essential
for points in Phas^           that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until c^S.1
                              supoorxers have cleared ti>= area.

                              * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




                              R E L I C CREER - LEPPINGS LANE

Serial 31                     Phase 1 (Before match)

PS    2824   Adams            This serial will be responsible for manning the barr
                                                                                rrieis
PC    1789   Flatrran         to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to   \
PC    2371   Bairstow         prevent access by supporters
PC    2225   Pervis -
PC    1484   Collins          1)     L>eppings Lane/Shenstone Road
PC    1432   Wright           2)     L>eppings Lane/Eskdale Road.
PC    2054   Wilkes                                                                                                           t!
?c    2889   Fenton                PC's on each road]
-C    2942   Williamso-
-\„   1023   Holnes           The re-raining PC's will patrol Leppings Lane in pairs to
:C    1724   Brown            maintain order and prevent persons arriving at the
                              ground in coaches unloading except at the turnstiles.

                              Phase 2 (EXiring natch)

                              Rena in at locations given above to prevent supporters who
                              are unable to enter the ground gaining access to the roads and
                              to maintain ordei.

                              Phase 3 (After match)

                              Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove
EALS  EXiring mater.          barriers is given by Sector Inspector.  It is essential
taggered at Clayvd^els        that no vehicles be allcwed Into Leppings Lane until all
ane to ensure cover foi       supporters have cleared the area.
                         SUB SECTOR 13                   Inspector   Qraoe
                                                  f


                        PUBLIC CREE* - LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOOT

                        Phase 1 (Before natch)

PS   888 Leader         This serial will be located at the roundabout at th°
PC   2334 WiIlians      junction of Leppings Lane/Penistone Road North/Herries
PC   1775 Hurphreys     Road. They will ensure that Liverpool supporters who
PC   2147 Gillies       travel down Halifax Road/Penistone Road North frcrr, the
PC   1925 Suter         motorway cb not gain access to Herries Road or that part
PC   1508 Hurst         of Penistone Road leading to the Spion Kop. T}>?y will also
PC   2686 Mitchell      ensure that Nottingham Forest supporters whose vehicles
PC   2473 Stockoe       will be parked in terries Road and Penistone Road do not
PC   2263 Chang         gain access to Leppings Lane or Penistone Road North.
PC   213 Yarrow
PC   1217 Hall          Phase 2 (EXiring natch)
PS 1480 Chaprren
                        Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                        Phase 3 (After match)

                        Location as in Phase 1 to ensure that supporters
                        leaving the ground do net cotn= into contact.


                        *****************************************




                        PUBLIC CRIER - LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOOT

erial 33              ' Phase 1 (Before natch)
PS   2957 Thomas
PC   2119 Bertra~       This serial will have similar responsibilities as
PC   2833 Holland       outlined in the serial above in relation to segregation
PC   1311 Brovin        of supporters before the natch but will also have
PC   1930 Lumley        responsibility for ensuring that the traffic island \
PC   967 Taylor         remains clear of traffic to allow convoys of Liverpool!
PC   1431 Jackson       supporters coaches to round it to gain access to
PC   2114 Pashley       their designated unloading/parking places.   Unless
PC   1710 Fleetwood     directed otherwise they will prevent such coaches gaining
PC   1671 Lodge         access into Leppings Lane.
PC   1645 Bagnall
                        Phase 2 (Poring natch!

                        Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                        Phase 3 (After natch)

                       At the end of the natch they will prevent all traffic
                       travelling into Leppings Lane and that part of Penistone
                       Road leading from the ground until directed to allow
                       traffic to flow again by control.                   *'*•
                          SUB SECTOR 14                                                 Inspector             Ingtam

                          PUBLIC CREER PATOCL - PEXISTONE HCAD NOFTTH

Serial 34                 Phase i (Before match)

PS   2858 Cocker          "Hois serial will be responsible for part of Penistone
PC   900 Dawson           Road North from th= traffic island at the junction with
PC   2097 B a r ^ s       Leppings Lane to the Travellers Rest Public House.
PC   3255 S-li/elds       This road will be extensively used by Liverpool supporters
PC   1417 McDonnell       en route from Wads ley Bridge Station and coach parking
PC   2043 Landers         areas in Claywheels L a n e ana Penistone Road North/
PC   919 Evans            Halifax Road. Tl*?y will rraintain order anc ensure
PC   1414 Gordon          that supporters do not possess items prohibited by the
PC   1296 Geddes          grour>d roles (Banners, etc., missiles, weapons or
PC   2359 Woodcock        alcohol).
PC   157^ Hood
                          A) 2 Officers will be located at the top of Niagara
                          Road to prevent access into this road by football
                          supporters or any other unauthorised person who tries
                          to gain access to the Niagara Police Sports Ground.

                          B)      Rerreining officers will be located in pairs
                          on static points a: the kerb edge or, if neorssary, on
                          the central ressr c ‘.ion (dependant on th=- v c u t p of
                          traffic) to e n s u r e poblic order.

                          Phase 2 (Poring match)                                                                        \ •
                          Refreshments at Clsy-h                                 a n = , T r a f f i c D ?rt.
                                                                                                                        >
                          Phase 3 (After natch)

                          Officers will be situated in locations as given for
                          Phase 1.

                          * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




                          PUBLIC CREER PATROL - PENISTONE ROAD NQRTm
                                                                                                                             \
Serial 35                 Phase 1 (Before mater.)
                      A
PS   1201 Meppen-W;       This serial will be responsible for the part of
PC   830 Sharp            Penistone Road No: ih frcrri th e T r a v e lle r s Rest P u b lic ^
PC   1766 White           House to Wardsend Road North.        This roa: will.;,be |
PC   2672 Curt is         extensively used by Liverpool supporters en route ’            from
PC   2216 Hillier         Wadsley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
PC   1326 Lugt on         Halifax Road. They will maintain order and ensure that
PC   3096 Povey           supporters do not possess items prohibited by the ground
PC   2349 Pat on          rules (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol). Officers
PC   2952 Pearson         will be located in pairs on static points at the kerb
PC   1846 Ackroyd         edg= or on the central reservation (dependant on volume
PC   2676 Beech           of traffic) to ensure public order.
                                                                                                                       "x.
                          Phase 2 (EXoring match)

                          Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                          Phase 3 (After match)

                          Offioers will be situated in the locations as given
                          for Phase 1.
                        SUB SECTOR 15                 Inspector   Finc±)


                       COPCH RECEPTION - CLMiWEELS LANE

Serial 36              Phas13 1 (Before retch)

PS   2408 Wilson       This serial will supervise the unloading of
PC   2788 Price        Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lan^. PC's will ensure
PC   2127 Snart        that supporters leaving the coaches do not possess
PC   918 Webster       items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
PC   2313 Lonsdale     weapons, missiles) or alcohol. Once Claywi-^els is full, this
PC   3318 Popplewell   serial will be relocated and assist serials 41 & 42 in Halifax
PC   2923 Dalryrrple   Phase 2 (During retch)                                    Road.
PC   3131 Lewis
PC   2584 Musk         Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic D?pt.
PC   1934 Smith
PC   2354 Otter        Phase 3 (After retch)
PS 2663 Lumley
                       Supervise loading of supporters onto
                       coaches.




                       GQftCH RECEPTION - CLAYWHEELS LANE

Serial 37              Phase 1 (B^for^ match)                              I
PS   2835 Edlington    This serial will supervise the unloading of
PC   3314 Ashton       Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane. PC's will
PC   1420 Woodward     ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do
PC   126 Langley       not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
PC   2241 Franklyn     (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol. Orce Claywheels
PC   590 Griggs        is full, this serial will be re-located and assist serials !41
PC   80 Marvin         Phase 2 (EXiring ret ah)           & 42 in Halifax Road.
PC   1442- Charter
PC   1773 Robson       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywr>=els Lane,
PC   3054 Moore                                                             \
PC   264 9 Bashforth   Phase 3 (After retch)

PS 2827 Moraan         Supervise loading of supporters onto coache-s.

                                                                           l!
                       NJTE;-

                       Claywheels Lane will be subject of "No parking"
                       cones for it's full length to allow Liverpool's
                       coaches to park - THESE MUST BE ENFORCED -
                       Barriers will also be available to prevent access
                       from Penistone Road.

                       Access must be allowed for persons workings at
                       the various premises including the brewery and
                       bakery in Claywheels Lane which will be open on
                       this day.
                           SIS S m CTCK 16                     Inspector   ScJaoley


                           R E L I C OREER - TRAIN KBCK’TCON/KAESLEY STATION

Serial 38                  Phase 1 (Before match)

                          This serial will work in conjunct ion with Mounted
 PS    1248 Gilhooley
                          Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the
 PC   2185 Cooper
                          trains at Wads ley Station. They will rrarshall the
 PC   303 Priest
                          supporters and only allow them to leave when all
 PC   2713 Fretwe11
                          have left the station premises.    Where neoessary
 PC   3137 Flynn
                          searches will be carried out to ensure that items
 FC   1287 Sfrnith
 PC   1297 Hall           prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
                          weapons, missiles or alcohol) are not in their possession.
 PC   1037 Cahill
 PC   1601 Ellis
                          This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
 FC   2149 Wilson
                          but remain static at this location.
 FC   254 Price
                          Phase     2 (EXiring met ch)

                          Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lan^.

                          P h a s e 3 ( A f t e r n e t chi'


                          R e su m e location at Wads ley Station to ensure orc>=r
                          is maintained and queues form in a proper manner.


                          ************************************



                          PUBLIC OREER - TRAIN RECEPTION/WADSLEY STATION

S e r ia l 39             Phase 1 (Before nretch)

PS    2324 Hagi>=         This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted Officers
PC    177 Kenyon          to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the trains at
FC    1581 Marshall       Wads ley Station. They will marshall the supporters a ^
PC    155 Old             only allow them to leave when all have left the station
PC    2445 Speed'         premises.    Where necessary7 searches will be carried
PC    3224 Lynes          out to ensure that supporters are not in possession    ,
PC    107 Carling         of items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc
PC    1727 Parkes         weapons, missiles or alcohol).                    r j\
FC    3023 Martin
PC    2732 Higginbotrom   This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
PC    2S70 Beaumont       but remain static at this location.

                          Phase 2 (EXirinq match)

                          Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                          Phase 3 (After rretch)                                      „
                          ----------------------                                      x-
                          R esu m e location at Wadsley Station to ensure order
                          is maintained and queues form in a proper manner.

                                                                                            /
                                                                                           i/
                       SUB Ea3-JluK 19                 Inspector   Bui las


                       PUBLIC OREER - C T C H RBOSFTION/SEARCH SQUAD

serial 46              Phase 1 (Before match)

PS   195 Howell        This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
PS   2737 Hallett      Officers on the A616 at Ought ibridge on the one-way
PC   391 Roberts       system to check at random coaches and mini buses
PC   1226 Smith        carrying Liverpool supporters.
PC   1940 Pattison
PC   718 Pont          Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
PC   93 Turner         are in possession of tickets, are not under the
PC   904 Corner        influence of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and
PC   909 Reddish       are considered fit to attend this event.
PC   37 Itersc^?n
PC   1012 Wilkinson,   Where this is not the case, or where they are in
PC   808 Rosevear      possession of alcohol or under it's influence,
                       consideration should be taken regarding action under
                       the appropriate legislation or returning the.- to the
                       motorway.

                       All coaches/mini buses checked will have a
                       l a b e l (issued to sector carmanders) affixed to
                       the windscreen prior to the." being allowed to
                       leave.

                       Phas<=- 2 (EXiring match)

                       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane

                       Phase 3 (After match)

                       Reserve duties, as directed by control.




                                                                               \
                       MINI BUS RECEPTION - WARDSEND ROAD NORTH

Serial 40              Phase 1 (Before natch)
                   B
  2092 Varga           This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
  2743 Charlton        mini buses in Wardsenc Road North. PC's will
  2614 Ogiey           ensure ttet supporters leaving the coaches do not
  494 Knowles          possess items prohibited by the ground rules
  228 Gledhill         (Banners, etc., veapons missiles) or alcohol.
  2015 Barden
  2222 Roebuck         Phas^ 2 (During match)
  2997 Riddiouc:
  1360 Dew’son         Refreshments at Traffic Efept. Claywheels La-y^.
  2953 Hudson
  400 Ryan             Phase 3 (After match)

                       Supervise loading of supporters onto mini buses.




                       This road will be subject to "No Parking" cones and^
                       only mini buses, etc. will-be allowed to park.
                       Barriers will also b^ available for erection
                       at the entrance to this road to control entry.
                   SUB SBCTOK 17                                                  Inspector        Robinson

                   OOACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX ROAD

erial 41           Phase 1 (Before match)

   2881 Pearson    This serial will supervise tb? unloading of Liverpool
   1254 Bradley    coaches in Halifax Road/Penistorte Road North. PC's
   2993 Nuoent     will ensure that simporters leaving the coaches do
   1067 Rogers     not possess ite.ns prohibited by the ground rules
   2903 Wheatley   (Banners, etc., v^apons, missiles) or alcohol.
   2840 Pearson
   304 Macreadle   Phase 2 (EXurina mat ch)
   2735 Wade
   258 Smith       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
   1239 Raybold
   2 2 0 1 Olney   Phase 3 (After match)

                   Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



                   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




                   OCWZH                           - HALIFAX ROAD                                             1

  ■al 42           All duties will be identical to ana work in

  1561 Reynolds
                   conjunction with the serial above.                                                         >
  1738 Green
  2100 Jepson
  1849 Wheldcn     Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clayvheels Lane.
  2214 Brownley
  845 Cowling
  2779 Burrows
  2354 Plumridge
  1042 Braddock
  1801 Duffield
  1336 Mclaness
                                                                                                                  \
                               SUB SECTOR 18                                                 Inspector   Bollixaan

                               PUBLIC GREET! - HALIFAX HOAD

Serial 43                      Phase 1 (Before match)
                         1
                               T h is
                                    serial will patrol Halifax Road from Wads ley
PS 1230 Ward
                               Station to Southey Green Road.   Officers will work
PC 1891 Staniforth
                               in pairs to maintain order, etc.
PC 1320 Wilson
PC 1130 Binns
                               Phase 2 (Durina match)
PC 2932 Denton
PC 2689 Lacey
PC 3181 Mincher                Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Clavwteels Lane
PC 76 EXirba-n
                               Phase 3 (After natch)
PC 422 Slater
PC 1548 Durrand
 PC 1946 L e g g a t e         Patrol location outlined above.

                                                                          t* * * * * * * *




                              PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX R C & D

erial 44                      Phase 1 (Before natch)

PS   2291 Dickins~            This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Southey
?C   3028 Davis               Green Road to Browning Road. Officers will work
?C   2845 Rob ins O".         in pairs to naintain order, etc.
?C   2763 Vallano=
?C   2828 Lighten             Phase 2 (EXirinq mat c h )
-C 106 Goss
Dr'' 1208 Thcnpso’-.          Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lar>?.
->C 1559 Bollons
     38 Pearce                Phase 3 (After natch)
     2531 Sneddon
     2169 Lowery              Patrol location outlined above.

                              * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




                              PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX RC&D

irial 45                     Phase 1 (Before match)

PS 2936 Linaor               This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Browning Rc
C 675 Ley                    to Deer lands Avenue. Officers will work in pairs’"to
C 234 3 Gardene;             maintain order, etc.
C 2623 McCorrra:
C 2298 Cooper                Phase 2 (EXiring match)
C 1944 Ogden
C 1982 Bint                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
C 464 Clayton
C 1292 Myers                 Phase 3 (After match)
- 1232 Hood
- 2009 Forshaw               Patrol location outlined above.

                             * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



                             NOTE:-           These officers will ensure that Liverpool
                                              supporters travelling in private cars are
                                              directed to park in side roads on adjoining
                                              estates
                           SUB SECTOR 20                   Inspector   Steele


                           prer -rc OREER - CQftCH RECEPTION/SEARCH SQUAD - TftNKERSLEY

erial 47               A   Phase 1 (Before match)

PS   2723 Mullins          This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
FC   820 Tcrrpkins         Officers on the A61 on tfr? Sheffield side of the
PC   1606 Gilding          Tankers ley motorway junction (Exit 36) to check at
PC   1681 Stevenson        random coactes and mini buses carrying Liverpool
PC   1963 Oxley            supporters.
PC   1393 Marks
PC   1664 Kerr             Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
PC   1612 Picket           are in possession of tickets, are not under the influence
PC   2872 Harratt          of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and are considered
PC   1450 Cunningham       fit to attend this event.
PC   2051 Hi girton
                           Where this is not t>>? case, or where they are in
                           possession of alcohol or under its influence considerat aon
                           should be taken regarding action under the appropriate
                           leaislation or returning them to the motorway.

                           A ll coaches/mini buses checked will h a v e a label
                           (iss'j^d to sector conTrencprs } affixed to the windscreen
                           prior to them being allcw^d to l e a v e .

                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           Refreshrrents at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.         V
                           Phase 3 (After rretrch)
                                                                                    \
                           Reserve duties as directed by control.
                        SUB SECTOR 21                                      Inspector         P S&ith (E)

                        M 3 3 H £ PATROL - CALL SIGN *TMC3 ONE*

Serial 48               Phase 1 (Before match)

 PS   542 Lee           TlvLs serial will petrol the Stocksbridy* area,
 PC   850 TYxxpson      paying particular attention to lic^ns^d prerises
 PC   1251 Davadso-     and to maintain order.
 PC   2129 Brooke
 PC   1363 Ssmyk        Phase 2 (During match)
 PC   1301 Cherry
 PC   3180 Hayes        Refreshments at Deepcar Police Station, at 3p~-3.45pr.
                        Resume petrol 3.45pr,.
                        Phas° 3 (After match)

                        Patrol in area as outlined in                    P hase    1.



                        *************************************




                        MCBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANG3 TWO*

Serial 49               P hase    1 (Before match)
                                                                                                         k
PS    661 Hill          T h is s e r i a l w i l l p a t r o l t h e D eepcar/O jght ibridgp             V
PC    844 Re^s          a r e s , p a y in g p a r t i c u l a r a t t e n t i o n t o l i c e n s e d
PC
PC
      2626 Chur-e
      3082 Fl^tclv^:
                        p r - r u s e s and t o m a in ta in or d=r .                                    >
PC    2888 Ellis        P hase 2 ( D ir in a match)
PC    583 Devis
PC    384 Roach         Refreshments at Deepcar Police Station.                            M=aJ at 3.45prr-4 .3C*pr:
                        Patrol prior to 3.45prr:.
                        Phase 3 (After match)                                                                  •

                        Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1

                       *************************************
                                                                                                         \
                       MCBILE PATRCL - CALL SIOI “TAN3D THREE*

^rial 50               P hase    1   (B e f   o re rrat c h   t


     4 57 McSloy       This serial will patrol the Wadsley/KiddJewooe area,
•C                     paying particular attention to licensed prer_s-£, tc
     2961 Jenkunso'
C    2933 Wadsworth    maintain order.
*C   540 SuTpter
C    263 Barton        P hase    2 (During match)
XT   305 Jarvis
C    276 Robinson      Refreshments at Claywheels Lane at 3pm.
                       Resume patrol at 3.45prr. in area shown for Phase 1.

                       P hase    3 (After natch;

                       Patrol in area as outlined above.
                          SUB SECTOR 22                        Inspector     Purdy (H3)


                          HDBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN *TAN5D FPUR"

a e r i a l 51            Phase 1 (Before match

  PS   323 Proctor        Patrol Foxhill area, paying special attention to
  PC   420 Davis          licensed premises.
  PC   2333 English
  PC   1083 Cox           Phase 2 (EXirina mat ah)
  PC   1041 Turner
  PC   1492 N a n g le    Meal at 3.00pm at Claywheels L a n e , Traffic Dept.
  PC   2481 Glossop       Resume patrol at 3.45pr; Foxhill/Parson Cross area.

                          Phase 3 (After match)

                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.

                          *************************************




                         M33LUE PATOOL - CALL SIGN "TANGO FIVE"

ferial 52                Phase 1 (Before match)

                         Patrol Parson Cross area, paying special attention
 PS    2664 Herbert
                         to licensed premises to maintain order.
 PC    3245 Hepworth
 PC    2884 Heritage
                         P h ase   2 (During match)
 PC    2976 Willia.TTE
 PC    333 Ogilvie
                         3.00pm patrol Parson Cross/Foxhill area.
 PC    57 Shelley
                         3.45pm Meal, Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
 PC    722 Gee

                         Phase 3 (After match)

                         Resume patrol as outlined in Phase 1.

                         ************************************




                         M3BILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO SIX"

srial 53                 Phase 1 (Before match)

=5    655 McCall         Patrol Grenosioe area, paying special attention to
^C    2786 Moore         licensed premises and to maintain order.
C     257 Hackney
C     2760 Harding       Phase 2 (Durina match)
C     36 Mahon
C     3300 Swift         3.00pn Meal - Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
C     1719 Boami         3.45pm Resume patrol Grenosiae.

                         Phase 3 (After match)

                         Resume p a t r o l a s o u t li n e d in Phase 1.
                              SUB SECTOR 23                    Inspector     Meek (HQ)


                              OQftCH RECEPTION - HENRIES ROAD BUS GARAGE/
                              REAR CAR PARK/igRRIES BQAD

      Serial 54               Phase 1 (Before natch)

      PS    1482 Briers       This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottinoham.
1)    PC   74 Khan            Forest Coaches at Herries Road Bus Garag=.   PC's will
2)    PC   1423 Newhole       ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
3)    PC   1729 Hampshire     possess itens prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
4)    PC   1828 Metcalfe      b an ne rs , weapons, missiles or alcohol.
3)    PC   513 Corkvell
;■)   PC   1644 Gagg          Any over-flow will be directed to park on the south
;)    PC   68 Wat t ham       side of Herries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
-)    PC   588 Thompson
')    PC   1535 Fairclouch    Phase 2 (IXirina match)
0     PC   532 Thcrcpson
                              Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                              Phase 3 (After natch)

                              Supervise loading of supporters ont o coach's.




                              CQftZH RECEPTION - FERRIES ROAD BUS GftRAGE/
                              REAR CAR PARK AND HERRIES R O M

      Serial 55               Phase 1 (Before natch)

                             This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham,
   PS 885 Green
                             Forest coaches at Henries Road Bus Garage. P C ’s will
  PC 2595 Broks
                             ensure that supporters leaving the c o a c h e s d o not
 PC 96 Toyne
                             possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.            ,
 PC 529 Scholey
                             banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol. Any over-flow will be
 PC 562 Cross                directed to park on the south side of Hefries Road South and
 PC 2818 Marshall            Phase 2 (During natch)                   Rawson SpringtRoac.
 PC 2197 Laverick
 PC 2650 McWalter
                             Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.
 PC 1319 Loxley
 FC 316 Cooper
                             Phase 3 (After natch)
 PC 2744 Blackmore                                                                      !
                             Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches..




                             NOTE: -

                             Herries Road and Wardsena Road will be subject
                             to “No parking’ restrictions which will be strictly
                             enforced in relation to private cars.

                                                                                  ’*•


                             SYPTE buses will park on Herries Road on the
                             opposite side to their garage.
                        SUB S&J'llx 24                                 Inspector         Armitage *E


                        EUS/GQftCH RECEPTION - HERRIES HOAD SOUTH

 Serial 56              Phase 1 (Before match]

                       TTiis serial will ensure that Herries Road South retrains
PS   1057 EXjggan
                       clear of all parked cars to allow the unloading of SYPTE
PC   308S Coupland
                       buses carrying Nottingham supporters. Coaches will
PC   2449 Inchclif:
                       unload on the North side of this road, having travelled
PC   2516 Cooper
                       along Penistone Road from the Midland Station.
PC   1345 IXmgworth
PC   2899 Blackbur-
                       They will supervise unloading and ensure that supporters
PC   1332 Scrufay
PC   857 Raistrick     are not in possession of items prohibited by the ground
                       rules (Banners, etc., weapons, missile.s or alcohol).
PC   197 Lewis
PC   2204 Bashforth
                       H-ey will also supervise the unloading of any Nottingham
PC   2097 Cousins
                       coaches who may be directed to unload and park on the
                       hard shoulder in this road (South side) as an overflow
                       from other parking locations.

                       Phase    2   ( D u r in c        :h:

                       R e fre s h m e n ts at     T r a ffic   I> p t . , C la y w r v ^ ls   Lane.

                       P hase   3 ( A f t e r m a tc h )

                       Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches/buse;




                       CQ»CH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD SOUTH

Serial 57              Phase 1 (Before match)

PS   2488 Jones        This serial will be located at the junction of Herries
PC   3244 Martin       Road and Herries Road South to ensure that Nottingham
PC   504 Gilbert he:   coaches arriving at this location are directed to t p
PC   1113 Wroe         car parking areas at SYPTE Bus Garage in Herries Road.
PC   1947 Langford     Any overflow will be directed to park on the South
PC   55 McMillan       side of Herries Road South and Rawson Sorina Road.
PC   1568 Goodoe
PC   1539 West ~       Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to the par&inq
PC   3051 Westwood     area in Rawson Spring Road.
PC   1335 Powell                                                    , ill                                    '


                       They will ensure that passengers do not unload until they
PS 2322 Kennedy        are in the appropriate parking area.

                       Phase 2 (During natch)

                       Refreshments at Traffic D?pt., Claywheels Lane.

                       Phase 3 (Durina match
                                                                                                       ■*■
                       Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



                                Herries Road South will be subject to "No
                       Parking" cones to allow Nottingham coaches to park.
                       IHE RESTRICTIONS WILL EE ENFORCED.   Coaches will be
                       parked on the hard shoulder on both sides of this road.
                         MINI BUS RECEPTION - RAKSCN SPRING ROAD

Serial 58                Phas^ 1 (Before natch]

  PS   824 Holmes        This serial will supervise tl>= unloading of Nottingham
) PC                     Forest mini buses in Rawson Spring Road.
       119 Connor
) PC   522 Marsden
) PC                     PC's will ensure that supporters leaving the coaches
       279 Burgess
) PC                     do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
       1811 Beech
> PC                     (Bankers, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).
       1904 Neath
  PC   1941 Bathrop
  PC                     Phas° 2 (EXiring natch)
       22 Flethcer
  PC   3222 Saffrey
  PC   2901 Burton       Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywiv^els La^.
  PC   1747 Saunderson
                         Phase 3 (After match}

                         Sum   ■vise loadxna of sucoorters onto coaches




                                                                              V-  *




                         NJTE:-

                         This road will be subject to "No Parking" cxr^s   and only
                         mini buses, vans, etc. will be allowed to park.
                         Barriers will also be available for erection at   tl>=
                         entrance to this road to control entry.
                                 SUB SECTOR 25                   Inspector   MrftoweU (H3)


                                R E L I C CREER - HERRIES ROAD

Serial 59                       Phase 1 (Before retch)
                        HQ
PS    2928 Williamson           This serial will be responsible for patrollina
PC    250 Calvert               Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from thp railway”
PC    390 Leach                 viaduct to the Five Arches Public House, to
PC    8 6 6 I/?vine             maintain order and ensure that any parking
PC    1140 Buckley              restrictions are enforced. Direct Nottingham
PC    1614 Lund                 Forest supporters in private vehicles to park
PC    1866 Harrison             in locations in sio^ roads.
PC    378 Sirmons
PC    3072 Turner               Phase 2 (Purine natch)
PC    1761 Marston
PC    1023 Peter                Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywte^ls La->=.

                                Phase 3 (After natch)
 PS 8 9 ^ Brov.—:       nine
                                Patrol in tb= area outlined abov>=- to naintain
                                ord^r.




                               HJBLIC CREER - HERRIES RCftP
                                                                                       I
     rial 60                   Phase 1 (Before natch)
                         HQ

?S   818 Brown                 This serial will be responsible for patrollina
PC   256 i Whit**              Herries Road (PC’S in pairs) from th= Five
^C   163 Jessop                Arches Public House to ti>? traffic island at
?C   3237 Hislop               the junction with Moonshine Lane/Shirecliffe
PC   1744 Pulfrey              Road to naintain order and ensure that any
PC   1822'Hutchinson           parking restrictions are enforced.
PC   2609 Morgan
^C   786 Ehmerson              Direct Nottingham Forest supporters in private           V
XT   683 Bond                  vehicles to park in locations in side roads.

                               Phase 2 (Curing match)
     2264 Hewitt (Training)
                               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels La^.          l!
                               Phase 3 (After natch)

                               Patrol in the area outlined above to naintain orcfer.
                                  SUB S&71\jK 2b                      Injector      Efayoax

                                  PUBLIC GREEK - F^XLSTONE HQAD

Serial 61                        Phase 1 (Before natch)
  PS   2663 Knowles
                                 PC’s will patrol in pairs in Penistooe Road from
' PC   3189 Scothem
                                 Parkside Road to Borough Road to maintain order and
  PC   2255 Car ling
                                 prevent any clash of supporters.      Direct sirporters
  PC   1932 Stimson
                                 to s i d e street parking and maintain security of
  PC   2388 Pearson
                                 business premises. Special attention to be given to thv^
  PC   65 Oldham
                                 enforcement of parking restrictions on Penistone Road.
  PC   2184 Clay     *E"
                                 Phase 2 (Paring match)
  PC   2950 Carver *
 PC    28 Drevitt    mE"
                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywh^els La^.
 PC    963 Evans      *
                                 Phase 3 (After match;
 PS 1197 Rye
                                 On cormencement of Phase 3, this serial will
                                 resum= patrol in location as above and p r e v e n t
                                 any clash of supporters.




                                                                                              V


                                R E L I C ORDER - PEKLSTONE ROAD

erial 62                        Phase 1 (Before match)

PS    969 Hodgkinson            PC's will patrol in pairs in Penistone Road from
PC   3015 Parkinson             Borough Road to Burton Street to maintain orc^r
PC   3084 Grant                 and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporte
PC   426 Hodgson                to side street parking. Maintain security of
PC   817 Wadsworth              business premises.
■C   2701 Hague
-C   2547 Ramsden               Phas° 2 (During match)
■C   2186 Malloy            B
-C   2066 Lockwood-2»ukes   B   Refreshments at Clayvo^ls L a n e , Traffic D=>pt.            i
C    325 Haycock            B
                                Phase 3 (After match?
•s
     3g-_                       On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resurr?
                                patrol in locations as above and prevent any clash of
                                supporters. ■
                                       a®    SECTOR 27                          Inspector      Hudson


                                      MOBILE PATOOL - CALL SI O' T A N C P SEVEN"

Serial 63                             Phase 1 (Before match)

 PS   784 Glover        •E'           Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention to
 PC   2902 Roberts       F            Licensed prerrises.
 PC   2154 Keen         R/ 1
 PC                       •
      2859 Knights                    Phase 2 (EXiring match)
 PC                       •
      1182 Pritchard
 PC                       •
      2469 Greaves                   3.00pm Meal - Claywheels Lane.
 PC                       •
      706 S v i n b u m              3.45pm Resume patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.

                                     Phase 3 (After retch)

                                     Patrol in area as o u t l i e d in Phase 1.




                                     MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO EIOTT*

terial 64                            P.nas- 1 (5 ^ f or° match)

PS    847 Mitchell      E            Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention
PC    1283 Kitchine     F            licensed premises.
PC    2892 Smith   "     R/T
PC    194 R»^a                       Phas= 2 (During match)
PC    2402 Thompson
PC    2601 Mush?tt       *           3.00prri Patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
PC    1323 Axup                      3.45pm Meal Claywheels Larv?.

                                     Phase 3 (After match)

                                     Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                    MDBUJE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO NINE*

iria.1 65                           Phase 1 (Before retch)

5S   2591    Charleswc— h     F     Patrol Hillsborough/Langsett Road area, paying speci
C    165    Hinas         H/T       attention to licensed premises.
C    599    Makin         r /T
C    212    Charters      HQ CID    Phase 2 (During retch)
C    2447   Hodgkinson    *     •
C    930    Fox           *     •   3.00pm Meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                    3.45pm resume patrol Hillsborough.

                                    Phase 3 (After match)

                                    P a t r o l i n a r e a a s o u t li n e d i n Phase l .
                         MOBILE PATRCL - CALL SIGN "TANGO TEN*

Serial 66                Phase 1 (Before m3tch)

   2991 Miller           Patrol O-'lerton/Neeps^nd area, paying special attention
   2944 Church           to licensed premises.
   1107 Tallow     R/T
   315 Roberts           Phase 2 (EXiring match)
   740 Rowbotha-
   1017 Walton           3.00pm patrol CX»’lerton/Neepsend areas.
   534 f-fertin          3.45pm meal - Ciavwbeels Lane, Traffic Dept.,

                         Phase 3 (After match)

                         Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                                                              >
                    LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                     APPENDIX »E«
 1 STAND             I STAND:


                                                 «■■■»—                            :     -
                                                                                                ENTRANCE
                         \    #OOTB Arw^SSOCIATI ON --
  ENTRANCE:             v > *■ C fftlU N ^ E C U P •


                                                                        LIVERPOOL
                         *   .fc    A T H JU L S aO ivO J ^

                              "5 ATURDAy"5th ATOIL 1^88 *
                                            IOCX-OFF-3prn


                                                                                                               NORTH
                                                                                                               'BITE*


                             SH EF FI ELD W E D N E S D A Y F. C p ic
                                       H llL S * 0 « C K ^ G H S H t f F t t l O




1STAND              I STAND




                                                                                                ENTRANCE

 ENTRANCE



                                                                                                                t

                                                                                                                WEST
                                                                                                                'BROW




   TO BE GIVEN UP        SH EF F IE LD W E D N E S D A Y F. C. p i c
                                    ' H»LLS60*CMCH SH£FFl£LD
                                                                                             THIS PORTK»l TO        \
                                                                                               BE RETAINED



I STAND:            I STAND

                                            fOtrS                  LA MI               *S_T r\ Nj!b 1Nf£,->
                                                                                                                l!
                                                                                               E NT R AN CE
                             FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
ENTRANCE:
                                CHALLENGE CUP
                                          SEMI-FINAL
                                               M           v         LIVERPOOL                                 LZPPING3
                                   AT HILLS&OROUGM STADIUM                                                     Lane
                             SATURDAY 9TH APRIL 1988                                                           •GREEN’
                                  KICK-OFF 3pm                                                                 N-




                        S H EF F IE LD W E D N E S D A Y F. C. p4c
                                    M1LLSBO«CK--ah S H £F F I£L D
                                                                                  APPENDIX *E»
 ISTAND


                                                                             ENTRANCE




                                                                                             KOP
                                                                                             ‘ORAN 3'




                          S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y F.C p tc
                                   HtLLSSOROiXi* SHEFFIELD




IS T A N D            STAND


                          b e
                                                                                              1



                                                                                             V
                                                                             ENTRANCE




                                                                                              SOUTH
                                                                                              •GRTT'




                         S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y F.C. pi c     THIS FOBTKH* TO
                                                                                                  V
    TO BE GIVEN U P               HILLSBOROUGH SHEFFIELD                     BE RETAINED


                                                                                              r»
   STAND:              STAND.

                          U> KJLOVt
                                                                                             it*
                                                                              ENTRANCE
                              FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                 CHALLENGE CUP
   E N TRANCE :
                                       SEMI-FINAL
                       NO TTING HAM               v      LIVERPOOL
                          FOREST
                                AT HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
                              SATURDAY 9TH APRIL 1988                                        '•^OUTK
                                       KICK-OFF 3pm                                            UNS0VZ5SD
                                                                                               * YELLOW1




                          S H EF F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y F. C. p*c
      TO BEGIVENUP'                HILLSBOROUGH SHEFFIELD           .. .
                                                              Appendix ’F*



CID General Sub Divisional Duties



     DS     829    Oughton      I/C     8am - Bpn

     DS    702     Wroe                 8am - 8pm
                                         «t    m
     DC    87      Mould
                                            m      m
     DC    3206    Levin
                   Hirst
                                            m      m
     TDC   1788
     DC    1197    ardthies
                                            m      n

     DS    366     Glaves              Noon - Midnight
     DC    1582    Clarke
                                            m      m
                                            m      m
     DC    366     Stevenson
                                            m      m
     TDC   2405    Dynes

     DC    1720 Phillis kirk




F2   DS     517   Smith                 8arr. - 8pr
     DC    3211   Priestley
     DC    1424   Wood
     DC    1152   McManus
                                                                        V-
     DS    727 Lindlev                Noon - Midniaht
     DC    3292 White
     EC    2540 Lindsay

     DC    1600 Jones                   6prr, - 6am



     GROUND                           OUTSIDE GROUND - PICK-POCKETS

     DI Scaife                        Pc    358    Hydes                     \
     DS   551     Wilson              TDC   2569   Blake                     \
     DS   1578    Hcldemess           TDC   3119   Bagguley                   '
     TDC 1386     Dobson              Pc    1181   Drajling
     Pc   11      Wood
     DC   1108    Locking
     DC   1209    Askew                                                  I
     DC   2270    Perkins                                               15
     DC   1745    Sturgess
     DC   332     Keightley




     PARKSIDE SECTION STATION

     DO    Addison
     DI    Towell
     DS    476 Hudson
     DC    2088 Brown
     DC    2812 Lawrence
                                                             Appendix 'F'




    WADSLEY BRIDGE SECTION STATION

    DS      846 Williamson
    DC      2968 Hall
    DC      146 O'Brien
    TDC     168 O'Neill
    PC      1242 Armitaqe


THEFTS FROM VEHICLES

Duties in relation to thefts from motor vehicles.   The Officers will
be based at Parkside Section Station.

Grour A


    DS      839 Hogg
    A/DS    854 Gilbertson
    DC      396 Roosby
    DC      127 Wragg
    DC      539 Jackson
    DC      1289 Nfenfredi                                           V
    DC      810 McFarlane                                            1 •
    PS      2590 Broadb^nt
                                                                      \
Grouc B

Based out at Wadsley Bridge Section Station, Halifax Road.

    DI      Garrett
    DS      1150 Wyatt
    DS      262 Sellers
    EC      2793 Marples
    DC      1979 Maxwell
    DC      3331 Williams
    DC      2947 Liversidge
    DC      1668 Johnson


All Officers to report to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Gymnasium for briefing at 9.45am Saturday 9th April 1988.




PRISONERS

The following Officers will man a Criminal Investigation Department
post situated in the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Gymnasium and*-
deal with prisoners arrested for crime committed outside the ground:-

    DC     649 Fox
    DC     1161 Staniforth
                                                                                            APPENDIX 'G'



                                             DOG SECTION


Members      of      the   Dog    Section         will    be    deployed       as   follows


        DOG VAN                                                       AREA



             2                                Wadsley       Bridge       Railway       Station

             1                                Leppings         Lane     Traffic       Island

             1                                Herries          Road    Coach   Park

             1                                Leppings         Lane     Turnstiles

             1                                Penistone          Road/Parkside             Road

             1                                Penistone          Road/Bradfield             Road

             1                                Hillfoot          Bridge
                                                                                                              3'
             1                                Penistone          Road    to    city    centre                 \ '

             1                                Middlewood Road/Wads ley                 Lane
                                                                                                                 \\
             1                                Middlewood             Road/Hillsborough             Corner

             1                                Middlewood             Road/Deepcar

             1                                Stocksbridge/Oughtibridge

             1                                Tankersley


                                                                                                                  V
In a d d i t i o n   to    the    a b o v e , t wo h a n d l e r s    together      with     'explosives'
dogs    will      parade     at    Sheffield Wednesday                  Football       Stadium       at   8.QQ'fam
                                                                                                             m    .5;
on S a t u r d a y   9 April        1988     to    search       the    interior       of    the    ground   . \\$
                                                                     Appendix 'H'




                       MOUNTED SECTION


htenbers of the Mounted Section will be deployed as follows




       HDRSES                          AREA



             6                         Leppings Lane    '

         10                         Penistone Road      North turnstiles

             6                      Wadsley    Eridge Railway Station

             4                      Halifax    Road *

             4                      Herries    Road *




         30                                                                  1
                                                                            \ '




         *       At Phase 3, two mernbers of the Nfeuntea Section

                 will be deployed in the Middlewood Road/

                 Catchbar Lane area.    The remaining tw o will

                 take up a position at Leppings Lane Traffic

                 Island.
                                                                                 \
                                                                                APPENDIX ' I '
              ACKINLSTRATION, CONTROL AND CUSTODY STAFF, ETC.



ACKLN1STRATION

Inspector Bennett
PS 838 Long
PC 3018 Shelton)
                       Radios
PC 3173 Kirk    )




PROPERTY - LIVERPOOL                                     PROPERTY - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

PS 2010 Powell                                           PS 870 Brown
PC 3253 Campbell                                         PC 2387 Collins




      tt^ ler I     C opies   - Meals supervision (Ground)
S^B3S Home    )


Inspector Lawson ) r     • .u •              t
   * __ ,, .       : Logistics - Clavwneels Lane
PS 20^3 U n e n  )      3
PS 204 Spencer   )




GROUND CONTROL                                           SECTOR DRIVERS

Inspector Calvert ^                                      Chief S u p t .               Insp. Broughton
PS 616 Goddard /                                         Sector 2                  -   PC 1863 B u x t o n (
PC 1035 Ryan    ■/                                       Sector 3                  -   PS 383 Woodward
PC 1370 Bichard /                                        Directors E n t r a n c e )   PC 3071 Stephens
PC' 1421 Guest                                                                     )   PC 3048 Cruttenden




CUSTODY (GROUND)                                         PRISON BUSES
                                                                                                   \

Police Room                                              PS   526    Langdale                  i\ v
                                                         PC   992     Kassell                  f
Inspector Croft                                          PS   449    Basford
PS 1164 Colley                                           PS   1460    Gover
PS 2956 Gordon
PS 805 Buxton
                                                         PROCESS R E A D E R
PC 1403 Jones
                                                         Inspector B u m s
PC 766 Marshall
PC 2493 Webster
PC 1577 Barden
                                                                                               V
                                                                            APPENDIX •!«



PROCESS SUPERVISOR - INSPECTOR BURNS


PRISONER PROCESS (HRPS)                                 PRISONER PROCESS (B3ZLESFIELD)

NCHTCNCHAM FOREST                                       LIVERPOOL


Inspector Aicbeson                                      Inspector Etheridge
DS Charlesworth                                         DS 510 Horror
PC 744 Hirst                                            PC 428 Hutchinson
PC 253 Hyles                                            PC 1784 Donahue
PC 621 Bell                                             PC 1826 Walton




PRISON HIS (HRPS)                                       PRISON HIS (EOCLESFIELD)

   4 4 Rouke                                            PS 862 Myers
   92 Auty                                              PC 48 MrCudden




                          CCMPLAINTS AGAINST



               Inspector B. Walker             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                               (Gymnasium)

               Inspector K. Walker             Haircnerton Road Police Station


               Inspector D. Riley              Ecclesfiela Police Station
T RA FF I C POINTS                                                                 APPENDIX           *J*




1     A6 1   - Grenoside          traffic      lights                                    PC 2 1 2 0    Thorpe


2     Halifax       Road/Kilner         Way TL                                           TW 109       Dixon


3     Halifax       Road/Foxhill          Road      TL                                   T W 43   Charlesworth


4     Halifax       Road/ClaywheeIs            Lane      TL                              TW 117       Thompson


5     Penistone        Road    North/ H e r r i e s Road      South      TL        TW                 Tay.-or E


       Penistone Road/Parksiae                Road       TL                              T W 83   Baldwin


7     Penistone        Road/Bradfield           Road                                     TW 130       Green
                                                                                                                   *>
                                                                                                                  \•••

8     Penistone        Road/Neepsend          Lane                                       T W 96 W e l l s   'El          ■
                                                                                                                  V
      All    other     traffic       lights      will    be   covered         by   'Dl*     Officers               v




P o l i c e S e r g e a n t 102 F i d l e r w i l l e n s u r e t h a t t r a f f i c     l i g h t keys are
a v a i l a b l e f o r i s s u e to O f f i c e r s n o m i n a t e d f o r t h e s e    points.      He w i l l
a l s o s u p p l y r e f l e c t i v e j a c k e t s if r e q u i r e d .

                                                                                                                   \

                                                                                                                         \
                                                                                       AP P EN D I X    ’K ’




TRAINS

 1.    N O T T I N G H A M FORE ST

Five s p e c i a l trains c a r r y i n g N o t t i n g h a m Forest s u p p o r t e r s will arrive
at M i d l a n d S t a t i o n ; t he t i m e s w i l l n ot b e a v a i l a b l e u n t i l the w e e k of
the S e m i F i n a l a n d t h e r e f o r e w i l l b e g i v e n at t he b r i e f i n g .

Each     train     has    a   c a p a c i t y o f 550.

The    fare for        these     special       trains       is   inclusive       of    the    bus      fare    to
t he   ground.

S Y T w i l l r u n b u s e s f r o m t he s t a t i o n to t he g r o u n d u s i n g a r o u t e a l o n g
P e n i s t o n e R o a d a n d u n l o a d i n g in H e r r i e s Road South?      these buse s will
b l u n d e r m o t o r cycle escort.

A f t e r the m a t c h a s i m i l a r o p e r a t i o n w i l l t a k e p l a c e to r e t u r n
N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t s u p p o r t e r s to t h e r a i l w a y s t a t i o n , l o a d i n g in
P e n i s t o n e R o ad N o r t h o p p o s i t e the g r o u n d a n d u s i n g an i d e n t i c a l         route
b a c k to t h e s t a t i o n .

Departure        times     will      be   given      at   t he   briefing.

There     is t h e f a c i l i t y    to d e l a y    the    trains       in   the    event    of      extra    ti^ne
being     played.

2.     LIVER P OO L

T w o s p e c i a l t r a i n s c a r r y i n g L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s w i l l a r r i v e at
W a d s l e y B r i d g e S t a t i o n at t i m e s y e t to b e a r r a n g e d ;          these will        be
m a d e a v a i l a b l e at b r i e f i n g .

Each    train     has    a capacity         of    550.

Departure        times     will      also   be    given     at      the   briefing.                                  \
A g a i n t h e r e is a f a c i l i t y     to d e l a y    t he    trains     in    t he   event      of e x t r a
time b e i n g p l a y e d .                                                                             <
                                                                                                                 I
As the s u p p o r t f o r L i v e r p o o l is w i d e s p r e a d , it is a n t i c i p a t e d . y t h k t |
s u p p o r t e r s w i l l t r a v e l b y s e r v i c e t r a i n f r o m a l l p a r t s o f the c o u n t r y
to M i d l a n d R a i l w a y S t a t i o n .      A r r a n g e m e n t s ha v e t h e r e f o r e be e n ma d e for
t h o s e a r r i v i n g at M i d l a n d S t a t i o n to b e t r a n s p o r t e d b y S Y T b u s e s to the
ground by a route separate from that used by N o t t i n g h a m Forest s u p p o r t e r s ,
t r a v e l l i n g a l o n g L a n g s e t t R o a d , M i d d l e w o o d R o a d a n d a r r i v i n g at L e p p i n g s
Lane where they will unload.

At the e n d of t h e g a m e , S Y T b u s e s w i l l b e a v a i l a b l e to r e t u r n a n y
p e r s o n a r r i v i n g in t hi s m a n n e r b a c k to t h e M i d l a n d R a i l w a y S t a t i o n .
T h e s e b u s e s w i l l b e l o c a t e d in P e n i s t o n e R o a d N o r t h on the 'to c A y '
c arriageway outside Beeley Wood Special School.
Nottingham Forest Executive Club coaches will be supplied with
e white notice (Copy attached) affording the same facilities
as in Paragraph 3 above.

These coaches will be parked in the South Yorkshire Transport
Garage., Herries Road South and, if necessary, Rawson Spring
Road.
                                                                    Appendix 'L'




                                 COACHES


LIVERPOOL

            All Liverpool coaches should leave the Ml Motorway at Exit 36
            (Tankersley) and travel via the A61 to designated parking areas.

            The geographical location of Liverpool, coupled with the1
            countrywide support enjoyed by the Club, suggests that coaches
            could well approach the stadium by other routes, particularly
            the A616. If this is the case, then they must be brought to
            the designated coach parking area.

            Liverpool Executive Club coaches will be supplied with a red
            notice (Copy attached) to display in the windscreen and these
            will be permitted to unload at the ground.  This facility will
            not be extended to any other coach for whatever reason.

            The Serials engaged on duty at Tankers ley and Ought ibriacp will
            operate selective stop and search procedures to ensure (A)
            Passengers have tickets, (B) they are net in possession of alcohol
            and (C) they are not drunk. When this has been done, each         \
            coach will h a v e an adhesive sticker placed on the nearside of ^ *
            the windscreen and it will be allowed to proceed to the designated
            parking a r e a .                                                   \

            All coaches will be allcwed to travel to the ground without
            specific escort, although members of the Road Traffic Motor Cycle
            wing will be providing overall mobile supervision. All coaches
            will be directed to the traffic island at Leppings Lane where,
            in the first instance, they will park in Claywheels Lane. Once
            this area is full then coaches will be directed to park on the
            'out lane' of the dual carriageway in Halifax Road, parking to
            commence at the top of the dual carriageway and then work towarda
            the stadium.                                                   Y
                                                                                  \

            All coaches will park before being permitted to set down passengers,
            thereby ensuring that the occupants know exactly where to return
            to on corrpletion of the football net ch.                         \
                                                                                 11
            Where it is discovered that passengers on a coach are not in     j
            possession of tickets, or are in breach of legislation concerning
            alcohol at Sporting events, then Ground Control will be informed
            for consideration as to returning such vehicles out of the Force
            area under escort.

            Where individual passengers only are involved who have consumed
            alcohol in such amounts that they are drunk,or are    inposses­
            sion of alcohol, then they should be arrested and detained pending
            transport.                                                     ^

  NOTTTNGCiM FOREST

            Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged
            to use tfr? MI Motorway leaving at Exit 34 (Tinsley). This aspect
            of the operation will be dealt with by 'D' Division officers and
            is the subject of a separate order.
           TRANSIT VANS - LIVERPOOL




Transit vans, etc. carrying Liverpool supporters will
be encouraged to trawl via the M62 and Ml Motorways
leaving the latter at Junction 36 (Tankersley).
However, it is envisaged that such vehicles will also
approach the stadium from the Flouch (A616).

Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and the
passengers have not consixned the saTie to an extent
where they are drunk.

All passengers will be checked to ensure that they are
in possession of tickets.

After the search has been corrpleted an adhesive sticker
will be placed on the nearside windscreen to confirm
the search has-been completed.

The v e h i c l e s will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Wardsena Road North where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.

It is not feasible to atterrpt to channel such vehicles
through one "checkpoint" and therefore it will be the
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadivxn to
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.

Should any vehicle arrive, without having been checked
on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the
legislation relating to the carriage and consumption
of alcohol en route to sporting events, then Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver ana passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way of
summons or arrest, dependant on their individual condit
                                                   Appendix



   TRANSIT VANS - NOTTINSttM FOREST




Transit vans, etc. carrying Nottingham Forest support ers
will be encouraged to t r a w l via the Mi Motorway leaving
the latter at Junction 34 (Tinsley)

Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and the
passengers h a w not consigned the san? to an extent
where they are drunk.

All passengers will be checked to ensure that they are
in possession of tickets.

After the search has been ccrrpleted an adhesive sticker
will be placed on the nearside windscreen to confirm
the search has been completed.

The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Rawson Spring Road where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.

It is not feasible to attempt to channel such vehicles
through one "checkpoint" and therefore it will be the
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadium to
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.

Should any whicle arriw, without having been checked
on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the legisla­
tion relating to the carriage and consurrption of
alcohol en route to sport ing events, then Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way of
surTTTons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.
                                                                                                                   APPENDIX *0*




                                       SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL CF ALCCKX) ACT 1985
                                          AS AMLMXU BY THE PUBLIC CRDE* ACT 1986


      1.     VE2U CLES

               (A)      It i s an o f f e n c e f o r an o p e r a t o r to knowi ngl y carr y a l c o h o l or all ow i t
                        to be c a r r i e d on a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e or mini b us / v an or t ra i n e t c .
                        t r a v e l l i n g to or f r a n a f o o t b a l l match.

               (B)      I t i s an o f f e n c e to p o s s e s s a l c o h o l    on a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e , or mini
                        b u s ' v a n , or t r a i n e t c when t r a v e l l i n g t o or from a f o o t b a l l match or to be
                        drunk on s u c h v e h i c l e .

              (C)       A C o n s t a b l e may s t o p and s e a r c h a p u b l i c s e r v i c e v e h i c l e , or mini bus ' van,
                        or t r a i n e t c where he h a s r e a s o n a b l e grounds to s u s p e c t a l c o h o l i s bei ng
                        carried.

     l '                 INTO GROUND

              (A)      I t i s an o f f e n c e to p o s s e s s a l c o h o l      when e n t e r i n g or a t t e mp t i n g to e n t e r a
                       f o o t b a l l ground.

              (3)      I t i s an o f f e n c e t o e n t e r o r at teirpt to e n t e r a f o o t b a l l ground when i n ­
                       p o s s e s s i o n o f b o t t l e s , ca ns e t c ( or part o f ) whi ch a r e c a p a b l e of c a u sin g
                       injury.           T h i s i n c l u d e s d r i n k i n g g l a s s e s but not thermos f l a s k s .      \

             (C)       A C o n s t a b l e may s e a r c h any p e r s o n he s u s p e c t s i s a t t e m p t i n g t o e n t e r the
                       ground w i t h a r t i c l e s m e n t i o n e d .

 3.          CONDUCT IN GROUND
                                                                                                                                                 i


             It     i s an o f f e n c e   t o e n t e r , a t t e mp t   t o e n t e r , or be i n a f o o t b a l l   ground when drunk.

 4‘        * SALE 0F ALCOHOL IN GROUND                                                                                                       ^

             (A)      A l c o h o l i c d r i n k may o n l y be s o l d i n t h o s e p a r t s o f t he ground d e s i g n a t e d
                      wh i c h w i l l be out o f v i e w o f t he p i t c h . A l c o h o l may not be taken out of
                      designated areas.

             (B)      Any C o n s t a b l e i n u n i f o r m may c a u s e a bar i n a f o o t b a l l ground to c l o ^ a S f
                      he b e l i e v e s t he c o n t i n u e d s a l e o f a l c o h o l i s d e t r i m e n t a l t o guod b r d ^r ' o r
                      public safety.

5‘         PYROTECHNICS

            It i s an o f f e n c e to p o s s e s s         f i r e w o r k s , smoke bombs e t c . when in or e n t e r i n g /
            l e a v i n g a f o u t b a l l g round.

6.         PUVERS
                                                                                                                                     • -*.

            In a d d i t i o n to the pow ers to s e a r c h , a C o n s t a b l e may a r r e s t any p erson corrnii t t i ng
            or who h a s con n i t t e d an o f f e n c e under the A c t .
                                                                   APPENDIX ’P '


                                         PARKING RESTRICTIONS

 NO P A R K I N G CONES

 No parking cones will be placed in the following locations prior to 7.00 am on
 Saturday 9 April 1988 by civilian staff under the direction of Police Sergeant
 102 Fidler:

 1.   Halifax Road - out of city lane frcm Parson Cross Road to Cowper      Avenue

 2.   Foxhill Road - out of city side from Halifax Road to Parson Cross     Road

 3.   Wardsend Road North - both sides

 4.   Penistone Road      - frcm Claywheels Lane to Railway Bridge - both sides

 5.   Claywheels Lane (including one way system) frcrr: Penistone Road to Limestone
      Cottage Lane.  (Both sides)

 6 ^ ^ N i a g a r a Road - both sides

 7.   Leppings lane - both sides

 8.   Herries Road - frcrr. Penistone Road to Wordsworth Avenue - both sides          fc

 9.    Wardsend Road - both sides

10.   Herries Read South - both sides

11.   Galsworthy Road

12.   Rawson Spring Road - both sides

13.   Parkside Road - from Penistone Road to Catchbar Lane -
      one side only - alongside park

14:   Catchbar Lane frcm Parkside Road to Leppings Lane
      Oie side only - alongside school

15.   Middlewooc Road - one side only (alongside park) from Parkside Road to
      Hawksley Avenue

16.   Penistone Road - both sides from Leppings Lane island to Neepsend Lane

17.   Liversey Street - one side frcm Penistone Road car park entrance
                                                                              Appendix "Q"


                               ROUTE SIGNING


LIVERPOOL COACH AND CAR ROUTES

1     M1-A61     to    plac^c in location by Road Traffic

2     A57-A628   Hayfi®Ids crcssroac-E^rbyshire to indicate football traffic
                  is to follow.  A628 to be placed out by Road Traffic during
                  night of 8 April 1988.

3     A623/A616 to be placed in location by Deepcar Officers.

Additional signing will       repeaters at intervals on the route.




NOITINQiAM FOREST COACH AND CAR ROUTES

    Nottingham Forest vehicles will use a route from the motorway, arriving at
B®ghtside Lane.         At this point, cars will be directed along Sutherland Street,
Gower Stree-, Brunswick Road, Nursery Street to Neepsend Lane.

Coaches and Vans will travel via Upwell St.,       Firvale,   ana Herries Road to the
Ground.
                                                                                        A
SIGNING                                                                                 V •
1     Route split sign                                    Owler Lane                      \

2     Coach route sign                                    Herries Road/Barnsley Road

3     Direct ional sign                                   Barnsley Road/Pitsmoor Road

4     Direct ional sign                                   Pitsrroor Road /Rutland Road           >

5     Direct ional sign                                   Rutland Roaa/Neepsena Lane

6     Direct ional sign                                   Neepsend Lane/Rutland Road        \\
7     Coach route sign                                    Herries Roaa/Shirecliffe Ra Island

8     Car route sign                                      Herries Roaa/Shirecliffe Rd Island
                                                                                        i \ Si
Additional signing will be repeaters at intervals.                                      \ ^*

All signs must be in position by 8.00am.    The signs have m o v a b l e arrows and when
placed must be facing oncoming traffic with the arrow pointing in the appropriate
direction to follow the routes given above.

Signs will be placed out by    civilian staff responsible for parking cones.




                                     ***********
                                                              APPENDIX




                   SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES



Spe cial C o n s t a b l e s will be on duty in c o n n ec t io n with this
event to supplement the regular Officers.                 They will in
p a r t i c u l a r be inv ol ve d in connection w i t h the control of
t raf fi c a wa y from the immediate v icinity of the ground.

T he y w il l parade at 9.45 am in the g y m n a s i u m for briefing
and take up their duties as soon as possible.

R e fr e s h m e n t s w il l be available in the g y m n a s i u m during the
ma tch.

Radies will NOT be issued to members of the Special Constabula
exc ep t s u pe rv i so r y ranks.



                                 DUTIES


(a)     H err ie s Road - encourage and supervise p ark in g in side
        road on Longley, Norwood and S hi re cl i ff e estates by
        N o t t i n g h a m Forest supporters.

(b)     Langsett Road - encourage and supervise p ar king in area
        be tween Langsett Road and Infirmary Road by Nottingham
        Forest supporters.

(c)     N e eps en d Lane - encourage and supervise p ar king in
        around old gas works by Nottingham Forest supporter

(d)     H a l i f ax Road - encourage and supervise p ar k in g in side
        roads on Parson Cross/Foxhill e st a te s by Liverpool
        supporters.

(e)    M i d d l e w o o d Road - encourage and supervise parking .in | ‘
       side roads on Marlcliffe and W is e wo od estates by Liver^
       supporters.
                                                                                                         APPENDIX *S»-


                                                  OfcJUND REGULATIONS


 U n a u t h o r i s e d p e r s o n s a r e not p e r m i t t e d to ent er upon the f i e l d of p l a y .

 The c l i m b i n g o f f l o o d l i g h t p y l o n s ,   s t a nd s or o t h e r b u i l d i n g s i n the ground i s
 forbidden

 The c o n s u mp t i o n of i n t o x i c a t i n g l i q u o r s i s permi t t e d o n l y in a u t h o r i s e d p l a c e s
 and i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h the S p o r t i n g Events (Control of A l c o h ol Et c) .Act 198a

F i r e w o r k s , s.*noke c a n i s t e r s , b o t t l e s , g l a s s e s , ca ns , f l a g s , banne rs, p o l e s and
o t h e r s i m i l a r a r t i c l e s or c o n t a i n e r s i n c l u d i ng anyt hi ng which coul d or might be
used as a w eapon, a r e not p e r m i t t e d w i t h i n the ground, and any p erson i n p o s s e s s i o n
o f s u c h an a r t i c l e or c o n t a i n e r may be r e f u s e d e n t r y or e j e c t e d fror. the ground.

Under no c i r c u m s t a n c e s i s i t       p e r m i t t e d to throw any o b j e c t o n t o the p i t c h .

    p e r so n who f a i l s        t o com ply w i t h i n s t r u c t i o n s frcm a st ewar d may be e j e c t e d from
the ground.

.Any p e r so n who rem ains in a gangway may be e j e c t e d from the ground.

The Club r e s e r v e s the r i g h t t o r e f u s e admissi on to or e j e c t any person who
r e f u s e s to be s e a r c h e d by a P o l i c e O f f i c e r .

The Club r e s e r v e s th e r i g h t f o r i t s s e r v a n t s and a g e n t s to remove from t h i s ground
any p e r s o n who d oes n o t c a c p l y w i t h Ground R e g u l a t i o n s and w i t h the Rul es and
R e g u l a t i o n s o f The F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n and The F o o t b a l l League or whose p r e s e n c e
on th e Ground i s or c o u l d r e a s o n a b l y be con stru ed as c o n s t i t u t i n g a s o u r c e o f
d a n g e r , n u i s a n c e or an n oyance t o o t h e r s p e c t a t o r s .
                                                Appendix




              M A P S




(i)     Division of stadium


(ii)    Liverpool routes and parking areas


(iii)   Sector 2


(iv)    Nottingham Forest routes and parking areas


(v)     Sector 3


(vi)    Overall parking areas (Sectors 2 & 3)


(vii)   Location of rrobile units (Tl-10)
                                  *    O I,JC M y #   V-r»                                           Police
                                                                                                     Room
       Hillsborough Ground                                                     First-Aid Room'<
                                                                                             X L \
                                                                                                                      ts\\\
                SMSB^-SfWOttfeRS1                                                                               6.            ,
                                                                                                                 \ t-V O
                                                                                Oyrnntnkim
                                                                                                                                  7 7 -8 8
                                                         :‘
                                                          7s>
                                                                                                                                     7 3 -7 6
                                                                                                                                     5 5 -7 2
                                                                            WOSTH' S

                                                                  m


                                                                                                                                   A      /,

                                                                                                                                                      4 9 -5
                                                                                                                                                      43 -41




                                                                            Play9r%
                                                                            Tumnmf
wa y Fans Entranc*
 and E n c lo s u re s



          Police C on t r o l
                                                                   fit in                                             37-42
                                                                                                                     Pari



       M I                    *
       TUrtNSTIt.rs . . . .   fTTTTX                            Directors Entrance                            NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS


                                                                                                                                     C.I.n. Plane 17 / ft#
                                              Grown Ion     P.H




                           n   if




                                    M 1. M O T O R W AY   JUNCTION   36 - TANKERSLEY


SHEFFIELD WLC.'^SDAY                                        0?




                                                                                       i(TTB»
      f o o l b j i Club
r                 APPENIHjC *fliii)*




                 KftXIE&X ROM)




                      J




WADSLEY BRIDGE
                                                                                                      APPENDXX »!



                                        §£H eixjle


                           Ch Si_53t             „
                                                 SUpt
                                                             01      Insp
                              1                                                   insp
   (~t~*rTROL ETC                                    1                                            PS
                                                                 3                                               PC
                                                                                  10
                                                 1                                               27
               order                                                                                            241
                                                                                  9
 mobiles                                         2                                               16
                                                                 4                                              25
                                                                                 20
cm                                                                                               44
                                                                                                            346
                                                                              4
Re s e r v e                                 1                                               'l0
                                                             1                                              60
                                                                             3               9
                                                                                                           29
                                                                             1
                                       — _.                                                  J
                                                                                                          30
                       1
                                        5                                                —
                                                         8                  ~~~
                                                                            41
                                       ___                                               109          %
                                                                                                          731
                                                                                                  V


                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                           V '



                                                                                                      \
                                                          ■   '    SEMI FINAL 1988

                                                       NOTTS FOREST ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS


                                                                                                        NORTH
                                                                                               *   *0

       Nl AGAR A                                                                                                TINSLEY
         Ground
                                                                                                                V I A DUCT
                                                                                                             J u n e tio n 3 -


                                                                                                                  SOUTH

                                       S H£ FF i f i D WFONiSDAY

O <3>\V T

                                                                                Firvale

           °o                    Coach Parking
                            \ \ SYim-: Cxirage and
                               \ llerries Rood South




                                                                            V

To M a n c h e s t e r                 \ ^       Car p ark in g
         A 57                          v         Neepserx^ ^


                         Car parking
                         Owlerton



                                                                                                                            M-

                                                                                                          South Yorkshire
                                                                                                                PLANSOt
                                                                SSMI FINAL 1968                                          APPj^HDC   **(r)'

                                                     SECTOR ^ - MDmNGEAM TOggST
                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                       Notts Forest
                                                                                     -V,                               Coach Park
                                            .0       /                                    *A
                                                                                               7.
          O                                 S 3 .                   gO       o
                                      Cu                 sv q   :
                                      -j

    O                                                                            o
                                                                                                                           Notts Forest
                                                                                     -A                                    Coach and Mini bus
                                                                                                                           park
                                                          S/>
                                                                V 'c* *d.
5C« ^          S O *0 ' J            ^ c V       ,
    c >O^ON        B0        — I         / \ ^




                 \S
                      BO                         PARKS,
                                                                                               >o-


        4-ENNOX ROAD                                                                               3W *D-

    Do r OTm t        b o a o    -^
                                             H ills b o ro u g h Pork                                  .0 v*           O w l e r to n
                        o,       3                                                                                     St odium

w 'r"''AR0 e O A 0           A

                        .3                                                                    V.            t O *PO-


                                                                                                             Car parking
                                            5?*.

                      rO


                                   >
                                                                                                       RO.

           o

                                              ^°V
                                         ^\\> pO
         '-r    vo V»
^          V           %             v
                                                                         n                %


                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                             o
                 V 1
                                                                                     O-
                  » i ,iu_                                                        ^ 3 ) 474




                                                                        a *~i
*■-.4   r                                                 a    sl   e      #»■   *■
. x r#r»
O OJ> '

                                                                                                                                      Vfiw®



                                                                                                              jMJiscar i-2g*




                                                                                                                        xoy-ciir
                                                                                                                             ^AltJS




                                                                                          V*




                                                                                                      B ivyt t£^
                                                                                                                         x*?c—'

                                                  a   ^'--.:^^ ***"* ^                                                    V # *,5-*'r|
                                                                                                                            w a-'i <f
                                                                                                                 $>&&?%% 'JL.'p'&fT
                                                                                                            Ssr'%®'. &*m0V! ^fcTi^ww

                                                                                           §80QS,*0&,C
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                  .    V.
                                                                                             V1




            ^•^•S-r-T’>^V' 'r%3 \
                                                                                       rjprnafs




                                                                                                                                         *5*~*«-’F^>
                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                   r«oCS ^



                                                                                                                             <b 'JV**"
                                                                    yA'fC
                                                  '+**s7^/-
                                                       +£z,/a., *#r***p'
                                                      '/ W w
                                                                                         „ ~ vt
                                                                                         Y« V* *
                                                                                               %=-,-                         '\
                                    rfj>... '*’
