'SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For the attention of     Your j                j
  To
          Chief Fire Officer                                  ..Rei 1          ..I
                                                                        ...... "     1
                                      Please contact           Our        016/2/i
 From
          LFM HOUSLEY,
          CENTRAL FIRE STATION        Tel.                     Ref.       DH/DG


Subject   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,     Date
          15TH APRIL 1989.                                                17.4.89


          On 15th April 1989, I was nominated Officer in Charge of Central Fire
          Stations Emergency Tender with :

          During the course of the morning a lecture was given on first aid
          covering crush injuries and resuscitation.

          At 1516 hours the E.T. was mobilised with two pumps Central, two
          pumps Darnall Road, One pump Rivelin Valley and one pump Ringinglow
          Road to Hillsborough Ground, Penistone Road, Sheffield.

          Upon attendance at approximately 1522 hours at the Penistone Road/
          Riverside Entrance.  (A on map). After a short delay we proceeded
          along the private road following Central 1 and 2 in the direction of
          Leppings Lane side of the ground.

          After proceeding approximately 60 metres the approach was blocked due
          to the height of the appliance against the stand which gave no or
          very little clearance.  Station Officer Fletcher was informed by
          Storno Radio that our progress was blocked and unabls to gain vehicle
          access by that Route (B).

          Asking for police assistance the appliance was reversed back onto
          Penistone Road (A). At this point a police constable was asked for
          more information and where we could be utilised best. No information
          was forthcoming.  Remounting the appliance we then proceeded along
          Penistone Road in the direction of Wadsley Bridge. At this point I
          overheard a storno radio message that resuscitation equipment was
          required at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

          At point (C) on the map we were stopped by a Police Inspector who was
          in radio contact with a colleague.  However after a short period cf
          time he was not able to offer any positive information.  So we
          proceeded to Leppings Lane and parked at point (D).

          Taking with us a Motivus resuscitator one spare bottle of oxygen and
          a first aid kit we proceeded into the ground through the north stand
          access ramp.   Entering the stand we forced our way through the ground
          and onto the pitch where we immediately came across a casualty laid
          out with a group assisting by giving mouth to mouth and cardiac
          massaging.   Taking charge of the situation we got the resuscitation
          equipment to work and took over giving cardiac massage.   Friends of
          the casualty pleaded with us that we continue and don't give up now.
          An advertising board was brought to the side of the casualty, the
          casualty was transferred to this and carried from the pitch (E) to a
          waiting ambulance (F) where he was put into the care of the ambulance
          service.
                                                                         t-Yb



We then made our way back onto the pitch and walking in front of the
north stand giving assistance to four people and oxygen tc a further
two.


We were by now directly in front of the Leppings Lane Stand (G), I
contacted Divisional Officer Lockwood by storno radio who had by this
time located himself by the police box overlooking the ground/
incident.

He directed us to the gymnasium with our resuscitation equipment.
Upon arrival at the gymnasium (H) we were directed to two casualties
whom we gave oxygen and comfort. A further two casualties were
assisted from the area and onto waiting ambulances. We continued in
this area rendering humanitarian service. Five minutes before the
crowd has asked to disperse we made our way back to our appliance.
Where we were instructed to wait for further instructions.

Some members of the public became agitated and upset that appliances
and a staff car were blocking exits from the ground. There was some
verbal abuse "you have done a good job now xxxx off" and some took
their anger out on the E.T. (no damage was dur*a on later inspection).
To try and alleviate the situation the staff car was moved to one
side.

A number of members of the public thanked us for what we had done and
a young man came into our care who had lost his father in the rush to
leave the ground.  They were reunited a few minutes later.

After the crowd has dispersed we returned to Station arriving back at
approximately 1720 hours.




LFM 943 HOUSLEY D
CENTRAL FIRE STATION, RED WATCH.
                            srAfrcAn


                           UPPrrs/c- UWG
                               S,TArJO i •
        Pg L l C 6   BcK




                                                           Fyo P.TU   C Tftrio '



        ScuTU
        CTAriO                                                               •T N R S lo fA



                                                       !
        ft




rtAwo£                                     Rwotuio*:                  Noft l U
                                              ^rriTiAHCC
\S     WEtt
 fnicfcoOnutrtt
                                                                                                   »/
                                                                                   H o u s e   £   7
