« E.R .                                                             c 7 MAR bid

                                           CC   Ms   Dent
                                                Ms   Snow
                                                Mr   Yates
                                                Mr   Turney
                                                Mr   Whalley
                                                Mr   Mower
                                                Mr   J D B Taylor


      Mr Bolton



      HANDLING OF THE TAYLOR REPORT



      Thank you for your note of 9 February addressed to

JP    John Gilbert.   Mr Gilbert has now left Parliamentary Section

      and I have succeeded him as Parliamentary Clerk.      I am sorry

      that you have not had a reply to your note before now.



      I attach a copy of a note I have circulated today to senior

      staff and Heads of Divisions about the fast-track publishing

      of Government reports.   My note covers a memorandum from the

      Lord President of the Council (Sir Geoffrey Howe) to the

      Prime Minister of 19 February in which he summarises the

      advice received from the Chief Executive of HMSO in answer to

      enquiries about the time taken to print the final report of

     Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium

     diaster.



     As you will see, the HMSO advice about forward planning

     concurs with the point which you make about the need for a

     deliberate decision to be taken in advance of receipt of a

     report if it is to be printed and published as a matter of
E .R .




     priority.   I need only add that Parliamentary Section will,

     along the lines of your suggestion, take all possible steps at

     an early stage to explore the level of urgency to be accorded A'

     a particular report.




                                              B E KINNEY
                                              Parliamentar




     Private Office
     5 March 1990
                                    cc   Private Secretaries
                                         Mr Yates
                                         Deputy Secretaries
                                         Under Secretaries
                                         Mr Mower
                                         Mr J D B Taylor



Heads of Division


"FAST-TRACK" PUBLISHING OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS

I should be grateful if Heads of Division would circulate the
attached copy of a memorandum from the Lord President of the
Council (Sir Geoffrey Howe) to the Prime Minister of
19 February about fast-track publishing of Government reports.
The memorandum summarises advice received from the
Chief Executive of HMSO following concern expressed by the
Prime Minister over the time taken to print
Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster.


FAST-TRACK ARRANGEMENTS

You will see from the memorandum that, subject to three
working davs notice of firm date for delivery of final copy
and subject to clearance of proofs. HMSO would guarantee the
following production times:


                     Typesetting         Printing
Up to 48pp            12 hours            2 days
48pp - 144pp          24 hours            3 days
Over 144pp            36 hours            4 days

Depending on size and complexity, and the degree of advance
notice, it might be possible to produce some publications
within 24 hours should that prove necessary. These times are
for publication in London only.  If simultaneous publication
at other locations is required then a_n extra day should be
added.


FORWARD PLANNING

Officials involved in the preparation of papers likely to
require publication within a week of clearance by the
Home Secretary must plan their requirements in accordance with
this timetable.  The key to the fast publication of reports is
forward planning and subsequent adherence to the agreed
timetable by all concerned.
There may be some difficulty in setting an initial timetable
for the production of a report sufficiently far ahead because
of uncertainty about when the final text will be available.
However, in all but the most exceptional cases it should be
possible to Set a clear deadline and stick to it. This
planning must involve early contact with Parliamentary
Section, who act as the Department's point of liaison with
HMSO and who stand ready to give advice on the Parliamentary
handling of publications.


LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S REPORT

I should add that in the case of the Taylor report it did not
prove possible to provide the desired advance notice for a
genuine "fast-track" publication. This aside, HMSO succeeded
in achieving everything we asked of them. Additional time
was, however, needed for proof-reading, packaging and
delivery.


I hope that officials will find this guidance useful.  It
should be remembered that fast-track arrangements incur extra
costs and for this reason should be only resorted to when it
is essential to print a report outside the normal printing
timetable.


Any queries about this note, or about the timetabling of more
routine publications, should be directed to the Legislation
Clerk, Mr Dent, on GTN 273 3705.




                                        B E KINNEY
                                        Par 1 iamen tarv^tfl e rk




Private Office
5 March 1990
  PRIME MINISTER




 FAST-TRACK PUBLISHING OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS


 In the wake of the problems we encountered over the publication
 of Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
 disaster, I have looked into the steps which would be needed to

•establish a fast-track arrangement for the publication of similar
 reports in future.


      The primary lesson underlined by our experience over the
 Taylor report is the need for close collaboration and advance
 planning between the Department sponsoring a report and HMSO.
 The crucial point is for departments to identify well in advance
 the possible need for the rapid publication of a report and
consult HMSO at an early stage about this and any other aspects
of the report’s publication, including any security requirements.
If this is done, full advantage can be taken, for example, of
word processing to speed the production of written text.      Plans
can be made for photographs and other illustrations to be
processed in advance of receipt of the rest of the text of a
report.


3.   Departments may of course have difficulty in setting a
timetable for the production of a report sufficiently far ahead
because of uncertainty about when the final text will be
available.   But it should be possible, in all but the most
exceptional cases, to set a clear deadline and stick to it.
Other problems can arise if final proof stage is used not just to
correct typographical errors but to change the actual text.
  Again, this problem can be much reduced if a report is prepared
  on word processing equipment which can output tape or disk in a
  format suitable for direct input to the printer's typesetting
  equipment.    But this too requires collaboration between
  Departments and HMSO in advance to ensure that necessary
  technical standards are met.     it is no surprise that advance
  planning and subsequent adherence to the agreed timetable by all
  concerned emerge as the key factors in achieving fast publication
  of reports.


  4.    It would clearly make no economic sense for HMSO to maintain
  a permanently idle printing capacity in case of an urgent
^requirement which might arise only occasionally.       HMSO therefore
 relies on buying the services of private sector printers, a
 handful of whom have been specially cleared for the production
 of classified material.     Productive capacity can be earmarked for
 precisely the right time, provided sufficient advance notice is
 given.


 5.     HMSO have, however, reviewed their performance standard for
 the production of important reports like the Taylor report*
 Where fast-track treatment is requested by the responsible
 Minister, they would guarantee the following production times,
 subject to three working days notice of firm dates for delivery
 of final copy and/or clearance of proofs:


                        Typesetting          Printing


       Up to 48pp         12 hrs               2 days
       48pp-144pp         24 hrs               3 days
       Over 14 4pp        36 hrs              4 days


 If simultaneous publication of a report was required at several
 locations in addition to London, then an extra day would need to
 be added.     If applied in the case of the Taylor report, this
 would have meant that, assuming the text of the report had been
 received by HMSO on Friday 19 January (it was in fact received by
 them on Monday 22 January), it could have been published on
 Tuesday 23 January.   Depending on their si2e and complexity, and
 the degree of advance notice, it might be possible to produce
 some publications within 24 hours, should that prove necessary.


 6.   The costs associated with such fast-track arrangements could
 substantially exceed normal print-buying methods.    It has long
 been the accepted practice that those buying reports should not
have to pay higher cover prices to reflect the urgency or
security required in a particular case,     sponsor Departments
could therefore on occasion find themselves asked to contribute
towards any exceptional costs involved in fast-track publishing.
The extent of such costs would depend on market conditions, and
could only be determined case-by-case.


7.    Colleagues will wish to be aware of the new performance
standard proposed by HMSO, which represents a considerable
improvement on existing arrangements.     They will also wish to
have in mind the other lessons I have set out which can be
derived from our experiences over the Taylor report.


8.    I am copying this minute to Ministers in charge of
Departments, the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, Sir Robin
Butler and the Chief Executive of HMSO.




                               OH




19 February 19QQ
