Louise Brookes




16 October 1997

Lord Justice Stuart Smith
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H9AT

Dear Lord Justice Stuart Smith

Ref: Andrew Mark Brookes; killed at Hillsborough 15 April 1989

I am Louise Brookes, sister of Andrew, and this is my submission to your
independent scrutiny. It raises a range of serious matters and concerns relating to
Andrew’s death, the legal proceedings that followed and my recent communications
with the South Yorkshire Police. I attended the families’ meeting held by you in
Liverpool on Monday 6 October 1997. It was my intention to seek a private meeting
with you in Liverpool, and Chris Bone offered such an opportunity at short notice, but
I was not able to provide you with a full submission at the time. This was because
significant information promised me by the South Yorkshire Police had not
materialised. I still await release of some of that material.

Brief Background

At the time of Andrew’s death I was 17. As you will appreciate, my parents were left
in a state of profound shock and the legal proceedings which followed, from Lord
Justice Taylor’s Inquiry through to the Inquests, were difficult and confusing times.
Much of the information relating to Andrew’s death and its specific circumstances,
was not made available. This included the statements of the civilian and police
witnesses. Living in                the family was isolated from the events and
support in Liverpool. At the time we knew very little and it is only recently that I have
become familiar with the main issues and I am now deeply concerned about the
circumstances in which Andrew died and the appropriateness of the legal
proceedings, particularly the inquests, that followed.

These concerns are a direct result of gaining access, 8 years on, to a mass of
information about events on the day, to statements, to photographs and to other
material concerning Andrew’s death. At the time of the various inquiries and the
inquests we had no idea of what to expect, how the procedures operated or what we
could or could not gain from the inquests. It is only now, so long after the event, that
we have become aware of the limitations of the inquests and of the restrictions
placed on our access to the statements and other evidence concerning Andrew’s
death. We now believe that the investigation and the inquest failed us, leaving more
questions unanswered than answered.
Concerns

1    At 3.05 Andrew is alive and showing no obvious signs of distress (Ref:
      PRI/IOA). The Coroner’s logic was that according to the medical evidence
     traumatic asphyxia would “fix” the chest “so that respiration could no longer
     take place, then irrevocable brain damage would occur between four and six
      minutes”. His conclusion was that “the latest, when this permanent fixation
     could have arisen would have been approximately six minutes past...”
      (Transcripts 19 November 1990 p17). The Coroner added a few minutes for
     death to happen after fixation, took the 3.13 appearance of the ambulance as
     a marker and rounded up the figure to arrive at 3.15. I do not believe that
     Andrew had received his injuries by 3.06 and neither do I accept that he was
     in an irrevocably non-recoverable state at 3.15. What happened to Andrew
     after 3.15, particularly the level and appropriateness of the medical attention
     he received, I believe from the evidence, had a bearing on his death.

2    At 3.15 there is clear photographic evidence (Ref: PR2/F/23) that most of
     those who eventually died were still trapped in the pens. There is also written
     evidence from survivors that a number who had lost consciousness before
     this time actually gained consciousness and sustained no or minimal physical
     injuries.

     It appears that Andrew was still alive at 3.25. This was the time when
                 i survivor of the crush, came across Andrew and went to his
     assistance. He states that Andrew had been put on the pitch, apparently
     given no first aid, and he was still breathing.                 States that
     Andrew was being physically sick and there were air bubbles between his
     lips. Using a hoarding_____________ ind others carried Andrew across the
     pitch and on their way they realised he had stopped breathing. They tried to
     resuscitate him. Photographic evidence (Ref: DEI/16) shows Andrew being
     carried. His hand and fingers at this point were clenched tight suggesting
     that he was still alive.                 states that he was so convinced that
     Andrew was alive that he said at the time, “we better get this bloke’s trousers
     up before he wakes up because he will not be very happy to see his trousers
     down around his ankles.” He estimated that they tried resuscitation for about
     20 minutes.

4    In the West Midlands Police summary it states that while resuscitation was
      being attempted an unidentified doctor checked Andrew and asked that it be
      continued. He returned a short time later and “certified death”. At the mini­
      inquest the Coroner was at pains to point out that the original statement, from
      PS Walton, had not used the word ‘certified’ but that the doctor had told those
      attending Andrew that “there was nothing further we could do”. Effectively,
      then, we can only presume that this unidentified doctor set the seal on
      Andrew’s life and no other attempts were made to resuscitate him. He was,
      then, carried to the gymnasium as a person presumed dead.

5    According to the statements of Dr Matthew Bull he examined twenty bodies
     on the floor of the gymnasium, whom he “pronounced life extinct between
     times of approximately 3.50 pm and 4.15 pm” (statement, 5 May 1989). He
     claimed to have examined over 20 other bodies on the pitch before 3.45 pm.
     His pronouncement of life extinct on 20 people, each of whom he names in



                                        2
     his statement, in 25 minutes represents a feat of some magnitude both in
     medical examination and memory. It is of real concern that what could only
     have been a cursory examination resulted in such certainty of death. There
     are many contemporary examples of people showing no obvious signs of life
     being found to be still alive on careful and thorough examination.

6    As a direct consequence of Dr Bull’s statement and the naming of Andrew in
      his list of 20, there is no precise time of pronouncement, simply: 15 April
      1989, between 1550 and 1615 hours.

7    Apart from the sequence of events which occurred on the pitch it is clear that
     what happened in the gymnasium is of paramount importance when
      assessing the standard and appropriateness of care administered to those
      brought there. At the heart of this issue is access to video evidence VRM/2.
     VRM/2 was never mentioned either in the West Midlands Police written
     summary or at the mini-inquest. Yet, in the ‘key to exhibit plans produced’,
      attached to the inquest file (Ref: G88), VRM/2 is a noted location of
      identification for Andrew. Why was VRM/2 not referred to in the summary or
     at the inquest? According to a conversation I had with PC Ken Greenway of
     the South Yorkshire Police it was “not in the public domain” and it was not
     submitted to the inquiry because “they didn’t ask for it”. Still photographs
     taken from VRM/2 show several bodies, among them is Andrew, laid out on
     the gymnasium floor. They have bin-liners around their heads.

8    PC Greenway stated to me that both PS Walton and PC Williamson (who
     was the officer responsible for Andrew at the gymnasium) had viewed VRM/2
     to confirm their presence on the video. They had made statements
     accordingly. I wanted exact timings once I saw the stills taken from the
     video. PC Greenway states that he can only provide a rough estimate. I find
     it difficult to accept that they do not have exact timings for VRM/2 and one
     deduction is that to provide precise times might reveal inconsistencies in the
     police officers’ statements.

9    I requested the opportunity to view VRM/2. Eventually PC Greenway agreed
      to this and it was arranged that a car would be sent for me. It was made
      clear that I was not to reveal anything that I might view to others involved in
      the case. I agreed to this. Eventually, however, the arrangement was
      cancelled by the South Yorkshire Police and I have since been refused
      access to VRM/2.

10   PS Walton claimed that when he first came across Andrew his face was
     purple. There is no photographic evirf e n r p s h n w in n th ic anc in my
     discussions with two civilian witnesses,                          nd
     they deny this to be the case.

11   I had recent contact with PS Walton and during that time I accessed a
     considerable amount of material. In discussion with PS Walton he made
     several comments or claims which subsequently turned out to be false.
     Central here has been his claim that he attempted resuscita ion on Andrew.
     The photographic evidence together with my interviews with
     and                   how that PS Walton’s claims not only cannot be
     substantiated but are palpably untrue.



                                         3
12     The mini-inquest into Andrew’s death and the way in which it was conducted
       denied us the basic right to hear full oral evidence and put it to the test of
       rigorous cross-examination. The problem is well-illustrated by the exchange
       between the Coroner and the West Midlands Police Summary Officer, DC
       Gadsby. In the summary it is stated that an unidentified doctor “asked that
       resuscitation (of Andrew) be continued”. On returning “a short time later” he
       “again checked Mr Brookes and certified death”. As noted above (Point 4),
       the Coroner raised the issue that what the doctor “actually said was that he
       was dead but it was not certified” (Mini-inquest transcript, 25 April 1990,
       p552). He was concerned about the use of the technical term ‘certification’ in
       the summary. He then quoted from PS Walton’s statement: “The doctor
       returned and after checking the man he indicated that he was dead and there
       was nothing further we could do.” Apart from the fact that we were left to
       conclude that all attempts to give further help to Andrew were abandoned on
       the quick opinion of an unidentified doctor on the pitch, we were not able at
       the mini-inquest to raise questions concerning the sequence of events or to
       hear and cross-examine this vital evidence. The Coroner could selectively
       quote from statements in his possession, drawing conclusions from examples
       he had selected, but we had neither access to the statements nor the
       opportunity to test their accuracy or reliability.

13     Over the last few months, as a result perhaps of the independent scrutiny,
       much new material to us has come to light. I have had regular dealings with
       PC Greenway in order to gain further material. You will appreciate that as
       bits of information emerge, they often contain references to other items. In
       conversation with PC Greenway it emerged that he felt that I should “not go
       with the flow, but do your own thing”. This was a comment directed towards
       the Hillsborough Families’ Support Group. I find it reprehensible that a police
       officer entrusted with the role of supplying information to bereaved families
       should encourage them to steer clear of the families’ support group. It also
       suggests that there could be preference given to families not involved with
       the group over those who are. However such officers choose to use their
       discretion it is not their role to tell bereaved families how they should conduct
       their affairs.

I hope that I can meet with you in London.

Yours sincerely________________________________




Louise Brookes




                                          4
