            memorandum       H.\l PR IS O N
                              SI K \ K I
From

                            Telephone <5 / — 2 / 7
                     5a 3
                            Extension

                            Da«e              y/     ,
                            Your reference

                            Our reference


        L




F H83 PS (Rev 8'Kf
36980 8 86 XN\-
Report

Sports Ground Safety-
Technical Working Party
Minutes of meeting held on 7 November 1989

Comments on points raised - B A   Stickley

Minutes of previous meeting

2 (iv)    Further discussion and if possible details of methods
           and testing should be examined prior to any changes of
           testing procedures.

          Any revised wording should clearly describe THE OBJECT
          of the test and the NATURE of the test, together with a
          list of data to be noted.

4         Inspections and Tests

Para 38   Representative sample should be clarified, ie At least
           25% of the barriers (excluding those specifically
           designed with full calculations and working drawings
           approved by the Authority) including representative
           sample of all types from all areas of the ground should
           be selected for testing.

New Para Immediately prior to any event the following should be
          undertaken:-

          (i)       Visual inspection of all entry and exit
                    routes to ensure they are clear of
                    obstructions and are all in compliance with
                    the conditions of the Safety Certificate.

          (ii)     Visual inspection of all terraces.

          (iii)    Visual inspection of all stands.

          (iv)     Inspection and operational testing of all
                    turnstiles.

          (v)      Inspection and operational testing of all
                    exit doors and gates.

          (vi)     Testing of all emergency lighting generators,
                    public address system, etc.

          (vii)    Testing of all police and emergency equipment
                    including any automatic counting systems for
                    spectators, CCTV and the like.

27        Preliminary discussions were held with members of
          RADAR, including a physically handicapped member who
          regularly attended football matches.

                                  1
             Although more thought and research is required for full
             drafting, the following is clear

             (i)         There should   be a designated route to bring
                          handicapped   spectators to and into the ground
                          as close as   possible to their viewing
                          position in   their vehicles (ie car or
                          coaches).

             (ii)        Their viewing area should be as far as
                          possible separated and self-contained from
                          the general spectator area.

             (iii)       Entry to the viewing area should be as easy
                          as possible, ie very shallow ramps - Where
                          steeper ramps or difficult ingress/egress
                          routes are unavoidable a suitable number of
                          fully trained stewards should be available at
                          all times the area is in use.

             (iv)        Where emergency exit route out of the ground
                          is not independent of other spectator routes,
                          an emergency exit route to the pitch should
                          be provided.

             (v)         The viewing area should be constructed and
                          located to give an unobstructed view of the
                          pitch.

             (vi)        Where more than one row of viewing is
                          required, there should be a rise of at least
                          "300 mm"?? and the drop protected by a
                          suitable barrier. Easy access as described
                          should be provided to each row.

              (vii)      Toilet facilities, suitably designed,    should
                          be provided discreet to this area.

             It is hoped to discuss these points further within the
             committee and with outside bodies.

29 (x)       I have commented in my earlier note.

30           The advice of G2 Division should be sought to ensure
             the acceptance of the principles by the Fire Brigades.

31 (i)       To    be developed.

     (ii)    Until a definite format for the composition and powers
              of the FLA has been established, this is difficult to
              judge. The main concern must be around responsibility,
              ie if the FLA have the authority to instruct and
              enforce will this then make them responsible and
              relieve the Local Authority, issuing the certificate of
              their responsibility.

     (iii)   See earlier note.
                                        2
9




         (iv)   If it is established that standing terraces, providing
                safe accommodation by complying with the principles of
                the Guide, are not a danger and are suitable for
                viewing an event, can the case be made for enforcement
                of seated stadia.

         (v)    Wherever possible the Guide should be written to apply
                to all stadia.

                Differences of function/operation of spectators at
                various types of sport, should naturally be picked up
                during certification., ie Where spectators regularly
                move, such as at horse racing to place bets, the
                density of 54 would be reduced.

    23          The dimension of 1.1m and 1.8m are derived from the
                Post War Building Studies - I will bring copies of the
                paper to the next meeting.

    Regarding future meetings - I confirm my availability on the
    28th November and confirm that I will only be available from
    10.30 am to about 11.30 am on 13th December.



                                                                \
    21 November 1989




                                      3
