            South Yorkshire

                                                               Richard Wells qpm. m coxonx cim #.
                                                               Chief Constable
            JUSTICE     with   COURAGE




Police Policy Directorate                        Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)
Home Office                                      Our Ref:    D&C/JML/SW CSF 15/97
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                            Date:      3 February 1997
SW 1H9AT




HILLSBOROUGH

Following the screening of the drama documentary "Hillsborough” on Thursday 5 December 1996
and your letter dated 20 December, I have now had the opportunity to study in some detail the
contents of the programme and to conduct further research.

As a result of the research into the material collected by West Midlands Police for the Lord Justice
Taylor Inquiry and the transcripts of evidence given at that inquiry, two volumes of documents
have been compiled which cover the matters raised in your letter. It would serve no useful
purpose for me to transcribe certain parts of the evidence into this letter and it seems appropriate
to provide the documents to you in their present form.

Volume One deals with video evidence, together with comments from the coroner, Doctor Popper,
Home Office Pathologist, Professor Usher, Doctor Gumpet, a consultant neurologist, and
Doctor Slater. Also in these documents are comments from Police Constable Bichard concerning
the operation of the video cameras in question.

Let me say at the outset that no new evidence has emerged and the issues raised in the television
programme have all previously been aired in Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest.

Perhaps I can address specifically the concerns mentioned in your letter dated 20 December. First
of all I must emphasise once again that there is no new evidence. Secondly, you seek clarification
on whether film from a video camera trained on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor
Inquiry. Such a video film was made available to the Taylor Inquiry and a copy is enclosed for your
information, together with another video film, completing the video record available from police
sources, that day. The second video, like the first, was made available to Lord Justice Taylor. You
will see that they did not provide any useful information to the match commanders on the day of
the disaster and the programme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.
*

                                                     -   2-


     Police Policy Directorate                                        3 February 1997


     Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the workings
     of the camera on the day in question and his evidence can be seen in volume one of the
     documents provided, at Section Two.

     Police Constable Bichard told the Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry that whilst some pictures were
     available from the camera in question they were of poor quality although the camera was in fact
     working.

     There does seem to be some confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
     position. Evidence given by Police Constable Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the


•
     ground although, as I have previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
    focused on the Leppings Lane end of the ground exclusively, the recorded material on the tape
    enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several cameras
    are used by control room personnel to scan the ground and its environs but these record footage
    only when transferred to certain monitors in the control room. It will be seen from the enclosed
    video that footage from several cameras had been recorded on the day in question. Where the
    reproduction is of poor quality then that is the camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the
    ground. For your information I have also included a video schedule (prepared by the West
    Midlands Police for the Taylor Inquiry and included here in their original form) of these particular
    tapes which form the basis of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
    Taylor's Inquiry. Please see Section One in Volume One.

    Although your letter of 20 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes it
     has been an issue causing some confusion. We clarified this for the Minister, David MacLean, for
     his intended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience, I
     repeat that clarification here. The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
    not the police cameras were working. In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
    recording suite. This was entirely under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
    the police had no control in its operation. During the night following the disaster two video tapes
    went missing from that particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
    locked and the alarm set. When they returned the next morning the room was still locked with the
    alarm still armed. They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
    tapes was of no use whatsoever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
    the camera was trained on a brick wall. The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
    the playing area and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
    such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any internal part of the ground.

    Following the discovery of the theft the crime was recorded and West Midlands police officers
    made enquires to trace the person responsible. To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
    that clarifies the position concerning the video tapes.

    A further point raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
    which he would not take any evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
    explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
    Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
    remaining alive after the initial crush. That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
    observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
    call a clearly defined cut off time.
Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten - the first about the
allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
points, they were fully addressed.

A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.

Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
recommendations.

It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor's original findings.



                                Vj O vSV j o —
