                                                                       RECEIVED 0 2
From: Jim Bradley
Police Resources Unit                                                                        /
Room 614, QAG
® : 273 2996

1 February 1999                                        cc John Lyon
                                                           Lynda Lockver
                                                          Deborabi^tfudon

                                                           Caroline Price,LAB


Rosem ary Davies
LAB
                                                                                     j4 / A
FIN A N C IA L A SSISTA N C E TO PO LICE OFFICERS IN LEG A L
PR O C EED IN G S - HO C IR C U LA R 4/1998

I would be grateful for L A B ’s advice on a reply to the attached letter from Garretts,
Solicitors about H om e Office Circular 4/1988. They are acting for South Yorkshire
Police Authority and have asked for a reply before 5 February.

2. The background to this is set out in the attached Background Note. It has been
prepared in connection with a number o f Parliamentary Questions from Maria Eagle
M P about the decision o f South Yorkshire Police Authority to meet the defence costs
o f two former officers who are facing criminal proceedings as a result of a private
prosecution brought by families o f two victims o f the Hillsborough disaster.

3. The letter from Garretts asks “to learn the legal basis on which the ITome Office
concluded that police authorities had power to provide financial assistance [to
officers] . . . i n criminal proceedings” . The solicitors seem to have misinterpreted the
guidance in HO Circular 4/1988, copy attached. The Circular, which was drawn up
with assistance from LAB, reached no such conclusion.

4. Paragraph 4 o f the Circular informs police authorities that the powers in sections
88(4) and (5) o f the Police Act 1996 “enabling them to provide financial assistance to
officers involved in legal proceedings apply to civil proceedings only” . Paragraph 5
goes on to say that “section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police
authorities may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other
power to provide such assistance...”

 5. The solicitors also ask whether, in the light o f a legal challenge against the police
 authority’s decision to provide legal costs to the former officers, the Home Office
 would wish to be heard. My view is that we have nothing to add to what is in HO
 Circular 4/1998. However I would welcome your urgent views to enable us to reply to
 the letter.



 Jim Bradley            j



 M y documcnts:lab3
                                                                           G arretts

                                                                                                          '■'" " -'■'V v, U                            t f _____________________.
                                                                                                                                     J                       1 Citv Square
                                                                                                                                        ^                    Leeds LSI 2AL
  1 February 1999                                                                                                                        J               . 0113 207 9000 Telephone
                                                                                                                                             N       ' V ^ j O l D 207 9001 Facsimile
  By fax and post
                                                                                                                                v" A                       j  DX 26444 Leeds Fcirk Square

  J Lyons Esq                                                                                                                                        >|,   I
  Police Directorate                                                                                                                                       Direct line 0113 3 9 9 6 1 3 6
  Home Office
  50 Queen Ann's Gate                                                                                                                                      Our ref             DH/fCH
  London
  SW1H 9 AT                                                                                                                                                Your ref




  Dear Sir

 Hom e Office Circular 4/1994 - Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings

 We have been instructed by the South Yorkshire Police Authority to advise upon the granting of
 financial assistance to police officers in private prosecutions.

 We have considered HOC 4/1998, and its predecessor 77/1987, and the relevant provisions of
 Police Act 1996 (in particular s6 and s88(4)).

 In the light of the statutory provisions and recent cases which have considered the ambit of s i l l
 Local Government Act 1972, w e are not sure that HOC 4/1998 is correct on the power to provide
 financial assistance in cases other than tort.

 Accordingly, w e should like to learn the legal basis on which the Hom e Office concluded that
 police authorities had power to provide financial assistance in non-tort cases, and in particular
 criminal cases.

 It is possible that a legal challenge to the power to provide such assistance w ill be brought and w e
 shall be pleased to know whether the Home Office w ould w ish to be heard in those proceedings.

We understand that a parliamentary question has been tabled for Thursday, 4 February and we
should also like to see the Hom e Office,s answer to that question.

The Authority is meeting on Friday, 5 February 1999 to consider this matter. Therefore, w e should
be grateful for an opportunity to consider your comments and the parliamentary answer in good
time before that meeting.




C . i r r c t i v is a m e m b e r «>. U v A m ! r ' \ , - n U ' i ' a l   A list o f j h e u o v *          p ' l . r n c r s is o p e n i d                  O f f t t e * in: b ir n i n g h r .r r C i r r . t r d p c   Lcsds
 rite rp .ji i c - n j i o H w n r V <.;? l a w f i r m s                  hisjM-rtior* m t n c a b o v e o.'Itcc T h e p j i t n e i * ju -                   l.- » rv lcn M a n c h e s t e r R r a ' i t n ^
                                                                           ( . M t h a s o l i c i t o r s Cl t« >£.S V r.-d f o r i n t l;iwvi.TS             A s s o c i a t e f rr n t *r> S f y t i j n d   !            & '.Vjiv;.n 0 $

j \ g j r r c t » \ t o o t h y o r k th lr t p0lic*\le-00G18.doc\)G"l
                                             G ar r etts

        ,L y 0 m B s t l                           -2 -                          1 February1999




       Should you wish to discuss the matter, please do not hesitate to telephone our Mr David Harlock
       or his colleagues working on this matter, Mr Nicholas Painter, Mr Alex Guy and Miss Catrina
       Brazier.

       We thank you in anticipation of your prompt assistance.




       Yours faithfully




  j - \ g a m t f t \ » o u lh yo rtu hfn-

‘OQ Tim                                            1C     c I -y   T ' TPl   -
                                                     G arretts

  Privilege<yCon£idcntia) inform ation
                                                                                                1 C ity S q u a re
  may he contained in this facsimile and is intended only for the u « of the addressee. 1/
                                                                                                Leeds
  yon are not (he addressee, or the person responsible for delivering it to Ihe person
                                                                                                LSI 2A L
  addressed, you tnaj' not copy or deliver this to anyone else, if you receive this facsimile
  by mistake, please nob'fy us immediately by telephone Thank you.
                                                                                                0113 207 9000 Telephone
                                                                                                0113 207 9001 Facsimile (Central)
                                                                                                DX 26444 Leeds Park Square

                                                                                                1 February 1999

 To:              J Lyons Esq - Police Directorate                                              Fax no:              0171 2733742


 From:            D avid Harlock

 Subject:         H om e Office Circular 4 /1 9 9 4 - Financial Assistance to Police
                  Officers in Legal Proceedings
 Pages to fo llow :        '}
                          /•
 If unreadable p le a se contact Kaxen Hargreaves on 0113 3996133



 Please see attached correspondence.


 Regards




 David Harlock




A licr        „         , ,,                             UK offices.                              A ssociated firm in H o lla n d
m en h               f       partnen. u o p e n to       Birmingham               L ondon         Duiula* & Wihcm C5
inspection at tne above olfice. The partners are         C am bridge              M anchester     E d in b u rg h
w      “ I'C’^ r s or registered foreign lawyer*         Leeds                    R eading        G lasgow ’
PA R LIA M EN TA R Y Q UESTION FOR W RITTEN ANSW ER ON THURSDAY
28 JA N U A R Y 1999




M aria Eagle (Liverpool, G arston): To ask the Secretary for the Home Department,
if the guidance in Home Office Circular 4/1998, relating to the payment o f money to
officers, either former or serving, involved in criminal proceedings, applies either to
officers who have retired on health grounds with outstanding disciplinary charges
against them or to officers against whom outstanding disciplinary charges have been
dropped because o f a retirement on health grounds o f another officer.




D R A FT REPLY:                        MR BOATENG




There is no express statutory provision enabling police authorities to provide financial
assistance to officers involved in criminal proceedings. The circular makes clear that

it is entirely for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
o f a case, and on the basis o f legal advice, whether to make financial assistance

available to officers, either former or serving, in criminal proceedings. It does not

seek to offer guidance on the specific circumstances o f a case.




Pqeagle280198
Background



Ms Eagle has tabled a number o f Questions relating to proceedings following the
inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster, for answer on Thursday 28 January and
Monday 1 February. She has a particular interest in this subject as it is her
constituents who are pursuing the private prosecutions o f 2 officers involved.

Former C hief Superintendent David Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard
Murray o f the South Yorkshire Police were the two most senior officers on duty at the
Hillsborough disaster in April 1989. Although no criminal proceedings were brought
against them following the inquiry into the disaster, it was recommended that both
officers face disciplinary action. Duckenfield retired from the force on medical
grounds before disciplinary proceedings could be brought and it was not possible to
continue against Murray on what amounted to a joint charge.

The Flillsborough Family Support Group has brought a private prosecution against
both men. They face charges o f manslaughter in respect o f two o f those who died at
Hillsborough. They also face an alternative charge o f wilfully neglecting to perform a
public duty (otherwise known as ‘misconduct in a public office’) based on the same
circumstances as the main allegations. Duckenfield is also charged with ‘perverting
the course o f ju stice’ in that he lied about the circumstances in which gate C at the
ground was opened.



South Yorkshire Police Authority has decided to fund the defence costs o f Mr
Duckenfield and M r Dean-Murray. It is the particular circumstances o f these 2
officers, without naming them, to which Ms Eagle is asking whether the guidance in
Home Office Circular 4/1998 applies.

The circular, copy attached, provides updated guidance to police authorities on
financial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings, and distinguishes between
officers involved in civil proceedings, criminal proceedings and other types o f legal
proceedings. The background to this was a request from ACPO and other police staff
organisations that the previous 1987 circular should be amended to include retired, as
well as serving, officers. From this it emerged that the 1987 guidance had been
misleading in that there is no express statutory provision enabling police authorities to
give financial assistance to officers facing criminal charges. The law enables
financial assistance to be given only to officers involved in civil proceedings.

HOC 4/1998 explains the statutory vicarious liability under s88 o f the Police Act
 1996 for officers involved in civil proceedings, and that this does not apply to
criminal proceedings. It suggests that police authorities may wish to consult their
legal advisers as to whether they have any other power to provide such assistance, but
that it is for police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances o f a case, and
on the basis o f legal advice, whether to make financial assistance available to officers
in criminal proceedings.

The Circular does not offer any guidance as to whether it should apply to any
particular circumstances or type o f case, but states the underlying principle that it is



I'qcaglclSOiyK
important for police officers to be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that
their police authority will support them . if they act in good laith and exercise their
judgem ent reasonably.

We have been informed that the police authority has set aside around £500,000 to
meet legal costs arising from the Hillsborough disaster and the outcome o f the Mr
Justice Stewart-Smith report. This funding is available to meet the defence costs of
Duckenfield and Murray.

There are no plans to review the circular relating to these particular cases, but we are
separately looking at whether amendment is needed to rcnect provisions in the
H um an Rights Act.




 I>qeagle280l98
                          Home Office C
HOC 4/1998                                                                        17 February 1998

THIS CIRCULAR IS ABOUT:          FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN
                                 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

FROM:    POLICE R ESO U R C ES UNIT               EXPIRY DATE:     NONE

LAST DATE FOR
IMPLEMENTATION: IM M EDIATE                      THIS CANCELS HOC:      77/1987

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:                    STEV E SCHOLEY
                                                 POLIC E R ESOURCES UNIT
                                                 R O O M 610
                                                 50 Q UEEN A N N E ’S GATE
                                                 LO NDON SW 1H 9AT
                                                 TEL: 0171 273 3606
                                                 FAX: 0171 273 3742

THIS CIRCULAR IS ADDRESSED TO:                    CHIEF OFFICERS OF POLICE
                                                  (ENGLAND & WALES)

COPIES ARE ALSO BEING SENT TO:                    CLERKS TO TH E PO LIC E AUTHORITIES
                                                  R EC EIVER FOR TH E M ETROPOLITAN
                                                  POLICE DISTRICT




        Dear C hief Officer/Clerk,

        This circular:

        • provides updated guidance to police authorities on financial assistance to police
          officers in legal proceedings.

        • distinguishes between officers involved in civil proceedings, criminal
          proceedings and other types o f legal proceedings.

        • replaces HO Circular 77/1987.
Introduction

1.      It is important that police officers should be able to carry out their duties in
the confidence that their police authority will support them, if they act in good faith
and exercise their judgement reasonably. The following guidance, which has been
prepared in consultation with ACPO, the Superintendents Association, the Police
Federation and the Association o f Police Authorities, should be read against this
principle.

Civil Proceedings

2.      Under section 88 (1) o f the Police Act 1996 which re-enacts section 48(1) o f
the Police Act 1964, chief officers are liable for torts committed by officers under
their direction and control. Section 88(2) provides that any damages or costs
awarded against the chief officer and any costs they incur themselves (which are not
recovered) should be met from police authority funds.

3.      Alternatively, a court may award damages against individual police officers.
Section 88(4) o f the Police Act 1996 empowers a police authority “to such an extent
as appears to it to be appropriate” to pay any damages or costs awarded against
officers (this includes both officers o f other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements and special constables), any costs incurred by the officers
themselves and any sum paid in connection with the settlement o f a claim. It is for
police authorities to decide when to make assistance available, taking account o f the
circumstances o f a particular case.

4.     Police authorities are reminded that the discretionary powers in sections
88(4) and (5) o f the Act, enabling them to provide financial assistance to officers
involved in legal proceedings, apply to civil proceedings only. Sections 88(4) and
88(5) may also apply to police officers who were members at the time o f the action
which gave rise to the claim but who are no longer members.

Criminal Proceedings

5.     Section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities
may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other power to
provide such assistance (whether in respect o f private prosecutions or prosecutions
brought by the CPS). In this context, they may wish to note that section 111(1) o f
the Local Government Act 1972 enables police authorities to do anything “which is
calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge o f any o f their
functions”. The provision applies to provincial authorities (but not the Metropolitan
or City o f London police) by virtue o f Section 146A o f the 1972 Act (as inserted
by Schedule 14 to the Local Government Act 1985 and amended by Schedule 4 o f
the Police and Magistrates’ Courts Act 1994). It could be argued that to allow
payment to be made to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal
proceedings would in some way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s
broad functions. For example, failure to provide financial assistance could
adversely affect the morale o f the force if officers had to meet their own costs after
an acquittal.

6.      It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
o f a case, and on the basis o f legal advice, whether to make financial assistance
available to officers in criminal proceedings.

O ther types o f legal proceedings

7.      Similarly, there is no express statutory authority for providing financial
assistance in proceedings brought against police officers in tribunals other than the
courts. It is for police authorities outside London (bearing in mind the
recommendations o f chief officers) to decide whether to make financial assistance
available to officers (either former or serving) involved in Public Inquiries and
Tribunals. Police authorities will therefore need to consider whether section 111(1)
o f the Local Government Act 1972 provides sufficient scope to enable fmancial
assistance to be given in any particular case. In this respect tribunals may include
certain industrial tribunals where it is clear that officers have acted in good faith in
pursuance o f their duties and the interest o f the force as a whole is involved. It is to
be expected that, where appropriate, the service’s grievance procedure
arrangements should be exhausted before there is recourse to legal proceedings.
These arrangements are set out in Home Office Circular 16/93, issued 10 March
1993.

8.      There are specific provisions in the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Sex
Discrimination Act 1975 for compensation, costs and expenses awarded against the
chief officer o f police and any sum required for settlement, if approved by the
police authority, to be paid from the police fund.

9.      There is no express statutory authority for providing fmancial assistance to
an officer wishing to initiate court proceedings. The considerations set out in
paragraphs 5 to 7 above apply to such cases.




 LYNDA LOCKYER
 PO L IC E R E SO U R C E S UNIT
