                             IN CONFIDENCE
Mr Chilcot
HMCIC
Mr Soden
                                                              0




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY: POLICE


I attach some draft supplementary briefing for the Home
Secretary's use on Friday covering difficult and sensitive police
points.


Comments would be welcome.




                                             F J SMITH
                                             F8 Division
2 August 1989

X 2952
Room 533A




                             IN CONFIDENCE
                          IN CONFIDENCE


Do you have confidence in South Yorkshire Police?

                                                                 t

Like all [Home Office] police forces in England and Wales,
South Yorkshire Police is subjected to a searching and wide
ranging annual inspection by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of
Constabulary. The force has demonstrated in successive
inspections a good level of efficiency and effectiveness. This
report levels a number of serious criticisms against the force,
identifying specific officers, in relation to the disaster at
Hillsborough football ground on 15 April. Certainly those
deficiencies must be put right and I look in the first instance
to the chief constable to report to me on how he will achieve
that.


Will you call for resignations bv police officers?

I do not intend to ask the chief constable to resign.


In relation to other officers, existing procedures are there to
investigate and deal with misconduct.  [As I have said] I will
expect the chief constable to report to me on what action he will
be taking in response to the criticisms of his force by
Lord Justice Taylor.


Are the police (generally) preoccupied with hooliganism at the
expense of safety?


Clearly the circular to all chief constables enclosing a copy of
Lord Justice Taylor's report and recommendations will be a
powerful reminder to the police and others that safety must come
first. Many of the recommendations are intended to increase the
margin of safety for spectators early in the coming football
season. But hooliganism continues to present real difficulties,
including an important risk to safety if it goes unchecked.



                          IN CONFIDENCE
