                           hcc    Miss Bannister
                                  Ms Craig
                                  Mr Yates
                                                        H   ome   O   ffice
                                  Mr Moriarty
                                  Mr Turney            Q UE E N ANNE'S GATE
                                  Mr Mower             L O N D O N SWIH 9 AT
                                  Mr Goddar        j
2 9 3A/ LF/ MT                    Mr Watts
                                  Mr Mould
                                  Mr Lidington

                                                       £    M a y 1989



           /?(r.

Thank you for your letter of   21 April to the Home Secretary about
perimeter fences at football   grounds.

You do ^raise an important issue.   As the Home Secretary said on
17 April in response to comments made on his statement that day, it
is one for Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry to look into.    We shall
consider very carefully any recommendations wh ic h he may make, but
we do not think that it would be right, in advance of that, to
amend the advice in the Home Of fi ce/Scottish Office "Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds".   This gives guidance on a variety of
safety issues which have to be taken into consideration, including
pitch perimeter fences.

A pitch perimeter fence is sometimes required by the terms and the
conditions of safety certificates which are issued by the local
authority and which must be complied with.   In some cases such a
fence has been erected, not because of a specific requirement in
the safety certificate, but as a segregation measure.     Such
measures are necessary to help combat hoolo ga ni sm and violence,
outbreaks of which can lead to the death and injury of spectators.

A number of clubs are, as you say, removing their pitch perimeter
fence.   It is of course open to them to consider this, but it would
be wi se for them to do so in consultation wit h authorities
locally.   Where the fence is a requirement of the safety
certificate, the club would of course need to seek the local
authority's agreement to a change in the safety certificate.

This ^is a matter which Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry will be
looking into, and I think that it would be best to await his views
before coming to premature conclusions.




                                 FERRERS


C Smith Esq MP
8 may
  j
