          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Dr S L Popper                                                   Your reference:

                                                                Our reference:

                                                                Date:        I     November 1997




Thank you for coming to see Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, with Mr Burgess, on Monday
November 17. I attach a copy o f the transcript of your discussion with the Judge.

2.      There are I fear three more points that we would like to take up with you. First, we
have since we met you and Mr Burgess had a meeting with Ms Debra Martin. She is a former
Special Constable with the South Yorkshire Police and was at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.
She made a statement indicating that Kevin Williams, one of the victims whom the Judge
discussed with you the other day (see page 34 et seq. o f the transcript) died in her care, in the
gymnasium, at about 1600 hrs, some half an hour after PC Bruder had stopped trying to
resuscitate him. She said that Kevin opened his eyes and said ‘M om’, and then died.

3.      Ms Martin repeated to the Judge an allegation which she had previously made on
television in the Cook Report programme in 1994 that a West Midlands police sergeant, Julie
Appleton, bullied her into making a fresh statement which did not imply that Kevin Williams
was still alive at around 1600 hrs (though it does not, in fact, deny that he was). Before the
Judge met Debra Martin I spoke to Julie Appleton. She agrees that she took the second
statement from Debra Martin, but not surprisingly she strongly disputes the suggestion that she
bullied her into making it. During the discussion Ms Appleton told me that she had been
asked to visit Debra Martin and discuss her initial statement by ‘the Coroner’.

4.     Would that be right? If not, is it more likely to have been the case that she was asked to
go to Ms Martin by a more senior West Midlands officer, working on your behalf?

5.      Second, we will shortly be seeing Dr Bull. Dr Bull was present at the ground as a
spectator on 15 April 1989 and went on the pitch to help. Later, he went into the gymnasium
where the police asked him to certify deaths. The evidence is that he then certified twenty
people as being dead in a period o f twenty-five minutes. The Judge has heard suggestions
(which I should add do not come from medically qualified people) that it is not possible

G:\HIlLSBOR\MAIN\DRPOPPER. 1 56
properly to certify the deaths of that number o f people in such a time.

6.      He would be grateful for your views on this. Were you aware during the Inquests
that this one doctor had certified the deaths o f that number o f people in that period?

7.      Finally, you discussed Dr Ed Walker with the Judge (page 22 et seq). You said that
you did not have a copy o f Dr W alker’s statement available at the Inquest and that there w as a
possibility that it might not have been on the HOLMES computer. Since our meeting, w e
have had from the police in Sheffield a copy o f Dr W alker’s original handwritten statement,
made on 20 July 1989 and witnessed by two West Midlands officers and copy o f a printout of
this statement as it appears on HOLMES.

8.     I attach copies o f these for you to see. In the light of these documents is there
anything else you would like to add to what you said to the Judge?

9.     I look forward to hearing from you.

     H
C F BONE




G:\H IlLSBOR\MAIN \DRPOPPER. 1 56
