                      fWv                                                                         u/~>,
                                                                                                                              (D
                                                                                /IaaP <y                      ,




                                                                                e^£/           6- /Cf
y ^ i - J ^ u j q r q .



           Ihd£Lb
                                                          j f A?                                     ^             ^   2le




                            'Tl&f                         (f4 * 4

        «^" *7J *hA   t-yfr J   ^       it-,   J J
                                                .              '"J         .         v.   /   ..-------   /       _    »


       Ayjd^e.




                                                     A
                        g \
                                    4
                                    •^°y            't^   4
                                                              */
                                                                   ^
                                                                       v
                                                                               zi*
                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                  ^ ^


                                    _                                -Q-u^                                        ^u, ' M g


                                               W      ^ ^ jc ti^ M j^                                             J4           ly
       it-a d a c t A*L                                                              - y o ^                  <U »**q J r U * - ^




                                                                   ^       >>U0 XL^ L     ^ ^ u a £ -y _ j


                                                                           S?
                   R. MCCOFF - FOOTBALL SAFETY CONSULTANT


   PLAN TO STOP CROWD VIOLENCE INSIDE AND OUTSIDE FOOTBALL STADIUMS


           Many ideas have been introduced within the past years in an
attempt to eradicate violence and vandalism connected with football.
Some have had a good measure of success while others have made little
or no difference to the problem, which has now escalated into a
European and indeed a World crisis. Banning English League Clubs from
European competitions has not stopped trouble in Europe and appears to
me now, to be non constructive almost like condeeding victory to the
hooligan element.

           In support     of this where   does UEFA go from   here.   Dutch,
German and Italian teams    supporters    have been involved in the recent
battles, will those teams be banned. With fewer and fewer teams left
to compete then the competitions themselves will be in jeopardy.

           Now that the World Cup is upon us certain ground rules need
to be   adopted from     the smallest   league club to the    international
scene, where violence exists or the likelihood is apparent.

              I also believe that an invitation by UEFA requesting the
re-application of the English clubs would illustrate to the media that
united, the footballing authorities of the World can out manoeuvre the
senseless minority of soccer hooligans.

              The following report has been read by Mr. Wallace Mercer,
Chairman   of Scottish Premier League Club Heart      of Midlothian,     two
Senior Scottish Police Officers, Chief Supt. Hugh Muir, Deputy to
H.M.I. of ScottishPolice Forces,     St. Andrews House, Edinburgh,
Assistant Commandant Ian Wishart, 'A' Division, Strathclyde Police,
Glasgow, Mr. William Newton, a prominent Glasgow businessman well
respected for his common sense views on football matters, Mr. Hugh
Ferris, of Scottish Television, along with a small cross section of
football fans all of whom thought my plans were very feasible,
constructive and that little or no objections would be envisaged by
the true follower of football.

              Chief Supt. Muir gave strong indications that     this scheme
could   see    the elimination of   soccer hooliganism within   one or two
seasons.
                                      - 2 -


    CONTENTS


    a.         Supporters.


               Deposit Disc Photograph and I.D. Card.


               Ticket Distribution/Allocation.


    0          Administration.


    e*         Domestic Scene, Cup Ties, Important Games.

               F.A. Control Centre,


    g^)        European/World Cup Fixtures,

    h.         Conclusion.




■
I



a
i



■
i
i
i
i
i
                                SUPPORTERS



  SEASON TICKET HOLDERS
  SUPPORTERS CLUBS
  NEUTRALS
  CASUALS


            The Season Ticket Holders must be recognised as the bread
  and butter of the club. They are the most trusted of all fans and are
^jp>rmally seated within the stadium.


            Supporters clubs are the next link in the chain. They can
  positively identify themselves with the club. Thus allowing control to
  be administered by their own officials,     e.g.   ticket   allocation   &
  individual identification.


            Neutral Supporters should be able to attend any game of
  their desire although entry in some case would be at the discretion of
  the club.   Where it is an all ticket game the neutral obviously may
  have to suffer the consequences.


            Casuals, for the use of another name, must be considered
  those who, although they may attend most games of their favourite
  club, have not affiliated themselves to that club either by becoming
  Season Ticket Holders or indeed members of the supporters club. It is
  with these factors in mind that I consider this the most likely area
  where the hooligan is to be found.        The overall intention of
  categorising supporters is to encourage as many fans as possible to
  become Season Ticket Holders.
                                          - 4 -


                      DEPOSIT DISC PHOTOGRAPH IDENTIFICATION CARD



             In return for a Deposit the supporter will be given a
   plastic disc.  A photograph will be taken and paid for (instamatic
   camera) (if the supporter will provide a             passport size or larger
   photograph with him/her.)    A small form            will be signed by the
   supporter giving name, address and telephone number.   The system can
   be intergrated with those clubs already using an I.D. cards.


              A fixed sum will be paid by all supporters whenever the
   clubs   in conjunction with the F.A. deem it necessary.   Pre-match
^^Jiaison between these bodies will have determined the level of
^^^ayment.  In some cases this may result in both sets of supporters,
   Home and Away, contributing the same amount of deposit. This decision
   will be made by the F.A. having made reference to the records of the
   fixture and of both clubs' past history, or where the importance of
   the venue demands this strategy.       This will put both sets of
   supporters on a level footing.


             Let it also be noted that the deposit would help to
   eliminate the drunken state of some to the fans attending the games.

   COST


              The amount of deposit, will fall into three categories:


                            The cheapest will     be that of the Season Ticket
                            Holder.

              b.            The Supporters Clubs       who     will       pay    a     small
                            additional premium.


              c   .         Casuals    and neutrals   who    will   pay    the       largest
                            deposit.




 G
                                         - 5 -

II               It would be administratively beneficial to the club that

m      Neutrals have their deposit returned at the end of the game at the
       same selected tumstyle/turnstyles by which they preselectively gained
       access.  Although I do not envisage Neutrals attending in any great
m      numbers critics of this plan could at least be kept in abbeyance
       regarding the freedom of the individual.

m
       SEASON TICKET HOLDERS

■                  A fixed sum determined by the     club could be deposited and
         left with the club for the season. This    would save such trusted fans
         the inconvenience of collecting deposits   from one week to another. It
     ^ p a y also act as an incentive for other     non-season ticket holders to
       join. The interest accrued on such deposits could be used by the club
       for general improvements, e.g.     Manchester United - 17,000 Season
       Ticket Holders x £20 = £340.000, Rangers Football Club 26,000 Season
       Ticket Holders x £20 = £520,000.


       SUPPORTERS CLUBS


                 The tightening up of ticket issue would appear to be the
       most important area here.    The issuing officials should use the
       methods as prescribed. Allocation could be on a l/l or 2/1 basis and
       suitable common sense arrangment be agreed for the return of the
       deposit. Once again the cost of the deposit should be determined by
       the club or issuing authority.Encouragement should     be given to
       Supporters Club Members to become Season Ticket Holders as this would
       be cheaper and again less inconvenient for them and the club.

       CASUALS


                  Positive   identification,     larger   deposit,   1/1   ticket
       allocation, (exceptions father and son) etc., are some of the methods
       by which problems can be prevented before they arise.

       NEUTRALS


                  A similar deposit to that of the casual supporter.




:o
                                PLASTIC DISC


          When purchasing a ticket or tickets a pocket size plastic
disc will be issued with a number corresponding to that of the ticket
provided.  Where Identification Cards are in use this can be left to
the discretion of the club whether they feel that the disc in this
case is required, referring to Season Ticket Holders and others who
already possess an Identification Card, (always bearing forgeries in
mind. )


          Neutrals will be given the appropriate disc on entering the
  ound and returned the same with half the ticket when collecting

« eir deposit.


SUPPORTERS CLUBS


          Discs would be supplied with ticket/tickets returnable with
half the ticket, photograph and signature, where possible, to the
centre where ticket was bought.

CASUALS


             The same rules would apply.

MISPLACED OR LOST DISC


          Where a disc or half a ticket is lost then a photograph, and
a signature, would suffice to collect deposit.    If deposit was being
collected other than by the purchaser, a photo plus disc or half the
ticket would be required.

FORFEITURE


          Where subject is arrested by the police. They will be asked
to return the disc to its owners (the club) this will ensure that an
arrested supporter cannot provide a disc to recover his deposit.
                                             - 7 -



         DESCRIPTION OF DISC


                        Four or five different colours/shapes,   numbered,   to fight
         against forgery of discs. Colours and shapes would make it extremely
         difficult for anyone to copy as the club or authority could decide on
         any colour or shape for different venues and different areas of the
         ground.


                   N/B.  These discs could be manufactured and supplied to
         clubs for the beginning of next season and for World Cup Qualifying
        ^Bkatches   •




II
!   ■




*
a
i
                                            - 8 -


N        TICKET DISTRIBUTION/ALLOCATION


                   First preference to Season Ticket Holders.      Numbers of
         ticketsallocated per individual at the discretion of club or issuing
pj||    authority.


^1                   Stricter control by Supporters Clubs 2/1 basis as suggested.


                      1/1 basis for casuals whose ticket willbe stamped"CASUAL"
H       so that     they can be zoned within the stadium.


        ADMINISTRATION


                     It has been suggested that the administration of this scheme
        could     be costly time consuming, could lead to a fall in crowd
        attendances, that there are many safe stadiums in existence (e.g. Old
        Trafford, Annfield, and in Scotland, Ibrox Stadium) and that where the
        identity card is being used in England it appears to be working
        successfully.    The Identification Card System is open to abuse by
        forgery.    Although costings for the I.D. card system      are not
        presently available to me, I am well satisfied that the manufacturing
        costs involved in the above scheme would be at the worst comparable
        with the I.D. card scheme and it at best substantially cheaper.


                  As to the cost, if more season tickets were sold and the
        deposit retained by the club then the interest accrued would more than
        cover the cost.


                   As to the falling of attendances I agree it may happen for a
jfj     limited period, (personally I have my doubts) but a marked improvement
!       in crowd behaviour will encourage family groups and other absentees to
        return and add to the numbers that are presently missing.


^                 On the point of trouble free stadiums I the danger zone lies
™       with the unknown casual supporter acquiring tickets for away games. It
    _   was with this in mind that the deposit disc system will automatically
■       make it more difficult for the hooligan to gain access.


I
f
I
                                       - 9 -


  F.A. CONTROL CENTRE


  A.         To decide well in advance what venues            should be   ticketed
              from 1st Div - 4th Div. To assist their decisions on this
              matter reference to all clubs past records, home and away.

  B.         All cup ties ticketed.


  C.         All games considered by F.A. where violence mayoccur.


  D.         Liaison with clubs on general levels of deposit.


J^jUROPEAN/WORLD CUP FIXTURES


            Liaison between UEFA/FIFA to commence as soon as possible,
  on this deposit disc system.     Especially where two countries are
  playing in a foreign country, e.g. Holland, England in West Germany,
  where the host countries      fans   battled   with   the   English and   Dutch
  supports.


              Deposits for travelling fans would be greatly increased £200
  - £500.


              Ticket   distribution on such occasions would be strictly
  handled    by the    F.A. allowing only trusted supporters access to
  tickets.


              No tickets to be allocated to Travel Agencies.


            Communication with opposition to ensure no tickets              to be
  sold to English Fans there on speculation.


  CHANNEL PORTS


              Action here to be handled by Government if they so desire.




 O
a
                                   -   10   -



m   CONCLUSION

m             In conclusion please note that this is not an attack on the

a   pocket of the ordinary club supporter and loyal follower of football



-   but rather a very powerful attempt to restore
    football and its millions of decent followers.
                                                      the   true   image   of




■
i
i
i
i
1
1
