INQUIRY     INTO        THE         HILLSBOROUGH


       S T A D I U M            D I S A S T E R




                       Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 M R . B . JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

            Thursday, 8th June,       1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                  (Morning Session)

                                               Page

P.C. PAUL BRANSTON called

     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Hytner         1
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Muller         2
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Kallipetis     5
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Glasgowy       7
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Woodward       9

P.C. JAQUELINE BURTON called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips                  15
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Hytner        19
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Jackson       20
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Gibson-Watt   21
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Kallipetis    22
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Woodward      22
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Glasgow       24

P.C. PAUL BRANSTON recalled

     Examined by Lord Justice Taylor           25

P. SGT.ROBERT BURNS called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                   26
     Cross-Examined by Mr.    Jackson          39
     Cross-Examined by Mr.   Maxwell           42
     Cross-Examined by Mr.    Kallipetis       42
     Cross-Examined by Mr.   Glasgow           43
     Cross-Examined by Mr.   Woodward          47
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                51

P.C. HELEN PEARSON called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips                  52
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Muller        60
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Kallipetis    60

P.C. ALEXANDER AITKIN called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                   61
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Hytner        65
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Gibson-Watt   67
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Kallipetis    67
     Cross-Examined by Mr.       Woodward      69

P. SGT. PAUL BERMAN called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                   71
            SEVENTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

              THURSDAY, 8th JUNE.        1989

                   (MORNING S E S S I ON )

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes, Mr. Hytner.

        POLICE CONSTABLE PAUL BRANSTON Called

            Cross-Examined by MR. H Y T N E R :

Mr. Branston, just one thing.   Prior to the game you
were given a briefing? - A. That is correct, sir.

I think at some stage in the briefing you were taken on
to the terraces themselves? - A. Yes, we had a large en
masse briefing and then a smaller briefing for our two
serials on the terraces.

Which Inspector was that? - A. That was Inspector White,
sir.

I think during the course of that briefing the gates at
the back of pens 3 and 4, leading into the wing pens were
pointed out to you? - A. That is correct.

I think they were pointed out on the basis that if there
was an evacuation needed those gates were to be used for
evacuation? - A. Yes.   As has been explained, we have a
standard evacuation procedure throughout South Yorkshire
and two Officers were deputed to take up positions at
those gates in the event of receiving the standard
message.

That is sensible, but I think Inspector White from your
understanding of his tone of voice made it pretty clear
that he thought in the event of an emergency those gates
were too small to be used effectively for evacuation of
the pens? - A. Also I took him to mean it would be
difficult for the Officers to perhaps take up their
positions.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   They would be swimming
against the tide? - A. That is if the people had already
decided to make their own way out.   The idea is that we
get the pre-warning message in an attempt to let us take
up our positions before the general announcement goes out
to the crowd.

      MR. HYTNER:   Of course, obviously if the whole
terrace was crowded, that is, if pens 1, 2 and 5 were
crowded, there would be very little point in using those
                              2



                                                P. BRANSTON


     tiny gates between the terraces for evacuation? - A. That
     is correct.

Q. You saw the terrace and you had the briefing.           If all
   the pens were crowded with an ordinary crowd of
   spectators, in other words, if they are full, those pens
   are, for all practical p u r p o s e s » quite separate pens? -
   A. Yes, the gates are not over-large.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Or very well placed for
     access from one to the other? - A. No, being right at the
     back of the terraces.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. M U L L E R :

Q. Officer, in relation to the evacuation procedure you say
   that the Officer told you that the route of escape in the
   event of an emergency was through those radial gates? -
   A. The Officer wanted a Police Officer on each of those
   radial gates to assist people.   He did not tell us what
   route they would follow.   Myself I would expect people
   in pen 1 to go round the south end of the west stand and
   in the top pen to go through the north tunnel in the west
   stand.   He did not specify a route, but he wanted an
   Officer on each of those gates to assist.

Q. To assist people leaving pens 3 and 4, is that right? -
   A. he did not make it clear in which direction he
   expected people to go.    Pens 3 and 4, I would have
   thought the majority of the people would try to make for
   the central tunnel.    This was not made clear to us by
   the Inspector where he thought people would go.    In such
   a situation a crowd makes its own mind up to a large
   extent where it sees as the most easy exit.

Q. The situation would be that people who were in pens 3 and
   4 in all probability would have got there through the
   tunnel? - A. That is quite right.

Q. The most obvious route by which they would leave if there
   was an emergency would be the route by which they had
   arrived? - A. Because they were probably unaware of any
   other exit from there.

Q. On any view that is generality the way people will leave,
   that is, by the way they have arrived? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. So there was the obvious route through the tunnel? - A.
   that is correct.

Q. And the tunnel was obviously sufficient - the entrance to
   the tunnel - to get those people through that entrance? -
   A. Yes.
                             3



                                             P. BRANSTON


Q. The question of moving to left or right would only have
   arisen if the tunnel blocked for some reason? - A. Yes.

Q. You would not expect anybody in pens 3 or 4 to even think
   of going left or right if the tunnel was open? - A. Not
   unless there was some specific reason for their not using
   the tunnel.

Q. If, for example, the tunnel was blocked and then somebody
   decided to evacuate the whole of the terrace, do you
   follow? - A. Yes.

Q. In those circumstances obviously the people who were in 1
   and 2 would move along round the south side of the stand?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. As soon as the announcement was made people would
   naturally move in that direction? - A. Yes.

Q. And the crowd would close up in that direction,     is that
   not right? - A. That is right.

Q. That would create a vacuum near the radial gate? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Into which the people,   if necessary,   from pen 3 could go?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Of course, if you have the radial gate to the front in
   those circumstances, do you follow me, or even at the
   front, right at the front? - A. Yes.

Q. The radial gate was there and there was a need to get
   people out of that pen, through that gate, the radial
   gate, the difficulty would be everybody would rush down
   and forwards towards that gate? - A. Yes, it would create
   the same log-jam effect that I saw round the gates on to
   the perimeter track.

Q. The difficulty about putting escape route at the bottom
   or at the front of the pen is that it is liable to cause
   crushing because people in an emergency will tend to push
   to rush out? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Therefore, from your point of view there is good sense in
     putting it at the back? - A. Yes, that being the slackest
     probable part of the crowd.

Q.   Of course, Officer, I do not know what your experience is
     of these grounds, but when a pen like that has got the
     appropriate capacity in it, that is to say, a thousand
     people, approximately, shall we say, in pens 3 and 4, you
     can actually walk quite readily through it? - A. Yes.
                                       P. BRANSTON


It is only when it gets over-packed that the problems
arise, do you agree? - A. Yes.

Just one other thing:   is it right that when you were
being given instructions about those gates, the Officer
you have just told ray learned friend was suggesting that
there might be some difficulty for the men to get to the
radial gates.   Were you told in that connection or at
that time, that in fact in normal games those gates would
be manned all the time? - A. Yes.

Of course, if the gates had been manned all the time in
this situation, the Officers at that point would be
already there? - A. That is correct.

They would be there in case of an emergency to clear
people away from the back and get them through the gate?
- A. I think the decision according to the Inspector, not
to man the gates permanently, was not to have an Officer
standing in a crowd which may at some stage become
hostile to him, cut off from any colleagues or any escape
if he got into any difficulties with any members of the
crowd.




                  Q. Did he say that
^?v

                                              P. BRANSTON


      Q. Did he say that? - A. I believe he did, yes.

      Q. So the problem was having one Officer, was it a question
         of putting two Officers there? - A. No, it was to have
         these Officers deputed to go to those gates in the event
         of us receiving the message.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Muller, I don't really
           feel; perhaps that kt this stage of the Inquiry an in depth
           examination of the emergency evacuation procedure is really
           so much in point.   We are not dealing with fire here or
           a bomb threat or anything.   I appreciate that when it comes
           to Stage 2 as to what consultation there should be with
           the Fire Service and so on about evacuation that is a
           different matter, but as far as analysing what happened
           here it is slightly outside.

                  MR. MULLER:   Indeed sir.


                         Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

      Q. Mr. Branston, when you arrived on the pitch you told us
         there were no players there.  That would be about 15.05
         or 15.06? - A. I did not see any players when I arrived
         on the pitch, no sir.

      Q. You told the Inquiry that you went to Pen 3 and then to
         the right of the gate of Pen 3? - A. That is correct.

      Q. Would you be kind enough please to have a look at the
         South Yorkshire Police bundle of photographs, number 2
         and photograph 1/11A and 12A.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The composite volume?

                  MR. KALLIPETIS:   My Lord, yes.

                 Sir, would it be easier if we had the photograph
           album numbered or lettered consecutively so that we all
           know which one it is?

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think that would be better,
           yes.

                 MR. KALLIPETIS:    Perhaps that could be done in due
           course.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, well will you decide
           amongst yourselves what they should be called and then
           we will call them that.

      Q.         MR. KALLIPETIS:  Do you have Photograph 11A,
           Mr. Branston? - A. PR1/11A?

      Q. That is right? - A. Yes sir.
&
                                 6

                                           P. BRANSTON


    Q. I am told that is in fact a view of Pen 3 and that is Gate 3
       open do you see in front of you? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were standing to the right of that gate you told us
       yesterday? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Would the group of people you see towards the top left-hand
       corner looking down to the floor be roughly where the group
       of people were that you have told us yesterday, gesticulated
       or pointed to a man on the floor? - A. Yes.  The picture
       is not taken from square on to the railings.

    Q.    Try the next one then? - A. But yes, I can see almost a gap
         with several people looking down.

    Q. It is even clearer I think in 12A Mr. Branston? - A. Yes.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think in 10A there is a group
         looking down there to.

               MR. KALLIPETIS:   Indeed sir, yes.

    Q.   If one looks at 12A, Mr. Branston, would you agree it looks
         as if there is more than one group of people looking at
         something on the fli>or at their feet.  Do you see to the
         left of the group I have just asked you about, there is another
         group apparently looking downwards?

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What, well away to the left?

               MR. KALLIPETIS:   Indeed sir, yes.

               THE WITNESS:  On the edge of the photograph there is
         people looking round.  I would not say they were looking
         quite as markedly down as the other group.

    q.         mr. KALLIPETIS:  Mr. Branston I want to ask you this
         please, this was before you arrived there and so it may not
         be exactly the picture that you saw, but you then assisted
         people over the fence and then assisted bringing people
         out through the gate.  Would it be right to say that for
         the first few minutes, I would suggest the first ten
         minutes, that the movement from the terraces was all
         forward in that as soon as you pulled one person out some­
         body else came over the top from the terraces, in other
         words downwards and forwards? - A. After making eye contact
         with the gentleman, as I described, I went to Gate 2 where
         the crush was slacker in the pen and I could actually get
         into the pen.

    Q. I see.  You went back down towards Gate 2? - A. I went to
       my left and in through Gate 2 into there and then made my
       way to the radial fence between 2 and 3.

    Q. And then what did you do, climb over that fence? - A. No,
       I was helping lift people over that fence and take them
       to Gate 2.
                                     P. BRANSTON


So if you turn to Photograph 8A I think that will assist
you.  I think that is where you were operating.  Is that
right? - A. Yes, that is right.

From that position there, Mr. Branston, can you help me
as to whether the movement of the people on the terraces was
forwards for the first ten minutes or so? - A. The people
that were climbing out were going forwards to the fence
and then attempting to climb over the top.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The point you are making, people
were not moving back up towards the tunnel?

      MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir, and the point I am making,
which I will be making throughout, is that by the ti"16
my first ambulances arrived they are quite certain by the
number of bodies that were outside in the concourse that
they could not have coiue from the front of the pen and
I will be submitting in due course that is evident also
from the video, that bodies were being brought out from
the centre of the pen, they must have been by the sheer
time.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well.

      MR. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you, Mr. Branston.


               Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Mr. Branston can you help me on one more matter with the
briefing you had on the terracing.  Do you remember that
Inspector White told you that in an ideal situation he
would have your two Serials, that is the two Serials he
was talking to at that time, on the terracing to help with
dispersing the crowd evenly in dealing with them? — A.
In the event of an emergency?

No, in an ideal situation he would have deployed both your
Serials on the terracing? - A. I cannot remember him
saying that.

You don't recall that? - A. No.

 The briefing on the terracing, was that a collective
 briefing with you all standing together or how were you
 spread out? - A. We were standing in a group, a rough
 semi-circle with Inspector White ....

 Of 22 men? - A. Yes, two Serials.

 Two Sergeants, 20 Officers? - A. I think our Serial may
 have been one down because an Officer went sick who should
 have been there.
 I am sorry, what I was concerned with, you were collectively
                                  P. BRANSTON


being spoken to, he was not addressing individuals? - A. No.

Perhaps I could again just put it to you in the precise terms
that one of your colleagues recalls, that what he said was:
in an ideal situation he would have used the two Serials




I was not aware of him speaking to them individually.

May I now bring you back to the turnstiles, Mr. Branston,
when people are coining in and you were on your primary
duty.  People got stuck on a number of occasions as the
afternoon wore on? - A. That is correct.

I just wanted to ask you this:   did you get the impression
that that only started to happen when the intense pressure
built up behind and people were being physically forced
against the mechanisms of the turnstiles? - A. That is quite
right.  The turnstiles worked effectively until that point
and the faults, if I can describe them as such on the
turnstiles that I described yesterday, only manifested
themselves when there was pressure on the turnstiles.




                     /Q. Yes, it is my fault ---
                                           P. BRANSTON

Yes.  It is my fault.  I am afraid I have forgotten.
Were you on the turnstiles last year? - A. Yes.

Had you experienced any faults on the turnstiles during
that year? - A. No, no.   There was not the same pre­
ssure ....

I entirely accept that.   It was a wholly different
situation, was not it, with a fairly even spread right
up to kick off? - A. Yes.

Did you have the impression again casting your mind back
to 1988 that there was a fairly even spread right the way
up to kick off time or did it cut off substantially before
kick off? - A. It did not cut off but eased some time
before kick off.   There was no great peak but from
perhaps quarter-of-an-hour before kick off it started to
ease somewhat.   The majority of people had obviously
arrived and got in.

Yes.  The last matter, M r ,,Branston. You have already
been asked very fairly by Mr. Collins about your obs­
ervation of the way in which the operators, the turn­
stile operators whom you could observe, were behaving
and I think in your own words it is fair to say that
you were impressed on a number of occasions with the
honesty that you saw of those men rejecting bribes and
drawing your attention to people trying to fiddle their
way in? - A. That is correct.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much indeed.

            Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD :

Mr. Branston, it is right, is it, that the turnstile
operators were under considerable pressure from a lot
of individuals who wanted to get in without tickets
by one way or another? - A. Yes.

That is not what was happening just at one turnstile;
that was your impression of the experience at the
turnstiles around where you were? - A. Yes.

Was that a sustained phenomenon from the early part of
the afternoon or did it blow up towards the latter part?
- A. It built up towards the latter part from around
half-past-2 onwards.

Individuals were resorting to all sorts of devices, money,
force, jumping over to try and get through?- A. Yes,
climbing over the turnstiles, wall, such things, the
people who were obviously annoyed at being kept waiting
and being crushed outside who were being abusive towards
us were also being abusive to the turnstile operators.
They had to bear ....
                       10
                                           P. BRANSTON


Bear the brunt of it? - A. To bear the brunt of it as well.

May I ask you about your evidence yesterday concerning
Tannoy announcements?  Do you follow?  Yesterday you were
asked by Mr. Collins about whether you heard any announce­
ments over the Tannoy and in an answer to him you said
you heard no announcement saying anything about the kick
off.  Then you gave some evidence about your recollection.
Now, first of all, is it right that your recollection of
the events of that day may be affected by what you actually
experience in a horror? - A. Yes, of course.

So your recollection of sequences might not be accurate?
- A. That is correct, yes.

When you made your statement you said at page 7 of it
that you heard two announcements on the ground's public
address system whilst you were still at the turnstiles?
- A. Yes.

You made your statement, I think, on the 3rd of May, 1989?
- A. I started making it well before that in actual fact.
It was written and rewritten several times.

 Yes.  According to the statement you then said, "I heard
 two announcements on the ground's public address system
whilst I was still at the turnstiles*   The first I believe
was asking fans coming into the ground to slow down and
not to push." - A. Yes.

Do you follow? Do you have any recollection of   hearing that?
- A. Yes. Now you have refreshed my memory.

Yes,  because  your evidence yesterday may have been
slightly confusing.  May I remind you of what you said?
"Do you remember when that was?   Before the gates were
opened?"  "I think it was after the gates were opened.
I could not put a time on it.   I was too busy to look
at my watch.  The message was I heard one announcement
asking the fans at the West Stand to   move back. I believe
it was saying that there was space. If you move back and
be patient you will get in."   Do you follow? - A. Yes, yes.

Now, there seems to be a bit of an inconsistency there;
if it is speaking about one announcement rather than two
that have got run together. - A. H'm.

It would not make more room on the terrace if people moved
back for people coming in, would it? - A. No.

But you do have a clear recollection whilst you are at the
turnstiles of some advice coming over the public address
system, the Tannoy, to the people outside to relent a
little? - A. Yes.

And if they stop pushing they would get in.   But do you
                                               P. BRANSTON

also have a recollection of some advice coming over the
Tannoy after you had gone into the ground, after you had
been called to the pitch? - A. No, I do not think so.   I
think that the Tannoy messages that I heard were whilst
we were still on the turnstiles.

What was the drift or gist of those messages? - A. Advising
people to slow down, allow more time to get in, presumably
to let the flow in front of them find its own level
rather than pushing into the back.

So is this the position, you have no recollection of a
Tannoy message directed to the people on the terraces?
- A. The words "terraces" I do not remember it being used
in a Tannoy message but to a degree I took it to mean
people that probably had come through the turnstiles
or the gate and were making their way into the places
that they were going to watch from.

To tell them to slow down? - A. Yes.

One final matter if I may, please.  You have been asked
about where you saw the casualties? - A. Yes.

And you have given evidence about the eye to eye contact
with a gentleman away from the perimeter fence. - A. Yes.

You went to the terrace after everybody had been taken
from it and saw the position at the fallen barrier. - A.
Yes.

Is that right?  Is it your clear recollection given where
you saw the barrier to have been and to be collapsed ....
- A. Yes.

.... that the man that you were having that communication
with was in some way associated with and probably at that
position? - A. Yes.  I have looked on the photographs.  I
cannot see the man that I remember seeing.

Yes. - A. When I left here last night I spoke to P.C.
Packer who was in the anteroom listening to my evidence.

Are you going to tell us about something he said or what?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Does not matter.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Forgive me.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Let's have whatever he can give.

    MR. WOODWARD:    Forgive me,   sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Habits die hard.

    MR. WOODWARD:    Yes.
C|^,
                                  12



                                                      P. BRANSTON

                 THE WITNESS:   And P.C. Packer has made contact
            with the same man,I described  him to P.C. Packer and
            it appears to be the same man that made similar contact
            with him either before or after with me.  Up until
            yesterday we were not aware that we had both had contact
            with this same gentleman.

       Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   You are talking about the contact
            on the day, are you? - A. The contact on the day, yes.

       Q. You clearly associate from where you saw him in the
          melee and from what you saw afterwards his position
          with the barrier? - A. Yes.

       Q. And it would be very difficult to say, would it, whether
          he was in front of or behind the position in which the
          barrier should have been? - A. Yes, it would be difficult
          to pinpoint it to any great accuracy.

       Q. It would be misleading to suggest that he was necessarily
          behind it? - A. It would be difficult to say exactly
          where.




                                             / Q. You had that   ....
                             13

                                                  D. BRANSTON


Q. You had that view of the gentleman from the perimeter fence? -
   A. That is right.

Q. You told us this morning that there came a time when you went
   round and into pen 2? - A . Y e s .

Q. By the time you got to the perimeter fence were some gates
   already open, did you notice? - A. Yes.

Q. Gates were open? - A. Gates were open.

Q. Are you able to say which ones or not? - A. Each gate I passed
   making my way from the South Stand was open as I passed it.

Q.   And each gate you saw ahead of you wasopen? You didn't see a
     closed gate? - A. No, I d o n ’t riecollect seeing any gates ahead
     of me, but I certainly did not see any closed.

Q.   When you went into pen 2 and looked over you were able to see
     somewhat across pen 3? - A . Y e s .

Q.   In relation to the log jam where you were, where was the log
     jam? - A. Round gate 3.  That is why I abandoned helping at
     gate 3 after only being there a few seconds.   There were
     enough Officers there.  I could not, get physically in, and it
     was so tight on the inside that I thought I might be better
     served by going into pen 2.

Q.   Would it be right during this time your concentration was on
     those individuals who were in the predicament in thatarea? -
     A. That is right.

Q. That is in the bottom left-hand corner basically and around
   gate 3? - A. Between the radial fence and gate 3. As has been
   described before, it was almost automatic.  I was totally
   surrounded in a small space doing what was immediately in
   front of me.

Q.   You were preoccupied with that? - A. Totally preoccupied with
     what I was doing and what was immediately round me rather than
     looking into the distance.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When other Officers talked of
     being on auto-pilot, is that it? - A. Yes, that is entirely
     the feeling I had as well, sir.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   Because it may be you are unable to say
     what other Officers were doing in other parts of the pens?   Is
     that right? - A. Entirely.

Q.   So to draw any inference from your evidence that no help or no
     effort had come from the rear would not be reliable, would it?
     - A. Not at all.   Even the Officers that were helping me carry
     people out I could not describe them, name them or anything.

Q. Have you found in discussing it amongst yourselves that you
   have been surprised there were colleagues whom you knew quite
                            14

                                                 D. BRANSTON


     well were working quite close by you but you were not aware at
     the time of their presence? - A. Yes.  The only Police Officer
     I can say where he was working with any certainty is Sergeant
     Swift, and he has unfortunately a completely bald head.  His
     helmet was off, and he was the only one I can say was at any
     particular point because of his distinctive appearance.

Q. I think that Officer can be picked out on some of the
   photographs.  Thank you.

                       Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. A couple of questions I would like to ask you on your
   statement.  You mentioned in your statement that your briefing
   was at the turnstiles to search people even if they had
   already been searched before they came through? - A. Yes.

Q.   Why was that? Do you know?   What was the point of searching
     them twice? - A. Inspector White after the briefing came down
     to where we were operating on the turnstiles and gave us this
     further instruction, and justified it by saying that we might
     find something that had been missed by the person searching on
     the other side.  We knew that in the early part we would have
     the ability to do that, but once things warmed up and a lot of
     people coming through there would be no chance, we would have
     to be selective anyway.

Q. At the stage when everybody was being searched I should not
   think it would make you very popular to search people a second
   time within 10 yards, would it? - A. In those early stages
   everybody was very happy.  All was right with the world and
   the sun was shining.

Q. They expected this, did they? - A. Yes.   Football crowds are
   now used to being search and submit quite willingly, and with
   a laugh and a joke we can overcome any sort of problems of
   him saying, "I've already been searched".

Q.   The other thing is this that you do say in your statement that
     you were completely unaware of the start of the match? - A.
     Yes.

Q. And you went on:

           "We were fairly confident that the start would be
          delayed in order to allow the latecoming fans extra time
          to find their way into the ground.  This I found out
          later was not the case".

     I just wondered who "we" is.   You and the rest of your serial?
     - A . Yes .

Q. And what led you to be fairly confident?   Was it that that
   seemed the sensible thing to do or because somebody had
   actually suggested it was going to be done, or what? - A.
   Nobody outside our serial suggested to us that would be done.
   That seemed in the light of previous experiences and the vast
5   ■   ■


                                        15

                                                              J. BURTON


                 crowd we could see outside through looking through the
                 turnstiles, that seemed to us at that time to be fairly
                 logical.  In the light of that we expected it.

            Q. Thank you very much, indeed.

                         POLICE CONSTABLE JACQUELINE BURTON Called.

                                  Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

            Q. You are Police Constable Jacqueline Burton, is that so? -A. It
               is.

            Q. And you were on Serial 14 on the day in question with Sergeant
               Crawford? - A. That is right.

            Q. You were behind the turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes.

            Q. And did you stay in that position during the whole period
               until the time of the kick-off, about 3 o'clock? - *A. I stayed
               roughly in that area.

            Q. Were you assigned to a particular turnstile or did you have
               other duties to do? - A. I was assigned to turnstile A, but as
               certain females came in through the turnstiles I moved across
               to search certain females.

            Q.   Can I take you just to one or two matters you refer to in your
                 statement.  Can you recall the occasion when gate C was opened
                 for the first time? - A. Yes.

            Q. And a number of fans came through? -A. Yes.

            Q. Where were you exactly when that occurred? - A. I was stood
               towards gate C, near to gate C.

            Q. On which side of it? Were you on the turnstile side of it or
               on the wall side of it? - A. The turnstile side.

            Q.   What happened to you when gate C was opened? - A. I was pushed
                 back against the walls of the turnstile.

            Q. Were you with other Officers at the time? - A. P.C. Thomas was
               quite close to me to my left.  I can't recall seeing any other
               Officers.

            Q. How did the crowd come in on that occasion? - A. Very rapidly.

            Q. You say you were pushed to the side? - A. Yes.

            Q. Were you able to stand comfortably against the wall? - A. Yes,
               I was not squashed against the wall.  I just had my back up to
               it.

            Q. And how many people came through before the gate was closed,
               would you say? - A. I would estimate it at over 100, but I
               could not say exactly how many.
                            16

                                                J. BURTON



Q. And what sort of manner did they come in from what you could
   see from where you were? - A. They were coming very fast.
   They were pushing and jostling to get in.

Q. the gate we know was closed very shortly afterwards.     That is
   right, is not it? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have any contact with people coming through the
   turnstiles at that point? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. What did you hear from them? - A. Once the gate had been
   opened and those outside had realised, they were coming to me
   complaining that they had actually been stood waiting their
   turn whilst others had just barged through the gate.

Q. Was this a single complaint or were there many people
   complaining about this? - A. There were several people
   approached me.

Q. The people who were coming through the turnstiles at this
   point, did they seem to be in any distress? - A. Yes, they
   did.

Q. What sort of things did you notice? - A. Some of the ladies
   coming through were crying, complaining of being squashed.
   Others were coming through without shoes, limping.  I noticed
   that a couple had got swollen ankles at that time.

Q.   We know then that the gate was opened on a second occasion? -
     A . Yes.

Q. Where were you when that happened? - A. I was roughly in the
   same area.

Q. Again, nearer to the turnstiles than to the long wall? - A.
   Yes.

Q. How did the folk come in on that occasion? - A. They came in
   slower than the first, but I believe at that time kick-off had
   actually started because there seemed to be an urgency in the
   manner as if they wanted to get in.

Q.   Had you heard any roar from inside the ground? - A. No.

Q.   It was simply from the urgency of their manner that you
     deduced that the kick-off had taken place? - A. Yes.

Q.   And people came in in large numbers on that occasion, did   not
     they? - A. Yes, they did.

Q.   Did anything happen to you on the occasion when the people
     came through on the second time? - A. I was just stood at the
     same place, really.

Q. You then I think went with Officers to the pitch? - A. I did.
                            17

                                                 J. BURTON


Q.   Didyou receive any particular instruction to do that? - A.
     No.   A serial passed by the front of us and said that there
     had been a pitch invasion.   I looked for Sergeant Crawford who
     was making his way round with that serial, so I followed him.

Q.   You just followed where everybody else was going? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then I think you went towards the South Stand, did you not? -
     A . Yes.

Q. And came on to the pitch via the South Stand itself? - A. That
   is right.

Q. You then I think participated in helping people who had been
   injured in the pens.   Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you look towards pen 3 as you came on to the pitch? - A.
     Yes.  At one point I went and stood on the wall at the
     fencing.

Q. Did you look particularly to any part of the pen? - A. Yes.
   About two yards from the front of the pen I spotted a youth
   stood there who appeared to be dead at that time.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Whereabouts along the front of the
     fence? - A. Just to the left-hand side of the goalpost.

Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:   Where in   relation to the gate? - A. I am
     sorry, I could not tell you.

Q. Could    you say whether it wasto the left or the   right of the
   gate? - A. To tell you the truth I don't really know where the
   gate was. I never went near the gate at all.

Q. Could  you say   whether it wasopen at the time you arrived? -
   A. No, I could not.

Q. What did you actually see when you saw this youth? - A. He
   seemed to be held up by the pressure of the crowd.  His
   head was back and his mouth was open and he was purple.

Q. How far up the pen was he away from the front? - A. There was
   a crush at the front and he was stood two or three rows back
   from that crush.

Q. Were you able to see any other part of the pen, or did you/
   look at any other part of the pen? - A. I looked towards the
   front.

Q. What did you see? - A. That there were several people being
   pushed up against the fence, and obviously could not move.

Q. Did you see any people at that time on the floor? -A. No.

Q. Did at any subsequent time see people on the floor? - A. No.

Q. Did you look at any time towards the back of the pen? -A. Yes.
(r   ’


                                       18

                                                            J. BURTON



         Q.   What did you see when you looked towards  the back of the pen?
              - A. I just saw the fans obviously had not realised what had
              happened, and they were still shouting for the football to
              begin, clapping and cheering.

         Q.   Shouting for it to begin? - A. Yes.

         Q.   Had the game       not started at this time? -A. I believe ithad
              been stopped.

         Q. Were they standing still or moving, the people at the back of
            the pen I mean? - A. There was slight movement.

         Q. In which direction? - A. Forwards and backwards.

         Q . A sway? - A . Y e s .

         Q. And were any of them, could you see, in a position to see down
            to the bottom of the pen, the front of the pen? - A. No, not
            that I could see.

         Q. Did you see any Policemen in the pen at this time? - A. Not at
            that time.

         Q.   Where did you go to after you had stood on the wall for a
              short time? - A. At that time people were starting to be
              pulled out and placed on the pitch, so I moved further back on
              to the pitch to help with first-aid.

         Q. You did a lot of good work with helping to revive people on
            the pitch.  Did there come a time when you noticed part of the
            barrier coming across? - A. Yes.

         Q.   Can you tell us, please, about that? - A. I was stood again
              slightly left of the goalpost.  I noticed there was a large
              number of Officers stood to the right-hand side of me.  I was
              stood facing the crowd when a large pole came over the fencing
              and landed quite close to me.

         Q. I think you said in your statement it missed you by a hair's
            breadth.  Is that right? - A. Yes, I did.  Yes, I felt it go
            past my face.

         Q. Can you give us any idea what time that was? -A. I am sorry,         I
            can't, no.

         Q. Or how long you had been there on the pitch when it occurred?
            - A. I seemed to have been there quite some time.

         Q. Were there still people in the pen, in pen 3 at that time? -
            A . Yes.

         Q. Were people still being taken out of that pen? - A. I could
            not see from where I was sto od .

         Q. Did you see it hit anybody? - A. No.
                              19

                                                   J. BURTON



Q.   You did not see it hit any other person? -A. I saw Officers
     moving to avoid it, and I don't really know if it hit anybody.

Q.   Was it in fact left where it landed? - A. Ibelieve so, yes.

Q.   Thank you   very much.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. HYTNER:

Q. Initially, before trouble started, there was a great deal of
   good humour between the Police and the fans coming in through
   the gate? - A . Y e s .

Q. There was no hostility shown to the Police Officers when
   things were going well? -A. No, not at all.

Q. Before the gate opened for the first time - this is gate C -
   some time before that you noticed a distinct change in the
   mood of the fans coming through the turnstiles? -A. I did,
   yes.




                                   /Q. I think yon were aware.
                              20



                                              J. BURTON



Q. I think you were aware there were problems outside
   because you had lost sight of the Officers on the other
   side of the turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. Is this right that some time before gate C opened for the
   first time, fans coming through the turnstiles were not
   only being abusive towards you and other Police Officers,
   but were forecasting death or serious injury outside if
   something was not done to control the situation? - A.
   That is right.

Q. I know it is very difficult, Officer, because time passes
   in curious ways when you are under stress, but how long
   would the first of those observations have been made
   before gate C opened for the first time?   Five minutes,
   ten minutes? - A. About five minutes.

Q. You yourself as a result of what you saw and heard, even
   at that stage was apprehensive that unless something was
   done the situation could result' in violence? - A. Yes.

Q. Another point I want to ask you about at that period.
   For a long period you did not see anybody above the rank
   of Sergeant, is that right? - A. That is right.

Q. It is difficult for us to know whether that is simply a
   statement or something unusual.   Obviously an Inspector
   cannot be everywhere at once.   Were you expecting, in
   the circumstances of the briefing you had, to see your
   Inspector some time during that fifteen minute period
   when he was absent? - A. With it being so busy I did
   expect him to re-appear, yes.

Q. Again, so we can get things in perspective on the pitch
   itself, we know that you and many other Officers did
   sterling work and did a great deal to h elp the injured
   fans.   However, is this right:  you were doing it on
   your own initiative because there was no direction from
   above while you were working? - A. I did not receive any
   so what I did was on my own initiative.

Q. Is this right again, that you looked at a clock at some
   stage, I think in your statement you said it was 4.15,
   would that be 3.15 or 4.15? - A. Four-fifteen.

Q. When did you first see any Officer on the pitch above the
   rank of Sergeant? - A. Personally I never did.

               Cross-Examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

Q. Just one matter, Constable.   When you arrived at the
   pitch side of the stand you had your attention drawn to
   the centre section? - A. Yes.
                               21



                                                 J. BURTON


Q. Is it correct that your observation of that was that as
   soon as you looked at it you knew there were far too many
   people in that section? - A. No, not initially.

Q. May I remind you of the contents of your statement in
   which you say on the third page:

         "I looked to the stands, noticing that the majority
         were shouting for the football to continue and
         jeering at our presence.   It was then my attention
         was drawn towards the stand behind the goal.
         There seemed to be far too many people in this
         centre section..."

   A. That is right.   Initially my attention was drawn
   because of the shouting.

Q. I am not suggesting you should have seen it before, but
   as soon as you saw the centre section it was obvious
   there were far too many people? - A. Yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. G I B S O N - W A T T :

Q. One matter, Officer.   Would you turn to page 3 of your
   statement.   At one stage in your statement you say this:

         "There were so few Police Officers at the
         turnstiles it was impossible to maintain any form
         of order.   It became a case of 'safety innumbers'
         and to this end I managed to find  and remain with
         several officers in my serial."

   Officer, this is right you are trained, or you learn from
   experience that there can arise situations where a Police
   Officer should not stay isolated and should group with
   other Officers, is that right? - A. That is right.

Q. And this was one of them in your judgment? - A. In my
   judgment, yes.

Q. You place this at the time after gate C has opened for
   the first time and the crowd has gone through for the
   first time, but before gate C opens again?   Is that
   accurate, that that was the moment when  you felt it was -
   between the opening of the gates - that  you felt it was
   important to group together? - A. Yes, I would say so.

Q. Therefore that would be at the stage at which the crowd
   who rushed through the gate when gate C first opened, had
   cleared, people are coming through the turnstiles
   resenting that gate C had been opened, but before the
   crowd comes through again?   That is correct? - A. Yes.
                              22



                                                J. BURTON


Q. Was there any particular incident that you can remember,
   something somebody said to you, or somebody did, that
   caused you deliberately to seek, so to speak, the safety
   of fellow Officers? - A. I was stood by the programme
   sellers alone at that time.   I was approached by four
   youths who were swearing at me, jostling me, and I
   decided I would be better stood with other Officers than
   on my own at that time.

Q. Was it just general bad or insulting or violent behaviour
   by the youths or were they saying something in particular
   about the opening of the gate or the condition outside or
   anything like that? - A. No, it was personally directed
   towards me.

Q. It was just general abuse and misbehaviour.

             Cross-Examined by MR. K A L L I P E T I S ;

Q. How many Officers were with you at that stage, can you
   recall? - A. Five or six, probably seven.

Q. What rank was the most senior Officer with you? - A.
   Sergeant Crawford.

              Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

Q. Officer, may I just ask you about the people coming
   through the turnstiles?   There were a number of
   individuals who were complaining that others had thrust
   their way in and jumped their turn? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they also saying that there were a number of people
   who had come through without tickets? - A. Yes, they did
   complain about that.

Q. So there were a number of complaints from various
   individuals who had come through quite properly saying
   that their progress had been affected by others pushing
   in and that people had come in without tickets? - A. Yes.

Q. Of course, you would be doing your best to deal with
   anyone who, to your knowledge, came through without a
   ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you deal with quite a few? - A. I did not actually
   eject anybody.

Q. What did you do? - A. As I was dealing with the
   complaints a lot of the people they were pointing out
   disappeared into the crowd by that time.   As soon they
   had got in they ran off.
                             23



                                           J. BURTON


Q. In addition to the complaints, you observed people who
   behaved as though they had come in without tickets? - A.
   Yes.

Q. That isn't just one or two, this is quite a number of
   people coming through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. In addition to people coming through the turnstiles
   without tickets, did you observe tickets being passed
   back, passed out of the ground? - A. I did, yes.

Q. How was that being done? - A. There is a ledge over the
   top of the turnstiles and there were youths stood on
   there waiting for their friends to come through the
   turnstiles who then threw their tickets back up to them.

Q. That was going on frequently, was it? - A. Yes.

Q. So there must have been numbers who came through the
   turnstiles armed with used tickets? - A. Yes.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    When you say "numbers” ,
     roughly what did you see? - A. Fifty to sixty.

Q. Tickets being passed out, fifty to sixty   times? - A. No,
   about fifty to sixty youths came through   and threw their
   tickets up to their friends who stood on   the wall above
   the turnstiles.   I would approximate it   at that but I
   cannot give a definite number.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:    That is in addition to those who
     had come through the turnstiles that you spoke of
     earlier? - A. Yes.

Q. When you came to the point when gate C was opened, was it
   your impression that a number of people came through then
   without tickets? - A. It was, yes.

Q. Did you see gate B opened at any time? - A. No, I did
   not.

Q. You were not aware of that being done? - A. No.

Q. Your progress to the pitch was brought about because
   another serial went past you? - A. That is right.

Q. Upon hearing what you heard then would it be right that
   you very quickly went to the ground? - A. Yes, we ran
   round.

Q. Did the other Officers in your company also go? - A. I
   believe most of them did, yes.
                             24



                                              J. BURTON


Q. When you got to the pitch and came upon the scene of the
   people in the terrace, was this the situation that there
   were a substantial proportion of the people in the
   terrace crowd who were behaving as though nothing had
   happened? - A. Yes.

Q. They wanted the sport to go on? - A. Yes.

Q. They were jumping and shouting and singing? - A. Yes.

Q. And pushing forwards? - A. Yes.

Q. Would it be right that from then on you became involved
   in giving what help you could? - A. That is right.

Q. Your recollections of time and the events are all very
   confused? - A. They are, yes.

               Cross-Examined by MR. G L A S G O W ;

Q. Between the two openings of C gate when you were
   attempting to deal with the situation behind the
   turnstiles, there came a stage when you really felt you
   needed the protection of your fellow Officers because of
   the atmosphere that was building up? - A. Yes.

Q. In a word would it be fair to say that for whatever
   reason, and however understandable it may be, there was
   very considerable hostility and aggression being directed
   towards you? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it also fair to say that that was being directed at
   the stewards with their yellow tabards on inside the
   gate? - A. Some were, yes.

Q. I think you, with the other Officers, tended to stand
   together in a group close to the stewards who were just
   inside the gate? - A. No, when I approached the other
   Officers that I saw who were stood just in front of the
   turnstiles, I was not stood with any stewards at that
   time.

Q. Do you know the numbers of the turnstiles as they go
   towards the gate? - A. Yes.   I think it starts with A
   and goes towards G.




                     Q. The gatemen were
                                     C. BURTON


Q. The gatemen were the other side of ’G', weren't they, against
   the gate itself? - A. I never saw any.

Q. You did not see them? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. Did you see the gate being opened and shut? - A. No.

Q. You just saw that it had been opened, you did not see who
   did the opening? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. Again this is not a criticism and I am sure it was very
   confusing, but we can see on the video there are a number
   of people in their tabard tops by the gate and I am sure
   you have seen that now, have you? — A. Yes.

Q. Was the position that you did not notice them at the time
   because you were concentrating on other matters? - A. That
   is it, yes.
Q. Did you feel that the aggression and the hostility towards
   you, again however understandable it may have been, continued
   even after the second opening of the gate? - A. Well after
   the second opening of the gate it was not very long until
   we actually made our way to the pitch so I did not really
   experience anything after the second opening.

Q. Before that second opening when there was the lull between
   the two storms, if I may call it that, the two rushes in,
   during that period when you were comparatively free, what
   were you trying to do, if anything, or was it just a matter
   of self-defence? - A. Well as I was just stood waiting for
   whatever was going to happen next I was approached by the
   people coming through the turnstiles complaining that the
   gate had been opened and that they had been waiting their
   turn.
Q. You were still trying to deal with the protests of those
   coming through the turnstile? - A. I was trying to calm
   people down that were coming in.

         MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, very well.   Thank you very much.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Thank you very much indeed.
    I would just like Police Constable Branston back for one
    question.


              POLICE CONSTABLE PAUL BRANSTON Recalled

                  Further by LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

 Q. I just want to ask you this:  you went into Pen 2 so you
    would be working very close to the south corner of Pen 3?
    - A. Yes.
                                  P. BRANSTON


Can you tell me whether you saw bodies right into that corner
or where you saw bodies in Pen 3 from where you were standing
then? - A. The ones I saw were directly over the radial
fence in that corner of Pen 3 up as far as the gate.  I could
not see bodies any further up because the crowd was there.

I am more concerned not with how far from you you could see
them but how close to you you could see them? - A. I could
see them directly the other side of the radial fence.

Right into the corner? - A. Right into the corner, yes.

People who were dead or injured or couldn't you tell? - A.
I could not really tell from there.  There were both.  We
carried both injured people with signs of life and people
that were fairly obviously dead.

From very close to the radial fence? — A. From quite close
to that radial fence.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.


            POLICE SERGEANT ROBERT BURNS Called

                  Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Sergeant Robert Burns, is that right? - A. That is correct,
sir.
You were in charge of Serial 15.  It was the Serial located
behind turnstiles 9-16? - A. That is correct, sir.

Actually can I ask you to look at the Operational Order
because there appears to have been some slight confusion?
- A. I think I can explain that one, sir. The Operational
Order did say 1-16.  During further briefing with Inspector
White when I said "You must be joking" he said "Forget that,
Sergeant, another Serial is coming in 1-8.  Yours is 9-16
In actual fact a moveable crash barrier was put up between
Gates 8 and 9.

Actually that funnily enough was not the confusion I was
referring to although it is obviously an extra confusion
because my copy, if you look at Tab 14, you will see about a
third of theway through, you will reach sub-sector 7,
which is the relevant one.  Have you got that? - A. Yes sir.

 On mine anyway it does not have the 1-16 it does have
 actually 9-16? - A. I have 15 sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The passage on the right there
 says "through Turnstiles 9-16".

       MR. COLLINS;  You say in the order you received
 there was apparently a confusion which said 1-16? - A. No
                                  R. BURNS


sir, I said Inspector White had an Operational Order which
said 1-16 and I said:  "You must be joking".

Can I deal with what actually might have been a confusion
and that is this:  Serial 11 was deputed to 1-8 or rather
part of it was, if we turn back a few pages.  We will see
under sub—sector 5 Serial 11, six Officers in that Serial
were to be located behind 1-8? - A. It does say that sir,
yes.
You were to do 9-16 and the division is obvious because
1-8 were thought to be going straight to the North Stand
whereas you were concerned with the West Stand.  That
is correct with brown tickets.  Red tickets were coming
through 9-16.

The difficulty is, of course, in fact what happened was
that it was changed on the day and 1-10 became the North
Stand and only 11-16 the West? - A. When I detailed my
Serial, sir, I had ten Officers, two of them were female.
It was ideal opportunity to put .... These turnstiles
work in pairs, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.  I had
eight men working in a pair one to each turnstile which
let me keep the female in reserve for searching.  When I
started off, sir, I had eight turnstiles.

You got it reduced .... A. I did not get it reduced, sir.
I would still argue to this day I had eight turnstiles.

Does that mean that you were only then dealing with 11-16?
- A. As far as I was concerned I was dealing with 9-16.

Despite the fact two of them had been changed.  There was
a barrier behind which was shifted? — A. There was, sir.
I was at that barrier, which you will come to later on.

Which meant that two of your Serial were detached effectively
by a barrier, weren't they? - A. On these turnstiles there ..

Inside there is a moveable barrier? - A. I accept that.
I know where the moveable barrier was sir.  I saw it being
put on, but I was not informed that I had lost two turnstiles

Well what happened? It sounds to me like a recipe for
confusion in relation to the Turnstiles 9 and 10? - A. It
was to my knowledge that I had lost two turnstiles to
another Serial.  No one told me that.

Exactly, but what about people coming through 9 and 10,
where were they to go? — A. I was having confusion at these
turnstiles sir,  hs things grew up. It was running
smoothly.  I was having no problems.  They were decent
families who were bantering with each other.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is not what you are being
asked about at the moment.   I don't know how far it matters,
                             28

                                       R. BURNS


     but the suggestion is that two more turnstiles were in fact
     allocated to the North Stand than had been originally intended?
     - A. I don't know.

Q. You did not know that? - A. No one told me.

Q.         MR. COLLINS*  Well never mind, let's go on.  I am not
     going to ask you about the details of the build-up because
     we have heard it from others, but vould you confirm the
     picture that has been painted, that all was relatively
     reasonably well until about half-past-2 and thereafter we
     have this awful build-up outside which gave problems inside?
     - A. Yes sir.

q . j will come to it in slightly more detail in a moment, but
     before I do can I ask you about the briefing which came
     from Inspector White .... A. My briefing with Inspector
     White was held on the terraces inside the Leppings Lane
     turnstiles.  Sergeant Crawford and myself, both Serials.

Q. There is only ©ne matter I want to ask you about and that
   is this: one of your Officers, Constable Rich, recalls
   that in the course of the briefing Mr. White said something
   to the effect that if he had an extra Serial he would have
   been able to use it to patrol in some way the terrace.
   Do you remember anything along those lines? - A. Along
   these lines sir I do recollect that Inspector White did,
   if he had another Serial he would have made alternative
   plans for patrolling the terraces, yes.

Q. As you understood it what did he have in mind in relation
   to patrolling the terrace? - A. I put this down sir in
   respect of emergency evacuation procedure which was being
   described at that time.  I would have put that in content
   with that factor.

Q. You mean the side gates that we have heard about to the
   pens? - A. Yes sir.

Q. What about the question of ensuring that there was not over­
   crowding in the pens.  Did you understand him to have any
   concern about that? - A. There was nothing said about over­
   crowding in the pens sir, nothing whatsoever.

Q. I know there was nothing said, but in the course of his
   briefing you have mentioned that Mr. White said if he had
   had extra men he would have used them on the terracing?
   - A. I understood that in relation to the emergency
   evacuation procedure.

Q. So you don't know why Mr. White .... At that time, sir,
   he was discussing one Officer to the internal gate which
   is located under the West Stand seating area.

 Q. Anyway, as far as you were concerned did your Serial have
                                        R. BURNS


     any duties in relation to the west terracing at the stage
     before the kick-off.  Do you understand the question?
     - A. My briefing sir.

Q. Was it your understanding whether from briefing from anyone
   or otherwise that your Serial had any responsibilities in
   relation to the West terracing before kick-off? - A. Yes
   sir.

Q. What responsibilities? - A. My responsibility to patrol,
   to ensure safety, public order, bearing in mind, my Lord,
   I had what I class as a North pen into the terraces,
   inside the terraces in front of the Stand.   From the middle
   tunnel, the north pen runs to the North Stand. Also the
   cantilever area which is in the corner between the North
   Stand and the West Stand, that is a standing area and the
   North tunnel which runs from the back of the enclosure into
   the terraces.   There is also a snap cabin, hot meals, just
   under the rear of the West Stand sir which again was my
   responsibility.

Q. Did you or any of your Serials to your knowledge ever go
   and have a look on the terraces before the match? - A. Yes,
   many times before half-past—2 and I had no problem whatsoever.
   I spoke to the three youths that were manning the snap
   cabin but I told them:  "If you get any trouble drop that
   hatch".  There is a heavy hatch.  I said:  "And come to me,
   I will be at the turnstiles".

Q. Am I right in thinking that that responsibility, limited as
   it was to the north side, did not include, or did it, any
   concern with whether Pens 3 and 4 were or were not getting
   over full? - A. No sir, that was not mentioned.

Q. That was not the purpose of it and indeed did you, in any
   of your visits round did you look to check at all? - A.
   I saw no problems sir up until half-past-2.

Q. After half-past-2 did you move from the turnstile area?
   - A. No sir.

Q. And that was because of the problems there, I take it? -
   A. My problems were at the turnstiles.

Q. I don't want to ask you a lot of detail because again we
   have heard the evidence from those on A —G and the pattern
   I think was much the same ....

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, can I just ask. When
     you   made those visits to the terrace up to 2.30, I mean
     how   many of your Serial would be doing that or was it just
     you   doing that? - A. I did that, sir.  I accepted that
     was   my responsibility.

Q. What would you be looking out for when you were doing that?
   - A. In particular in the cantilever stand, sir, we have
   problems there where supporters tend to fight. We don't know
   why.
                            30

                                      R. BURNS


Q. So it is public order? - A. Public order sir, yes, and safety
   of individuals and assisting people who come and ask me
   questions likes  "How do I get to such and such an area?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.

Q.         MR. COLLINS: We know that this enormous crush built
     up and it led to people coming through the turnstiles who
     were obviously in considerable distress as a result of
     being crushed? - A. They were in considerable distress sir,
     yes.
Q. Apart from the distress did you notice anything else about
   those who started who were coming through towards kick-off
   time in the last 20 minutes or so? - A. As we were gone
   well over half-past- 2, again I have no recollection of time
   sir, there is a sudden change.    Prior to that I put thousands
   through there, families, decent people joking, laughing with
   us, complaining they wanted the bottom end.    "We should have
   had the bottom end" but it was a complaint, there was nothing
   nasty about it.   I would say about quarter-to-3 or just
   after half-past-2 things altered.    Apprehension, I got the
   feeling of apprehension.    There was a mass which I could
   see through the turnstiles looking outwards, the masses
   into Leppings Lane.    There was a strong smell of alcohol
   which was sudden.   That had never happened before sir.
   People were sober that come through up to half-past-2.

Q. What state were they in after half-past-2? - A. I would
   say drunken sir.  I would class them as animals after
   half-past-2.

Q. Obviously not everyone but there were a number, there was
   a change in attitude you say and an increase in the numbers
   who were affected.  Is that a fair way of putting it? -
   A. A change of attitude sir, an arrogance which I have
   never experienced from Liverpool supporters in my life.
   I have worked with Liverpool a lot of times, here in
   Sheffield and at Barnsley and I have never experienced this
   with Liverpool.  There is an element with any Club of
   hooligans but where that lot come from sir, I have no idea.

Q. Anyway people started coming over the top, I think? - A.
   They were coming over the top of the turnstiles, sir.
   They were climbing the wall.

Q. We know Inspector Bennett climbed up .... A. I asked
   Inspector Bennett.  I pleaded with him to open the gates
   to stop the crushing outside.

 Q. Eventually Gate B was opened.  Is that right? - A. I never
    saw Gate B open sir but whilst I was dealing with incidents
    on the turnstiles i.e. those trying to push through, three
    and four trying to get through a single turnstile,
    operators were working well above their capacity.  I
    complimented the men on that in my turnstiles.  I have
                             31

                                       R. BURNS


     untoward to say about these people.  These men did work
     magic.  They worked with me and we both worked together.

Q. As you are dealing with the turnstile operators/ did there
   come a time when you felt it necessary to give them an
   instruction about getting people through? - A. Yes sir,
   I found that the operators were actually working to my
   orders and I said:   "Let them through, let me transfer them".
   What was happening was these operators of mine they had
   red tickets for the north seating area, sorry the West Stand
   seating.   The brown tickets was for the North Stand seating
   area.   What I found was people were being crushed outside with
   red tickets, brown tickets and they were trying to get ^
   through.   Operators were shouting:   "Get back, get back".
   It was impossible to put the people back. I ended up saying:
    "Look, let them through.  Let me and my Serial sort this
   out".
Q. What about non-ticket holders.  Did any non-ticket holders
   get through? - A. They were getting through, sir. As
   P.C. Branston told you the format here if an operator has
   problems or if he wishes to draw your attention he rattles
   the glass but when you have got operators rattling glass
   and you have got fliers coming through from all angles
   it is physically impossible to stop everyone and I just
   said to them:  "Try and do the best you can.  Get your
   tickets and we help you from in here".  That is all they
   were doing.

Q. So it is likely that a number of non-ticket holders towards
   that late stage would have got through? - A. That is sure
   enough.  There were a lot of non-ticket holders got through
   sir.  I am positive of that.

Q. Because of the inability to get them back again? - A. That
   is it, yes.  There was a physical impossibility to get
   back in amongst that crowd.

Q. Were you in fact aware at some stage of Gate B having been
   opened? - A. Yes sir, when I was transferring these red
   tickets, brown ticket holders through this moveable barrier
   between the two turnstiles, as I say again I had two
   Stewards working with me on that.    They worked well as
   others did.   I was suddenly aware of a mass from my left
   which was from Gate B, a mass of supporters, drunken
   hooligans, riiiiing towards my back which made me turn and
   look at them and I followed the movement of that crowd
   and there was a lot.    They went up into the cantilever
   Stand, sir, the north pen, the north pen area and the
   cantilever area, that is the north-west of the ground,
   between the West Stand and the North Stand.

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Where were they coming from?
      - A. They had come from the direction of Gate B to my
      left.  They came from my left which made me aware of them
      and I turned with them.  It was one of the Officers who
                        32

                                    R. BURNS


had been inside Gate B, in fact two of them, approached
me remonstrating that Gate B had been opened against their
wishes.




            /Q.   MR. COLLINS:   Who had opened
                           33




                                               R. BURNS

Q.        MR. COLLINS:    Who had opened it, did you under­
     stand? - A. From these two Officers, one of which is
     present today, it was two Officers from another serial
     who had been ordered to opfia it.  The two stewards on
     that gate, I understand, had also remonstrated against
     opening it, m y explanation being was forget it, go
     back, maintain order.   I had actually asked for that
     gate to be opened prior.

Q. Do you know who the Officers were who had in fact opened
   it? - A. I had no knowledge of who the two Officers were,
   sir, but I understand from enquiries I have made they were
   directed from another serial to open these gates.

Q. Do you now know who they were? -( A. No, sir.

Q. You do not.   Gate B was opened, I think, for a relatively
   short period, was it not? - A. I understand so from the
   Officers and immediately closed again.   It was to relieve
   the pressure.   The pressure was relieved but unfortunately
   the pressure was from the group that was being crushed
   outside.   It did not relieve the pressure on the turn­
   stiles immediately in front of me.

Q. No, because that would have relieved the pressure of
   course on A to G? - A. A to G, sir, yes.

Q. But in fact Gate A which was the gate which would have
   relieved the pressure on your turnstiles was opened too
   at about this time bu^ you, I think, were not aware of
   that? - A. I was after,again the recollecting being as
   I am transferring red, brown tickets I was suddenly from
   my right-hand side which is from turnstiles 1 to 10,
   purple ticketholders coming in on me, masses of them.
   Then the problem was three-fold, trying to transfer.

Q. Any way eventually it all died away.    Is that right?
   - A. It did, sir, yes.

Q. Then you received a message, I think, that you should go
   to the perimeter track? - A. All available Officers to the
   perimeter track.

Q. Can you remember how you received that message? - A. Sir,
   to this day that come out of my radio which had been dead
   since before half-past-2.  I had tried various means.   I
   am an ex-traffic Sergeant.  I am used to radio communication
   falling down.  I had the radio.  I took the base off, I
   wiped the terminals, I put them back on again, I switched
   it off which sometimes works but - describe it as a
   chattering, so from half-past-2 until this message came
   through loud and clear.

Q. Does that mea n that your radio receiver was in a defective
                                                R. BURNS

fedtiftitiOtt or 'tfii radio ddtataunication generally was
defective? ~ A. There is no answer to it, sir.           There
is no answer.       It was obvious that my radio was not
defective.      I swear to this day that came straight out
of the earpiece.

Forgive me.  It is my fault.  I have not fully followed
you.  Are you saying that ryour individual receiver was
defective? - A. No, sir, no, sir.

It was not? ~ A. I am saying for some unknown reason
there are various reasons why these radios can go down.
If someone, speaking on the radio, his own pocket set,
and that, for some reason, that return spring does not
push his button back out again it can stop thelot.

I see. - A. It can put the lot      off.   That isone   example
of radios gone down.

Are you saying you were receiving incoherent messages
through your radio or receiving nothing until you
suddenly received this message? - A. Incoherent m e s s ­
ages, sir, chattering, buzzing.

Any way, you heard    .... - A. That was clear,     sir, crystal
clear.

Did you hear why   .... - A. No,    sir, no, sir.

....   that was wanted? - A. No,    sir.

Any way did you gather your serial together? - A. I held
them back.  They wanted to run.  As Gate B opened to let
the outside serials in, 15/20 men at the most, my serial
were tempted to go with them and I held them back.  I
says, "No, with me, stop with me."  My responsibility was
the turnstiles, the operators and anyone else outside.   I
told, I instructed, the operators to close their outer
doors.  They have a facility where ....

So what it boils down to is this, that notwithstanding
the call you decided that you had to ensure that all was
well in your sector, as it were, before you responded?
- A. Yes, sir.  That is my authority, yes.

So by the time you responded it was a few minutes after
the call had been made? - A. Yes.  By the time I had ran
through the operators shouting to them close your outer
doors including the turnstiles as well at Gate C, they
all complied with it, there was no problem, the outer
gates werre closed and I merely went towards the right-
hand side of the West Stand.

So you went through that gate in the wall, did you? - A.
                                           R. BURNS

Yes.  There is a gate between Gate B and Gate C, that
is right, sir.

In order to go round the South? - A. Yes.  I approached
through that opening in the wall and it was then I met -
well, I saw two youths, one assisting the other, and
they were shouting, "Help, help, help us, we are being
crushed.

Where had they come from? - A. They had come out of the
middle tunnel, sir.  They were just in the mouth of the
middle tunnel.

And they were obviously in distress? - A. They were in
distress, yes.  One was - he could hardly breathe, sir.

So did you decide that you would go down that tunnel?
- A. I went down that tunnel, sir, yes.

Were you accompanied by other Officers? - A. I have thought
about this, sir.  I never saw another Officer.  From then
on I done my own thing.

Right.  First of all, were there any people in the tunnel
as you went down? - A. Again you get flashbacks, sir.
There was no-one actually physically in that tunnel at
that mouth.  I have worked a lot of matches here and I
have seen big matches where I can get them in the mouth
of the tunnel coming from the back of the terraces, can
be six, eight deep, and bear in mind that tunnel if - what -
16, 20 foot wide, it is quite a lot of people.   There was
none of that, sir.  All I got was backs.   As far as I am
concerned they were watching the match.   Whether the
match was being played I have no idea.

But any way that means, does it, that those backs you are
referring to were actually on the terraces rather than
in the tunnel? - A. In line with the back of the terraces,
sir, not inside the tunnel.

Not inside the tunnel.   And when you got to the back there
what did you realise about the state of affairs on the
terraces? - A. I still had no idea, sir, and neither had
the spectators at the back of the terraces.   They were
watching something.  Again I assume they were still
watching the match.   I do not know.  But I was suddenly
presented by adult males, bigger men than me, middle-
aged men, young-ish men, fighting their way out from
these people at the back of the terraces gasping,
sweating profusely, gasping for air, and I had to
remonstrate with those at the back, in actual fact had
to forcibly push them.   I was told off on many occasions,
unfruitfully, to go away, "I've got my ticket and I'm not
                                           R. BURNS

blbddy moving for you.  They were moved and I managed to
get individuals by dragging them out into the tunnel.

Which side did you go as you got .... - A. Initially,      sir,
this is those coming out of the right-hand side.

Yes. - A. I am physically helping them out into the
tunnel.    To help the Court, these tunnels, it is like
being in     the tube station. There is a vacuum of cold
air comes down the tunnel towards the back of the
terraces.   It is cool.   The air is being pulled in
from the   rear enclosure and once in there it was
relieving the congestion of the lungs of some of these
people that were breathing.    I said, "Look, just take
your time, stand in there, it is cold, there is fresh
air coming through."    It seemed to relieve them.   And
I then went back in again - there was half-a-dozen,
probably more, sir, the flashes, and I then went in
to the left-hand side, facing the ground, out into the
left-hand side of the middle barrier.

Yes.  That is Pen 4.   Did you still have to force your
way in? - A. I was forcing my way through there, yes,
sir, and I then came across - I had not gone far - I
think I said three or four yards.   On reflection it was
even less than that.   And I found two teenage youths,
I say, late teens, early twenties, they were on the
ground and these animals were still jumping up and down,
waving their arms about and jumping on top of them.
They were forcibly moved.   Lifted both of these.  I
say I lifted both of those, one under each arm, and I
ran the full length df the tunnel into the back enclosure
where it was cooler.   I lay them both down and I do not
know how m any times I went in and out of that tunnel, sir.

Were they - I imagine they were - alive? - A. These youths
were alive.  They were just having trouble breathing.     I
made sure when I laid them down, sir, they were all right.
They nodded their head.   They could not talk to me.   It
was a physical impossibility.   Their lungs had - obviously
there was a lot of   people in there and life was more
important, sir.  I wanted them out.

Can you help us as   to this?  From what you have been saying
it would appear that there were people who were suffering
at the very least injury fairly high up the terraces in
that pen.  Is that right?- A. Exactly, sir.    As I say,
at least no more than two yards from the back of the
terraces.

Do you know, can you help as to whether any of those who
were taken out were dead eventually from that sort of
position? - A. Not from that position, sir, I do not know.
The last one that I got was a young lad approached me to help
CiQ
                                  37



                                                         R. BURNS

          his friend.  I believe at that time that was back into
          the right-hand side.

      Q. How far down? - A. He pulled my arm, "Come and help my
         friend."  He was only two yards to the right of that
         middle barrier.  I picked a lad up ....

      Q. How far down in Pen 3? - A.    I am now back into Pen 3,
         sir, yes.

      Q. Yes. - A. I was transferring three,     four.    I do not know
         how man y times I have done it.

      Q. No.  I follow.    But how far down the terrace     .... - A.
         Not far, sir.

      Q         was this one in distress? - A. At the most three
          yards.   I picked this one up on a fireman's lift and I
          got him outside and there was litter everywhere.    I
          just got outside the mouth of the tunnel and I laid this
          lad down, his eyes were closed and I put him into the
          recovery position which seemed to ease his breathing.
          His eyes were open.   He was in deep shock.   His friend
          was still with me and I says, "Look, keep talking to
          him.   Are you all right?   If you are all right nod your
          head."   He was doing this.   This position seemed to help
          relieve the breathing problems we were having and, as I
          sa’ , there was that many round about me.   I said to his
          friend, "Look, just pacify him.    Keep him quiet."

      Q. Were there any of those around you, the bodies who were
         taken out into the concourse, who appeared to you to be
         dead? - A. Later on, sir, later on after I had applied
         cardiac massage to one of these youths.        I had three
         youths under me at one time, trying to help each one.
         A Policewoman from another serial was helping me
         assisting with this particular youth who I describe as
         late-teenage/early tw e n t i e s, fair hair, spotty com­
         plexion, he was wearing a denim jacket and denim
         trousers and a black checked? shirt.        I applied cardiac
         massage.   This lad had stopped breathing.       He was turning
         blue.  The Policewoman gave him mouth to mouth at the
         same time.   We did revive him. I had a pulse.        I got a
         pulse back.   I felt his neck pulse came through.       His
         eyes opened.   He was obviously in deep shock, sir.        His
         eyes had gone red.

      Q. Yes. - A. With grey background and he was staring.  I
         got him into the recovery position and he was sick over
         me, frothy, bubbling sickness, not much but the passage
         had cleared.

      Q. I do not think, forgive me, we need go into exact details.
         Suffice it to say you did clearly save his life? - A.
                                              R. BURNS

Twice,   sir, as far as I am concerned.

You did it twice.  Can I summarise, please, Sergeant,
because what is important is ascertaining where the
injured and dead were on the terraces. - A. Yes, sir.

It sounds from what you are saying that you must have
been the first Police Officer down that tunnel? - A. I
spoke to Sergeant Morgan shortly after the incident.
His reflection was I was first man down the tunnel.
Speaking for myself ....

Yes, that is exactly .... - A. This morning I said to
him, “John, are you sure you were first man?   I have
never mentioned it.   Are you sure you were first man?"
He said, "My perception is I was first man," and it
is a perception, sir.   I am not going to say I was
first down and I won't decry Sergeant Morgan saying
he was first down.

No, of course. - A. We are not competing.       I was one
of the first down that tunnel.

It is your impression you were the first down there.
Clearly shortly after you began to help other Police
Officers were down that tunnel helping as well.  Is
that right? - A. Shortly after, initially going down
the tunneli

You went down and helped out    .... - A ....... numerous
people.

Numerous people.  But as you were doing that were you
aware of other Police Officers in the vicinity also
helping? -A. Oh, yes, sir.  Who they were I do not know.

Indeed. - A. Whether they were my serial or another
serial I do not know.

What I am getting    at is it would  seem to follow from
that that shortly    after you were down the tunnel,
assuming you were    first, other Police Officers also
followed you? - A.    Oh^ yes, sir.   Yes.

And a number of people were taken out the back of that
tunnel? - A. Whilst I was engaged on first aid numerous
people ....

Exactly. - A. My Officers and I will say assisted by
their own supporters, Liverpool.

From what you have been telling us is it right that
certainly those injured and dead who were taken out
at the very early stages would have come from towards
                             39




                                                       R. BURNS

     the back of the terraces in your view? -A. I cannot
     say that, sir.   I cannot say that. I can only deal
     with what I had.

Q. Certainly so far as you were concerned and your obs­
   ervations you took people dead and injured or - rather -
   injured, not dead, from the back or towards the back?
   -A. Towards the back end of the terraces, yes, sir, and
   those at the back of the terraces and round about them
   were not even aware that there was people underneath
   them.

Q.    Indeed, indeed.  And you can confirm that you took them
     out towards the back of both sides, that is, both Pen 4
     and Pen 3? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. And there was overcrowding, crushing and injuries in
   both Pens 4 and Pens 3? ~ A. As far as I am concerned,
   what I saw, yes, sir.

Q.    Yes.  I do not think I need ask you to go into any
     more of the details.   Others can bring out matters
     if they wish.  Thank you   very much.

          MR. HYTNER:   I have no questions,       sir.

                 Cross-examined by    MR. J A C K S O N ;

Q. Officer, you do r e a l i s e .that you will have offended by
   your evidence this morning a very great number of
   people? - A. I have not intentionally offended anyone,
   sir.  I would praise the Liverpool people.

Q. The description of the fans as animals. - A. That is
   correct, sir.  I have seen and worked matches since
   1974 all over this county.  I have also seen big matches
   in Scotland.  I have never seen people   like animals.
   That is what I have described them as, sir.

Q. May I therefore just take you through one or two matters
   which would have perhaps assisted?, At    2.30 how would you
   describe the crowd outside your turnstiles?    -A. I had no
   problems.   Again I cannot describe the crowd outside the
   turnstiles.   I can only describe them inside the turn­
   stiles.   Just after half-past-2 it would appear I got
   the train, the special train had come, and they came
   through the turnstiles. I had no problems with them
   whatsoever, sir.

Q. Would you be surprised to hear the train arrived at the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles at about eight-minutes-past-two
   and was through by about 2.20? - A. If that is the case,
   sir, the train had gone through.
                            40



                                                 R. BURNS

Q. Would you like to look, please, at photograph No. 25,
   MWL 10, 25A, Composite album No. 1? - A. 25A.

Q. Yes.  It is a photograph familiar to us all by now.
   Shows what I understand is accepted by everyone
   as a full turnstile area of people behaving ....
   Composite Album No. 1. - A. It is the first one.
   It is the proper one I had the first time.

Q. It is near to the back. - A. 25A.

Q.   25A. - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Those were the people who would be going through your
     turnstile between 2.30 and 2.40, would they not? - A.
     That is not my turnstile, sir.  That is A to G.

Q. Yes, indeed.  The crowd of people.      That is the tempo
   outside? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Those at 2.30, people outside, were telling you - the
   people who were outside at 2.30 would be those going in
   between 2.30 and 2»35? -A. Oh, yes, sir.

Q. Yes, indeed.   They were the people that were telling you
   that their friends were being crushed outside, would you
   please do something? - A. Correct, sir, yes.

Q.    I want to ask you what did you do.  First of all, you
     are told by people that they were being crushed outside.
     What did you do? - A. I was attempting to repair my radio,
     sir, to inform the Control Room that I was having problems
     outside.

Q.    You are faced with a number of people who are abusive,
     they tell you if the Police do not do something people
     will be killed and you set about repairing your radio?
     - A. In order that I may contact my Control Room for
     something to be done ....

Q.    Indeed. - A ...... to help and assist these people    who
     were pleading to assist the friends outside.

Q. Indeed.  People are desperate, they are concerned, they
   are out of breath.   Who did you actually tell? -A. No-
   one I can tell, sir.

Q. Let's see how efficient and initiative conscious you were.
   Could you have walked to the Control Room and told them
   about this dangerous situation outside? - A. No, sir.
   By this time I had stopped searching procedures.  My
   serial were informed maintain public order.

Q. I did not ask you what you did do.      I merely asked you
                                                 R. BURNS

could you have walked to the Control Room? - A. If I
had walked to the Control Room, sir, my serial were
undermanned.

I see.  Could you have sent one of the young Policewomen
to the Control Room? - A. I could have done a lot of
things, sir.

.1 did not ask you if you could have done a lot of things.
 I merely asked you - Sergeant, if you do not want to
 answer these questions please do not.   We will save a lot
 of time.   I am suggesting to you that any Police Sergeant
 with any one ounce of initiative whose radio would not
 w ork could have got a message to the Control Room. - A.
 That is your opinion, sir.

Do you accept it? - A. No, sir.

You are saying that your serial, Sergeant, was cut off
some - what - 30 yards from the Control Room? - A. Put
it more than that, sir, but I was not cut off.  We may
be a thin blue line, sir, but we are certainly never
cut off.  We may stretch.

Where was your Inspector? - A. I have no idea, sir.

Your Inspector was missing.      Your radio was broken. - A.
My radio was not broken.

Was not working.    - A. I was having communication problems.

And you could not get a message to the Control Room? - A.
That is correct, sir.

     MR. JACKSON:     Thank you for your assistance.

     MR. MULLER:      I have no questions.




                         / Cross-examined by MR. M A X W E L L :
                            42


                                                  R. BURNS


                   Cross-Examined bv MR. MAXWELL:

Q. Sergeant, I would like to understand what Inspector White said
   was to be done in relation to patrolling the terraces.  Can
   you explain again what it was that he said was to be done in
   relation to the terraces before kick-off? - A. My briefing,
   sir, as is on Serial 15, is for my serial to be located at
   turnstiles 9-16, to search for any items of property which may
   cause injury or damage to people, to maintain public order;
   also to maintain order on the cantilever terraced area, the
   North Pen and what I class as the North Pen on the terraces,
   sir.

Q. Did Inspector White say that anything was to be done in
   relation to the patrolling of terraces? -A. No, sir.  That
   again, I am a Sergeant, i take that as my responsibility, that
   I must patrol the area.  I can delegate, but I take it on
   myself that that is part of my duty.

Q. You had worked that out for yourself? - A. I had, sir, yes.

Q. As far as pens 3 and 4 are concerned, if before 2.30 you had
   thought it necessary to go into those pens, would you have
   felt first of all confident enough to do that? - A. Do you
   mean on my own, sir?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And competent to do it? - A. Yes, sir.  I work as a loner,
   sir.  It is very rarely you will see two Sergeants together.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. KALLIPETIS:

Q. Sergeant, you have your statement in front of you, have you? -
   A. I have, sir, yes.

Q. Page 10, please.  The young Policewoman-you refer to at the
   top of that page, I think that is Police Constable Beard, is
   not it, in your serial? - A. The Policewoman I refer to, sir,
   in the second paragraph, ”a young Policewoman” , I only know
   her number as 3342.  I d o n ’t know her name, sir. She was not
   in my serial.  She is from a Sheffield Division.

Q. It should be 3342, not 2242? - A. Again there are a lot of
   typing errors in this statement.  It should be 3342.

          MR. COLLINS:   P.C. Blunt, from Serial 18.

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:    Over the page, at the top of the page,
     third line.   Did the man who appeared by you to tell you
     there were ambulances outside, was he an ambulance Officer
     in fact? Can you recall? - A. Bear with me, sir.   I am
     having problems.

Q. Shall I read it?

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I wondered when you were going to
                             43

                                                    R. BURNS


     give in! - A. Bear with me.  No, sir, having thought about
     this, I think this is the same gentleman, I believe to be the
     same gentleman I will refer to later.  I may be mistaken.
     Everything may happen vividly at the time but on reflection
     afterwards you get flashbacks.  I think it may be the same
     person.  I might be wrong.

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:   The same person you referred to later
     in your state? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is that the doctor, halfway down page 11? - A. yes, sir.

Q. The people you brought out from the pens, both sides, Sergeant
   Burns, is this the picture? You brought them out and laid
   them outside the tunnel, tried to make sure they were all
   right, and then went back in again? - A. That is it, sir.  In
   and out, in and out.  I d o n ’t know how many times.

Q.   I am asked to refer you to page 11, Mr. Burns, where you refer
     to the man wearing a brown suit, and you say that he appeared
     agitated to be a doctor? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Could you explain what you mean? - A. He said to me, he asked
     initially - this is the same individual which I had
     resuscitated outside the pen - I had moved a distance of about
     10 yards carrying the lad under his armpits assisted by two
     Liverpool teenagers, a further 10 yards, he had gone blue
     again, and on the instruction of the Policewoman he was placed
     back down again, we applied cardiac massage, and whilst I was
     doing this I was approached by this male wearing the brown
     suit.  The man was agitated.  In fact, we were all agitated.
     He identified himself as a doctor.   He asked me, ’’Have you got
     oxygen?” . My reply was in the negative.    ’’Have you got a
     trolley?” . Again it was obvious there were no such items at
     my availability.  Perhaps I was rude.   I d o n ’t know. I c a n ’t
     remember my exact words.  ”If I had there I wouldn’t be sat
     here doing this” . On reflection I think we were all agitated,
     sir, but he struck me as being unusual to identify himself as
     a doctor from Liverpool.  He said he was a supporter but was
     also a doctor from Liverpool, initially to help, which I
     appreciated, actually, but when he started asking silly
     questions I am afraid I got rattled.

Q. You would expect a doctor to act with some calm and composure?
   - A. Either that or give me a hand.

Q. Yes.    All he was doing was asking you silly questions? -A.
   Yes.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Sergeant Burns, have you worked the turnstiles before at
   Hillsborough? - A. Since amalgamation in 1974, sir - I am a
   Barnsley Officer - from 1974 to 1984 I was a road traffic
   supervising Sergeant.  During that 10 years I have worked the
   Traffic Serial to assist Sheffield Division.  I have worked
   the turnstiles previously.  During that time and towards the
                          44

                                                 R. BURNS


   latter end of the previous years.   I did not work last y e a r ’s
   Semi-Final.

Q. Have you worked a Semi-Final before? - A. I worked the
   previous one, Leeds-Coventry.

Q. 1987.  From a Police point of view and indeed the clu b’s point
   of view, it does have to be something of a team effort, does
   not it? - A. It is a team effort, sir, yes.

Q. Even if all goes smoothly? - A. Even if all goes smoothly, we
   have no problems.

Q. Whatever the outcome of the Inquiry may be and whatever
   advice and instructions we may both be given, the club and the
   Police, there still has to be co-operation between the men who
   have actually got to work the turnstiles, the men who have to
   work the gates, and the Police Officers who have to assist
   them? - A. We work together, sir.  We always have done.

Q. Could I just ask this, and perhaps nothing has been done to
   spoil this yet, but is it not a fact that over recent years
   there has in fact been very good co-operation between the
   working men on the ground in those teams I have just
   described? - A. Each knows his responsibility.    Each knows his
   direct control.  Any steward, any operator will do what I tell
   them.  I always  found that.   I have never had any, "No, I ’m
   not.  That's not my job".   If I tell them to do it they will
   do it, or what I ask them to do.

Q. Some of the turnstile operators may say that the relationship
   is such that they only have to nod at a Police Officer and
   that will be recognised as a signal that he has got a
   problem? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.  We are there to assist
   them, as well as they are assisting us, of course.

Q. Some of the turnstile operators have told the Police, and we
   may hear, that when things are running normally and indeed on
   this day up until about half-past-2 or so, a process of simply
   handing in a ticket and passing through the turnstiles should
   be completed at the rate of about one every 3 seconds? - A. I
   would say so, yes, sir, without any problem.

Q. But I am sure it is common ground between us, and i am sure we
   are both concerned that it does not happen again, things went
   very badly wrong with the turnstiles on this day? - A. Yes,
   through no fault of the turnstile operators.   They were trying
   to cope above their means.   It was impossible to get three or
   four through a single tunnel, and if he gets a jam on he has
   got one that is going to come over the top, and he knows he is
   getting one that is coming over the top, the other three may
   have tickets, but he can only cope with what is available to
   him, sir.

Q. Could you help the Inquiry with your own estimate of the
   approximately time at which the flow of roughly one every
   3 seconds became jammed to something unacceptable? - A. Time
                           45

                                                 R. BURNS


   is a void, but it must be quarter-to-3. Between quarter-to-3
   and 3 o ’clock, if that is the video time. The men were
   working hard out between half-past-2 and quarter-to-3.

Q. Did it happen rather suddenly rather than just gradually
   slowing down? Did it suddenly appear that the jam was
   affecting the turnstiles, or did it gradually slow down? - A.
   I think it was a gradual slowing down and a gradual build up
   until there was a crescendo.     That is the impression I got.  I
   became aware - I d o n ’t frighten easy - I was very apprehensive
   as it approached I think quarter-to-3 time.

Q. In the closing minutes before kick-off was due, between 10-to-
   3 and 3 o ’clock.... - A. Again, that is time, sir.   I am in
   limbo.  I have a complete void over that time period.

Q. I will forget talking about minutes.  Let me just talk about
   the game before you knew that the roar went up in the crowd. -
   A. I was not aware the match had started, sir.

Q. I appreciate you d o n ’t frighten easily.  I am not surprised to
   hear it, but it would be right to say that some of the gatemen
   and stewards were very frightened? - A. I believe as far as I
   am concerned I became concerned for the majority of elderly
   turnstile operators who were under my control. I think they
   were getting agitated.     They were getting frightened.  They
   were being harassed, shouted at, abused.

Q. I was going to ask you whether circumstances were such that
   you could sympathise with the fact that many, particularly the
   young and the old on the gates, were frightened? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. We may hear that one or more Police Officers at that stage
   shortly before the match, advised some of the stewards to take
   off their tabards because of the hostility that was directed
   towards them? Were you one of the Officers who gave that
   advice, or did you hear of them? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you see some of the stewards and gatemen took their
   tabards off? - A. I d i d n ’t know they had tabards on,
   sir.

Q. Does it surprise you? - A. What, that they'told them to take
   them off?

Q. Yes. - A. No, it does not.  If that was for their safety and
   if they wanted to get out of there in a hurry, if I had seen
   that I would have told them to do it as well.

Q. You would have told them to do it yourself? - A. Yes, and shut
   that outside door.  They are emergency doors which protects
   them and stops other people getting in.

Q. Could I bring you back to the briefing on the terraces as
   distinct from the rather formal one when you were all sitting
   in the stand.  On the terraces we know that Inspector White
'


                                 46

                                                       R. BURNS


         told the two serials together what was expected of them that
         afternoon. - A. That was a brief briefing in respect of to
         turnstiles.  This was in respect of emergency procedures which
         were to be complied with.     Two members of my serial he
         identified to a specific location from Serial 15, one Officer
         to the gate at the rear of the terraces and the other Officer
         to the mouth of the North pen.     That was the two locations
         which were allocated to my serial.     I am aware of the
         evacuation procedure.     Inspector White knows I am an
         experience Sergeant who has worked Leppings Lane.     Perhaps he
         abbreviated, I d o n ’t know.  Sergeant Crawford has got the same
         experience as I have got.

    Q.   There is a slight difference between the two versions we have
         been given of the briefing.  I would like your help with
         reconciling it if I can.  It was put to you perfectly fairly
         by my learned friend, Mr. Collins, that he may have said,
         Inspector White, that if he had had an extra serial he would
         have used it in a particular way on the terraces. - A. yes,
         sir.

    Q. And Police Constable Rich as we now know recalls what he
       thought he said was that in ideal conditions he would have
       liked to have deployed both your serials on the terraces to
       even out and distribute the crowds.  Can you reconcile those
       two? Which of those two versions - I don't know where the
       first one comes from - which do you think is right? - A. I
       still say as far as my recollections were, he was referring to
       emergency evacuation procedures.

    Q. Could I bring you finally to what you understood to be your
       responsibilities in respect of that part of the terrace that
       was under your control. - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Looking at the model if we may again together, have I
       understood correctly it is the elevated section and pen 6? -
       A. I don't refer to them as number of pens.  This is the
       problem.  You are right.  It is the elevated standing area
       which I refer to as the cantilever stand.

    Q. How far should Mr. Poole push the pointer down before your
       territory runs out, if I may put it in that way? - A. To what
       we used to class as the - we d o n ’t use the words "No-go area”
       now.

    Q. What I rudely called the rat run? - A. Well, that is worse
       than "No-go area", so I will accept that.

    Q. I will withdraw the rat run. - A. I d o n ’t like that word.

    Q. The partition we call 5, the two fences close together? - A.
       Yes, sir, that is my responsibility.

    Q. I d o n ’t want to put words in your mouth.  Your words, and I
       want to make sure you meant them, your responsibilities
       included to patrol, ensure public safety and public order on
       those areas? - A. That is correct.     Again that is Phase 1.
                            47

                                                  R. BURNS



Q. Before the match? - A. Yes.    I always accept that is «y
   responsibility.

Q. Did you understand that the serial next to you had a
   similar responsibility in respect of that part of the
   terrace that came under their control? - A. That is
   correct, sir, from where we meet as you class it as the
   rat run to the South Stand, and the middle tunnel.

Q. If you had been responsible for Serial 14 you would have
   attempted to carry out the same responsibility in respect of
   the centre pens? - A. Yes.

Q.   Public safety and public order? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Would I be right in thinking on the terraces the greatest  fear
     for public safety is overcrowding? - A. It always is, sir,


Q. Sergeant, forgive me and forgive all of us if I d o n ’t ask you
   any further questions about your own activities. - A. Thank
   you, sir.

Q. I fear it may appear we are all so interested in our own
   clients' concerns that we are disinterested or take for
   granted the acts of heroism that were performed by you and
   your colleagues.  I hope it is not thought either by you or
   any of your colleagues that if any us mounts criticism at
   individuals we have forgotten those acts of heroism or that we
   take them for granted, because none of us d o e s . - A . Thank
   you, sir.   We can also add that to Liverpool supporters, and
   I do not mean to be offensive towards your colleague.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Just to start with, you have spoken of the Liverpool
   supporters and you have been asked about it, but it may be
   important to note that you are not criticising them all,
   are you? - A. Sir, there were thousands, in fact the
   majority of those supporters were decent people.  This is
   what I am trying to get over.  I was not offensive towards
   Liverpool supporters.  I was offensive towards hooligans.

Q. And there was a significant element of that that day? - A.
   There was a lot of that, sir.

Q. But there was kindness shown to you and great courage and
   support given to you by Liverpool supporters? - A. Correct,
   sir.

Q. Was there a Mars bar? - A. Yes, sir, I had a family, and on
   reflection now at the time I wondered why the male, the female
   parents and the young lad - this is well into a void - after a
   lot of the hooligans had left and were still leaving, and my
   parentage was being put in question;  the family came and
   they stood beside me.  I got the impression they were there
                                              R. BURNS


for their protection.     This family were frightened.  I had a
Mars bar in my pocket which was part of my early morning
break, and I took it out and I handed to the youngster, "Are
you hungry?".     I gave it to the young kid, and I said, "We
will remember this day for different reasons, son".     That
was the final of it. He took it and the family said, "Thank
you very muc h " .




                            /Q. You handed the Mars
                             49


                                            R. BURNS



Q.   You handed the Mars bar over, did you? - A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   Your serial was on duty on the inside of the turnstiles?
     - A. We were, sir.

Q. Your boundary was gate B and the wall that separates the
   enclosure going towards the west stand? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q.   What you were observing at your turnstiles,   and what you
     have described, relates to those turnstiles   immediately
     in your view? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You have not been intending to describe the sort of
   conduct that witnesses have spoken of at turnstiles A to
   G? - A. I have not, sir.   I did not witness that.

Q. You could not see that? - A. I could not see that.

Q. It may be that in the evidence a lot gets rolled
   together, do you follow? - A. I agree, sir.

Q. Your specific experience at the turnstiles you were at,
   was it of a considerable number of people getting to the
   turnstiles and presenting themselves there without
   tickets? - A. That is what I formed an opinion of.    They
   definitely were there to get through without tickets.

Q. Was their behaviour determined? - A. There was an
   aggression and an arrogant manner.   If I had had one
   hundred men with me I could not have stopped that volume
   that came through there.   I had them coming over the top
   of the turnstiles, on to the roofing, initially just
   after half past two, and inviting them down to throw them
   out.   They would not come down, obviously, and in fact
   they were inciting their friends to join them.    As time
   wore on I felt as if I was getting a flood.    They were
   coming over the top of that wall in hoards.

Q. Did you notice tickets being passed out? - A. Yes, sir.
   Earlier on, probably after half past two I came across an
   elderly male who was handing tickets up to a young lad
   about fourteen or fifteen.   I had asked for this one to
   come down but he would not come near me.   An elderly
   gentleman appeared and he handed tickets up to this kid.

Q. Numbers of tickets? - A. Well, tickets - two or three - I
   cannot say, sir.    They were tickets.    His explanation
   to me when I got hold of him, I asked him why.     He said,
   "It's my son.    We got split up outside.    I was giving •
   him his ticket."    I accepted that explanation.    I had
   no other reason to do otherwise.    Minutes later whilst
   engaged in other matters at the turnstiles I again saw
                                          R. BURNS


this male   adult in my locality handing the same tickets
up to the   same individual.   He saw me and the excuse was
not valid   the second time.   He had gone.    He was off,
back into   gate C, the enclosure.   I got the impression,
sir, that   all he was doing was feeding tickets up to the
youngster   so he could feed them back down to outside.

The last witness who gave evidence spoke of people coming
through the turnstiles obviously without tickets and
making their way speedily off into the crowd.    Did you
face that? - A. Yes, sir, I chased two or three in until
eventually my body said, "Hey up, enough is enough".     I
had to give up.   There were too'many, sir.    As I say,
we kept a line, we tried it, it was a physical
impossibility to stop everyone.   Each man you caught had
to be either arrested by reason of his conduct, or he was
ejected out of gate C, which would seem to be the
easiest.

It would seem that very many got in without tickets then?
- A. In my opinion, sir, a lot got in without tickets.

May I ask you about the journey you made to the tunnel? -
A. The initial journey?

Yes.  It appeared from what you have said that the moment
from your becoming aware of a problem, to going into the
tunnel, was a fairly short time? - A. A very short time,
sir.

Of course, this is not a competition between you and
Mr. Morgan? - A. No, sir.

You were pre-occupied with what you and your men were
doing? - A. Yes, sir.

However, within a very short time    of   becoming aware of
the problem, is it right you were    in   and down the tunnel?
- A. That is correct, sir.

Not aware of what other serials may have been in there,
what Mr. Sykes may have been doing or... - A. I was not
even aware, sir, whether my own serial followed me down
there, or I followed them, or what happened.

You encountered at the top of the terraces individuals
who were coming out? - A. Trying to force their way out,
sir.   Sweating.

People who were coming up from somewhere down on the
terrace, you could not say how far or where they had
started from? - A. I do not know how far down, sir.
This was to the - again, it would be    pen 3, that iswhere
the majority were coming from, adult males.
                                       R. BURNS


Then you got to a stage where you observed casualties on
the terrace? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.   On the
ground.

Is this the picture we should have that despite those
people being on the ground, there were individuals around
them who were ignoring them? - A. Yes, sir.   As I have
tried to explain in my statement - to assist, bearing in
mind that the terraced area of Leppings Lane end was the
only area where the sun was shining directly into.    In
the sunshine it was a strong heat.   I had difficulty
breathing whilst I was in there due to the atmosphere,
the stale alcohol, the sweating, it was like a mass
hysteria.   Truthfully, to this day, I do not think these
people realised what had happened.    That is my own
honest opinion.  You get flashbacks, you try to reason
why, how did it happen.

Officer, one last matter.   Over the years of your
experience you must have encountered many, many crowds? -
A. Yes, sir.

Crowds who have had to wait their turmn? - A. And been
quite happy to do it, sir.

Not being able to get on as they would have wanted to? -
A. Including Liverpool fans, by the way, sir.

But not behaving as you observed on this day? - A. No,
sir.   I have never seen that.

There was something different about it? - A. Again, sir,
when you think back, this was pre-planned.   When you
think about it it was something that was conducted.    It
was planned.   They were going to get in at all costs.
That is my honest opinion of what was going on here.    It
was like a pre-planned invasion of a large amount of
hooligans.

             Re-Examined by MR. COLLINSt

Of course, a large number of those coming in were ticket
holders, were they not? - A. They were, sir.

A large number of those caught in the crush outside were
ticket holders? - A. They were, sir.

What you are saying is that there was a minority, as I
understand it, of those who did not have tickets who were
determined to get in? - A. Exactly, sir.   I make no
reference to Liverpool supporters when I say hooligans.
I am talking about the small percentage who had the full
intentions of behaving like hooligans, drunk, and they
were coming in there at all costs without tickets.
                              52


                                             R. BURNS


Q. There were many more involved in the crush than that
   minority? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. There were many more on the terraces involved in the
   crush than that minority? - A. Exactly, sir.   Again, I
   apologise to Liverpool people...

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You have no need to
     apologise.

           THE WITNESS:    I am speaking overall, sir.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:   Yes, of course.   Those crushed on
     the terraces that you have been describing, you think
     were caught up in the situation there and simply were
     unaware, for one reason or another, of what precisely was
     going on? - A. That was my impression, sir, and still is
     to this day.

           MR. PHILLIPS:    Constable Pearson please.

             POLICE CONSTABLE HELEN PEARSON Called

                   Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. Are you Constable Helen Pearson? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you in the serial, Serial 15, with Sergeant Burns? -
   A. Yes, I was.

Q. You were, of course, behind the turnstiles 9 to 16 at
   Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q. I want to go through one or two matters in your statement
   and take you to the time when the large gate opened, gate
   B? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you tell us what time that was? - A. No, sir.

Q. How close was it to three o'clock? - A. I would say it
   was quite close to three o'clock, but I am not aware of
   the exact time.

Q. Where were you when the gate was opened? - A. I was stood
   just in front of the gate, in front of the turnstiles.

Q. So you were on the turnstile side of gate B itself? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Were you looking to gate B? - A. No, I was looking
   towards the turnstiles.

Q. Looking at the people coming through the turnstiles? - A.
   Yes.
\ §
                                     53


                                                      H. PEARSON



      Q. What happened when the gate was opened?   Did you see who
         opened it, first of all? - A. I did not see who opened
         the gate.   I did not see the gate opening.   I was just
         aware of a sudden flood of people.   I had to stand back
         to avoid being caught up in the rush and trampled on.    I
         was stood against the wall of the turnstiles.

      Q. How many people do you say came through the gate when it
         was opened? - A. It is difficult to estimate numbers, but
         I would say between 200 and 300 people.

      Q. Where did those people go to? - A. They headed straight
         on from the gate and I presumed they were going down
         towards the north stand.   Yes, down there.

      Q. Towards the elevated section, just before you get to the
         north stand? - A. Yes, the majority of them seemed to
         head that way.   They just rushed in and it was difficult
         to see where...

      Q. Going effectively straight       ahead? - A. Yes.

      Q. How long was the gate open for? - A. I would say only     a
         couple of minutes.

      Q. Who closed it? - A. I did not see who closed the gate.

      Q. It was closed though?      - A. Yes.

      Q. When it was closed were there still people outside, could
         you tell? - A. I could not tell whether there were still
         people behind the gate.   There were still people waiting
         to get in at the turnstiles.

      Q.   At your   turnstiles, 9 to 16? - A. Yes.

      Q.    What did you do immediately after the gate was closed? -
           A. Resumed my duties on the turnstiles.

      Q. How long did you do that for? - A. I would say only
         another couple of minutes and then Sergeant Burns
         instructed the turnstile operators to close the doors.

      Q. To close the doors? - A. Yes.

      Q. Did you see the turnstile operator on your turnstile do
         that? - A. Yes.

      Q. What did you do then?   - A. Sometime in between that I was
         aware of a serial, or   a number of people, coming through
         gate B.    Somebody said there had been a pitch invasion.
         We were told by Sergeant Burns to remain where we were.
                           54


                                           H. PEARSON


   I wandered through the dividing wall to the back of the
   north stand to the tunnel.

Q. Can I just have this clear?   You say a number of people,
   or a serial, coming through gate B.   Do you mean to say
   it was opened again? - A. Yes, to let this serial
   through.

Q. The number of people, were they Police Officers in fact?
   - A. Yes.

Q. By that time were there many people about on the other
   side of the turnstiles, could you tell? - A. I could not
   tell, no.

Q. Were there many people about on your side of the
   turnstiles? - A. No, the area was deserted.

Q. You heard something about a pitch invasion and you were
   told to say where you were? - A. Yes.

Q. Where did your Sergeant go to? - A. At that time I think
   he was instructing the turnstiles operators to close
   their doors.

Q. You say you wandered off to the gap in the wall? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Were you with any other Officer? - A. Yes.    I was
   followed by PC Martin.

Q. Where did you go to? - A. We went up to the tunnel, to
   the back entrance of the tunnel, to see if we could see
   what was happening and then there were a number of people
   coming down the tunnel complaining of being crushed
   inside.

Q. At this time were there any people out in the courtyard
   behind turnstiles A to G? - A. There were only a couple
   of people.   A gentleman came out of the tunnel and asked
   directions for the way out.

Q. Could you see whether gate C was open   at that time or
   not? - A. No, I did not notice.

Q. You went up the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see anybody in any difficulties in the tunnel
   itself or just people being brought out? - A. There was
   nobody being brought out a that   time. There were one or
   two people in the tunnel making   their own way out,
   complaining of being crushed.   A gentleman took hold of
   my arm and told me there were some children at the front
                             55


                                             H. PEARSON


     of the pen who were being squashed and that was the
     reason I went into the tunnel.

Q. You went to the end of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you have a reasonably clear route through? - A. Yes,
     until I got to the back of the pen.    There was nobody in
     the tunnel at that time except one or two fans who were
     making their way out.

Q.   Into which pen did you go? - A. Into   pen 4.

Q.   So you went to the left when you got   to the end of the
     tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the other Constable go that way with you? - A. Yes,
   she was right behind me.

Q. That is Constable Martin? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got to the entrance to pen 4, at the back, what
   did you see? - A. All I could see was a large number of
   fans climbing on the central dividing fence to be pulled
   up by people who were in the seating area above.

Q. Did you know why they were doing that?   Could you see
   any reason for their doing that? - A. I could see that
   the pen was very full.   I do not know whether the match
   was still going on at that time.   I presume it must have
   been otherwise I can see no reason why they would not
   have come back up through the tunnel if they were being
   squashed.

Q. You mean these people who were climbing up were right at
   the tunnel end of the... - A. Yes.   They were in the
   mouth of the tunnel clambering up above.

Q. Did you try to do anything about this? - A. Yes.    I
   tried to stop them.    I pulled on one man's leg and told
   him to get down.    He took no notice of me.   Partly
   because I feared these people might fall and injure
   themselves and partly because I feared the overhanging
   seating area might collapse.

Q. You were concerned for the safety of those people and the
   people below? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you stay at the top of that pen for very long? - A.
   No, only a few minutes.   I pushed my way into that pen
   and as I did so I could see Officers at the front,
   standing on the fencing signalling for me to get people
   out from the back.

Q. Did you try to do that? - A. I tried, yes.
*                                56


                                                H. PEARSON


    Q. Did you have any success? - A. Not at first, no.    As I
       made my way into the pen I realised the seriousness of
       the situation.    I got hold of several fans and tried to
       push them out, but they just said, "I am not going.     I
       have paid for my ticket.    I have got a ticket.   I am
       watching the match**, and various other words.

    Q. At the back part of the pen did you see anybody with any
       sign of distress? - A. There were one or two distressed
       people who did make their way out.   They were the ones
       who were co-operative.

    Q.   Had they been coming out from further down or had they
         been starting, as it were,from the back of the pen? -   A.
         I think the crush was starting at the back of the pen.
         People were stood with their arms trapped down by their
         sides.   They could not move, even at the back.

    Q.   You were talking to people and telling them to go but
         they would not? - A. Yes.    It was very difficult to make
         myself heard above the noise.    I was screaming at them
         to get out, but...

    Q. You say you realised that the situation was serious.
       What made you realise the situation was serious from
       where you were at the back of the pen? - A. Several
       things.   I could see that the pen was full.   I could
       see there were people in distress, sweating, pale faced,
       and having difficulty breathing, and I could see the
       Officers at the front trying to get people to move
       backwards and get out.

    Q. Did you then go further down the pen with Constable
       Martin? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you then come to a worst situation than the one you
       had left? - A. Yes.

    Q. Tell us about that. - A. I pushed several people under
       the retaining the barrier.

    Q. Which way, forwards or backwards? - A. Backwards, trying
       to get them out.   As I got just in front of one of the
       barriers that adjoins the central dividing fence, by this
       time I had got separated from PC Martin, I was on my own
       in the crowd, I came to a pile of bodies.   There were
       about six or seven males and a female body lying on the
       top, face upwards, and that female was obviously dead.

    Q. Did anyone speak to you about that? - A. Yes.   What drew
       my attention to this was a youth who was screaming
       hysterically, "She's dead.  She's dead".   I made my way
       to him and looked down and saw this pile of bodies.
                              57


                                             H. PEARSON


Q. I wonder how accurately you can tell us where this was.
   Do you have before you a set of plans? - A. Yes.

Q. If you turn to the second drawing you see there a close
   up view of pens 3 and 4 with the barriers? - A. Yes.

Q. You see at the top the tunnel you come in and, of course,
   you were down to the left of that? -  A. Yes.

Q.   As you came through the tunnel.    To the right   on the
     plan? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you point out the barrier against which this pile of
   people was? - A. Yes.   It is that barrier there that
   adjoins the central dividing fence where it says "Design
   A".

Q. It is over half way down? - A. Yes.

Q. It is the first one you come to? - A. Yes.

Q. Out of the tunnel if you keep to the fence itself? - A.
   Yes.

Q.      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   This pile of people was on the
     upper side of that? - A. No, on the lower side.

Q. The pitch side of the barrier? - A. Yes.

Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:   You mentioned you had been pulling
     some people yourself under barriers? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you tell us which barrier that was?   - A. I think it
     must have been that barrier there.    As I came down I
     must have been pushed this way.    I pushed some people
     under the barrier here.




                 Q. That is the first one
                          58

                                     H. PEARSON


Q. That is the first one you come to out of the tunnel? - A.
   Yes, and then as I made my way down nearer the fence
   under this barrier, here, so that I could get to the man
   who was shouting.

o. So people were all right, were they, when you were helping
   them under the first barrier? - A. Yes, they were obviously
   distressed by nobody with any injuries until I got down
   there.
Q. Were you able to move the people away from behind this pile
   of bodies that you saw under that barrier? - A. Yes,
   because they could see that these bodies were there.  They
   could not get down to them themselves because of the crush
   of people and at first I could not get down to help them
   because of the crush of people that were standing around
   them and on top of them.

Q. Did you eventually get to them? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Had you cleared a space behind you at that stage? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you do when you got there? - A. I took hold of
   the man who was screaming hysterically and pushed him under
   the barrier to get him out of the way as he was actually
   standing on top of the woman who was dead.

Q. He was standing on top .... A. Yes, there was nowhere else
   for him to go.  I pushed him under.  I then tried to get
   down to the woman myself and couldn't.  I feared that I
   was going to get trampled on.  I instructed some of the
   fans who were stood about to get hold of this woman, I
   could not lift her myself, and they carried her out under
   the barrier and then I did the same, there were about six
   or seven males.  I don't know whether they were dead or
   alive.  They were all certainly unconscious.

Q. Were they laid out on the floor? - A. Yes, they were all in
   a pile.
Q. And they were underneath this woman, were they? - A. Yes.

 0. Did you get any assistance here from any other Police Officers?
    - A. No, there was no other Police Officer near me at that
    time.
 Q. Did you subsequently get assistance from Police Officers?
    Did others come down the tunnel? - A. I did not see another
    Police Officer until I actually helped carry the last man
    from the pile out myself and as I got into the tunnel
    there were a lot of Police Officers in the tunnel at that
    time.  I did not see another Police Officer as I was
    coming out of the pen.

 Q. So you were taking this last person out through the tunnel
    with the assistance of whom? - A. Several male fans.
                          59


                                     H. PEARSON


Q. Do you know what happened tb this person that you took out?
   - A. When we got him out, as soon as I found a space just
   in front of the entrance to the tunnel I put him down.  He
   was coming round then.  I put him in the recovery position
   and I instructed One of the fans to stay with him and make
   sure that he was all right.  I then moved on to help with
   other casualties.

Q. Do you know for sure whether any of those people you took
   out from that pen died? - A. I know for sure that the woman
   who was on top was dead as I got to her in the pen.

Q. But the others, could you say one way or the other? - A. No,
   I did not see where they went.

Q. I think you had to spend a lot of time in the rear enclosure
   assisting people? - A. Yes, I spent the remainder of the
   time I was there in the rear enclosure giving first aid to
   people.

Q. Then I think the ambulances arrived? - A. Eventually, yes.
   It seemed a long time before any ambulances arrived.

Q. Do you know in fact how long it was? - A. I think it was
   about half-past-3 before any ambulances arrived.

Q. Was that just your impression from   what had been happening,
   the time that it took? - A. Well I   know that there were a
   lot of bodies in that area, people   wandering amongst them
   looking for lost relatives.  All I   know it was a long time
   before the ambulances arrived.

Q. How about the priority of people getting on to ambulances.
   Did you have anything to do with that? — A. Eventually,
   at first as I say I stayed immediately at the entrance
   to the tunnel helping where I could and giving first aid
   to those who needed it. As those people were looked after,
   when the ambulances came they parked in the area alongside
   the river, I believe that is Gate C. The casualties were
   being carried out there.  They were being lined up against
   a wall in order of priority.  The dead bodies were put on
   one side and the live people put on the other side.

Q. Who was putting them into priority order? - A. At that
   time I think there was a doctor.  He was a fan.  He said
   he was a doctor.  He was running around,I think ltrying to
   restore some order into the proceedings but I don't know
   if he was actually getting anywhere.

Q. You were carrying out his instructions? - A. No, he did
   not actually give any instructions to me.

Q. But you nevertheless did help to put them into a priority
   order? — A. Yes.
                                    H. PEARSON


       MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, thank you very much.


                Cross-Examined by MR. MULLER:

Just one matter.  Am I right in understanding that when
you came through the tunnel the real problem that confronted
you was trying to get people to go down anc obvious opening
which Was the tunnel? - A. Yes.

And all around you people, for whatever reason, just would
not move? - A. Yes, that is quite right.


              Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

Officer, you acknowledge that doing all that you were doing,
performing the task that you did, conceptions of time
deceive one.  Would you agree with that? — A. I would agree
with that, yes.

Just for the record, as you have made it public, year
impression was that ambulances seemed to take a long time
in coming.

      We see from the video that the first time that we
note supporters coming out from the tunnel area, the time
distance between that being seen on the video and the
first ambulance arriving was 35 seconds.  Does that surprise
you? - A. Is that on the pitch, sir, or in the area behind
the tunnel?

No, no, this is behind the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
Yes, that does surprise me.

And within a space of about ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What time was that,
Mr. Kallipetis?

      MR. KALLIPETIS:  Sir, 15.12.43 the video shows
supporters dazed congregating back around the turnstile
area A-G and at 15.13.18 the first ambulance comes into
the Leppings Lane terrace.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose the video can't
show what is immediately behind the Stand?

      MR. KALLIPETIS:  Of course, Officer, you understand,
the same as the view, that you could only get to a scene
once you were called there? - A. Yes.

       MR. KALLIPETIS:   No further questions sir, thank
you.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr. Woodward, I address you
                                   A. AITKIN


because you are representing the South Yorkshire Police.
I don't propose to say each time it seems appropriate,
but obviously whatever else one says about this operation
there is no doubt that many many Officers saved life and
did heroic things and I don't propose to say anything
to individuals, it would be invidious to do so, but that
is clear, whatever else may not be at the moment, or
whatever else may be clear to other effect.

      MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, thank you for that.  It is
appreciated that man worked to exhaustion, sir, and beyond
it.


           POLICE CONSTABLE ALEXANDER AITKIN Called

                   Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Police Constable Alexander Aitkin, is that right? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

On Serial 15.  I am not going to take you through matters
that have already been dealt with.  I think you have heard
what your Sergeant said about the build-up and the state
of the fans and so on.  Do you agree with that? - A. I do
to a certain extent, yes.

What are your reservations? - A. Up until 20-to-3 the fans
were really good, really well behaved, and even after that
they were well behaved.  There was a few, an element that
I think you find at any football match and they follow any
club that they just get out of hand.

So your impression was that it was a small element of trouble
makers but the vast majority were victims of the situation
outside, namely that crush? - A. I believe this is true
in any football.  If you get 200 out of 25,000 you have
got problems on your hands, 200 hooligans.

Can I ask you about the opening of the gate and we are
talking I think about Gate B, aren't we? - A. Yes, that
is correct.

Were you   aware of moves to open that gate? - A. Yes, I was.

You were inside it of course at the time.  Just tell us
what you saw and heard? - A. I was at Turnstiles 15 and 16
which was nearest to the gate and obviously we assisted the
Stewards earlier on ejecting people or letting Police Officers
into the ground.

      About 20-to or quarter-to a P.C., I don't know who
he was, a youngish lad come running round and he said:
"We have got to open the gate".He said to the Steward:
"We have got to open the gate". The Steward said:    "No
way are we going to open this gate", so I came over.   I
                               A. AITKIN


saw they were having words with each other and I sayss   "What
is the problem?" and this young P.C. says:  "We have got
to open the gate.  I have been instructed to come round here
to get this gate open".

Did he tell you who had instructed him? - A. No, I did not
ask him.  He just said:  "They have opened the other gate^
and I have been told to come round here and open this one .

Which was he referring to "the other gate"? - A. Gate C, I
believe.  I said: "Well we can't open it at this stage.
I said half of them out there have not got tickets." That
was the impression we were getting from fans that were
coming through the turnstiles. They were complaining about
the build-up.  I think what may be had happened is that
people had got to the turnstiles without tickets, were
getting turned back but they had nowhere to go and you had
got the fans with the tickets coming and they were like
building up outside the turnstiles, so you got a mass of
may be 50-100, I don't know, but they were preventing
people with tickets getting to the turnstiles and they
were like blocking them.

I see, that is what you believed and you thought these
of course would all get in if the gate was opened? - A.
If the gate had been opened the fans with tickets and
them without tickets would all get in.

What did he say when you raised this objection? - A. Well
he said he had been sent around because the other gate
had been opened and he had been told that they should be
opened.
So in fact was the gate opened? - A. The gate was opened.
I think about 200 fans got in and then with P.C. Ford who
worked with me and the Stewards we managed to shut the
gate again.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   This is Gate B, is it? - A. Yes.

      MR. COLLINS: Any idea how long? Was it a matter of
seconds or more than that? - A. Well to allow 200 people,
they just spilled in.  In fact the fans on the other side
contrary to Gate C where they went straight in, the fans
at Gate B would have been lined up with their sides to
the gate which would have meant when the gate opened they
would come in sideways rather than rush in.

 Is that the impression you got .... A. That is what
 happened because they queued up for the Turnstiles A-G.

Well I know, but did they appear to come in sideways the
first lot? - A. Well the first lot did, yes, because the
gate probably surprised them when it Opened.  They were
walking towards the turnstiles and the gate was on the
left-hand side.  It was not as if they were directly coming
into it.
                                  A. AITKIN


And they went, one would assume their natural direction would
be round the north side of the West Stand.  Is that right?
- A. Yes, they would go up to I think it is 5 and 6 the pens.

That is the way they would naturally go.  Is that the way
they in fact went? - A. Well we were trying to Slow them
down.  We said:  "Look, slow down.  You will not miss the
game.  Just calm down and just go up there.  There is plenty
of room up there. Just take your time."

So you were directing them round that way? - A. Yes, we
were telling them to go up there:  "Take your time.  There
is no rush".

How did you know there was plenty of room round there? -
A. I did not know that but I told them that to take their
time.

Can I ask you now about a little bit later when things had
cleared and we get, or you get the message about going to
the pitch.  Is that right? - A. I did not get a message to
go to the pitch.

You were told by your Sergeant? - A. No.   I was working at
the back of the turnstiles.  We more or less cleared every­
body from there and I was walking up towards, my duty was
to go to where I had sent the fans before.   A lad come
running out of the tunnel through the middle tunnel towards
the gap in the wall there and he shouted to me and P.C. Ford:
"You want to get in there it is bedlam". At first I thought
he meant they had been fighting, so I ran up the tunnel
and there was one or two coming out out of breath and he
said:  "We are getting crushed in there".

It would seem, from what you are saying, that you are yet
another first into the tunnel? - A. No, I am not first
in the tunnel because when I got in there I remember seeing
Sergeant Burns.

I see, you got there after Sergeant Burns? - A. Yes.  He
was trying to make his way into Pen 4.  I tried to make
my way into Pen 3.

First of all when you went down the tunnel were there people
coming out or not? - A. Not many.  There was a couple had
come out.

When you got to the end of the tunnel you were faced no
doubt with a sea of bodies, if that is the right expression?
- A. Yes.

What did you try to do? - A. I tried to move people out.     I
said:  "Come on let's      have you back a bit".   It was
obvious that there were people trying to get out but people
would not move.   There was some at the top that just would
not move.   I asked them to move and they replied:   "I have
paid for ray ticket and I am stopping".
                            64


                                       A. AITKIN


Q. They told you in no uncertain terms that they weren't?
   - A. I told one or two of them in no uncertain terms that
   they had got to go.

Q. When were you first aware that there were people who were
   injured in that crowd? - A. I must have gone in abbut 3,
   4, 5 yards and I saw a lad on the ground.

Q. This is in Pen 3, is it, the right-hand one? - A. Yes.

Q. You say you saw a lad on the ground.  What state was he in?
   - A. He appeared to me to be unconscious at that time.

Q. Have you any idea at all roughly where that would have
   been? You have got that plan in front of you.   Can you
   help at all as to where this lad was? - A. Perhaps the
   first crash barrier as you come in down here, just in
   that area.

Q.    So what drew your attention to him?     Did you see him or
     did someone point him out? - A. No,    I saw him lying on
     the floor.

Q. Yes. - A. I said to a couple of the fans:  "Give us a hand.
   We will get him outside back to the back of the tunnel".

Q.   Did you do that? - A. Which we did,yes.   We got to the
     back of the tunnel.  There was one or two more casualties
     out there by this time.

Q. I think you were able to hand him over to .... A. There
   was a lad come who said he was a male nurse.   I had given
   him heart massage.   He said:  "He has got a pulse.  Put
   him in the recovery position and he will be okay".   There
   was a couple of fans about and he said:   "Keep your eye
   on him" and then I went back in.

Q.   You went back in. Where did you go on the second time you
     went back in? - A. I went back the same way.

Q. But where did you go in the terrace? - A. I went back down
   to the same place.  It had thinned out a bit but there was
   still a lot of people hanging about that would not move.

Q. So you got them back? - A. I managed to get a few of them
   back and got another man out the same way.  He was conscious
   but he was just breathless and that.

Q. Was he in roughly the same area as the last one? - A. Yes,
   but he could have moved you see.  He could have been
   wandering about, I don't know.

Q. Did you eventually get to a stage when you were helping
   people through one of the perimeter gates? - A. Yes, I
   got down to the gate.
                                     A. AITKIN



Is that the gate at the front? - A. Yes.

Where that pile of bodies was? - A. Gate 3.

You having come down from the back helped to get people
out from that, did you? - A. Yes.

         MR. COLLINS:   Yes, thank you Officer.   That is all
I ask.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Officer, before the gate was opened fans were coming into
the Stand area, that is Turnstiles 1-16 being abusive to
Police Officers because they were blaming them for the
chaos outside? - A. What time would this be sir?

This was before the gate was opened, so sometime ....
- A. To be honest, we had a complaint from most of the fans,
well not most of the fans, a number of fans all day and
the biggest complaint they had was that the Liverpool
supporters had got the wrong end.

Yes, we know about that complaint. - A. That was the
biggest complaint we got.

There came a stage, I think in your statement you refer
to the abusive term "dick head", that you were being
called dick heads because of the way in which the crowd
outside was now out of control? - A. Yes.  The biggest
complaint was coming from the fans at the other side of
the turnstile.  Once they got through they were not so
bad.  They had got in and they were quite happy.   One or
two were a bit breathless and one or two said:   Look, you
want to do something about that out there .

And this was before the request was made to you to open
the gate? - A. Yes, it probably would have been, yes,
but once the gate was opened the problem had gone.

Now the next thing is this:  you looked at your watch at
some stage before the fan ran out of the tunnel to say
that there was bedlam inside? - A. Yes, I looked at my
watch when it had quietened a bit.  I can remember it
was 2-minutes-past-3 and I said to P.C. Ford:   They will
have kicked-off by n o w " .

 That is right, that is what I am coming to.

       When you first got into the   tunnel and tried to
 move fans from the rear, the problem was that the game
 at that stage was still going on,   wasn't it? - A. I have
 no recollection of the game going on.
                                 A. AITKIN


It would have been a minute or so after 2-minutes-past-3?
- A. Yes, may be.

That is right, is it?    £ don't want to trap you into
an answer, Officer? - A. I can't say whether the game was
going on or not.

I know you can't. - A. If that is it it would be about
two or t h r e e ®   after that, after 2-minutes-past-3.

You look at your watch at 2-minutes-past-3 and it is a
minute or so after that that you go into the tunnel
because of the fan running out and the people are reluctant
to move out? - A. Yes.

The only thing I just want to ask you to get everything
into perspective, after the tragedy there was of course
a lot of abuse being hurled at the Police? - A. Yes, there
was and there was a lot of sympathy as well.




                  /Q. That is what I am coming to
*   ,



                                     67

                                                            A. AITKEN


        Q. That is what I am coming to.  The majority of fans, even after
           the tragedy had occurred, leaving the stadium were sympathetic
           to the Police for what was being done, and indeed many shook
           your hand, I think? - A. Yes, I think I said that in my
           statement.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. GIBSON-WATT:

        Q. One matter, Officer.  I think after you had done the rescue
           work in the pens and you then went out on the pitch and did
           some work, you went back round to the back of the Leppings
           Lane stand,  Is that right? - A. That is correct.

        Q. Was there an incident when you saw someone who was apparently
           a supporter and someone who you supposed was the Chairman of
           Liverpool Football Club examining a gate? - A.Yes.  They were
           not examining the gate.  He came round and I heard some fans
           say, I can't remember his name, that he was the Chairman of
           the Football Club, and as they approached me I would be about
           15 yards from the gate.

        Q.   Which gate? -A. Gate C.     The fan was saying to this man,
             "Look, if you look at the gate it is not damaged.      We have not
             broken it down", and I said, "Look, nobody has said that the
             gate has been broken dow n " .

        Q.   When you said that to them did   you get any reply from them?      -
             A. No, I did not.

        Q. It seems then that a rumour.... - A. There were all sorts of
           rumours went off that day.    In fact, a lot of it was based on
           rumour.   A lot ofpeople got the wrong information,    fans,
           Policemen.   To be   honest, the communication as far as the fans
           were concerned, they didn't know a lot about what had
           happened.   Even at that stage people were coming up to me and
           asking if anybody    had died in the stadium, and that would be
           about 4 o'clock time.

        Q. About 4 o'clock time? - A. Roughly that time.        I don't know.

                           Cross-Examined bv MR. KALLIPETIS:

        Q. Mr. Aitken, were you wearing your helmet at this match? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. And were you wearing it when you went into the tunnel? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Would you please turn to the bundle of photographs, composite
           album 2.

                    MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir, I am grateful to junior counsel
             to the Treasury Solicitor.  This is now album F, and I gather
             they will be circulated.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I wonder whether it really is a
             good idea, because we have been referring to them by these
t 't   '   *

                                           68

                                                                 A. AITKEN


                    other names all along up to now.   What of A, B, C, D and E?

                         MR. KALLIPETIS:   They are all inside as well.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You might like to consider it over
                    the adjournment as to   what is the most convenient     course,
                    because I think with a little assistance from Mr. Poole we can
                    probably usually get the right volume up.   We could do with
                    him up here, too!

               Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Composite album 2. Go to the back,
                    please, 2/17.  That is 15.06.  If you come back 4 photographs
                    to 2/8.  That is at 5-past-3? - Yes.

               Q. You see there the tunnel at the top left-hand     corner of the
                  picture? - A. Yes.

               Q. Would you agree with me there are no Police helmets visible at
                  that stage? - A. No, I can't see any there.

               Q. May we take it that it was some time after 5-past-3  at least
                  before any Officers before you entered that pen? - A. There
                  does not appear to be   anybody there at that time.

               Q. I refer you to page 4  of your statement, please. Can you tell
                  us when this statement was made? - A. I wrote the notes out
                  when I got home that night about 7 o'clock.

               Q. So the matters were still fairly fresh in your memory? - A.
                  Yes.

               Q. At the bottom of page 4 you describe the situation which
                  you encountered as this:

                         "On arrival at the end of the tunnel I could see some
                         spectators trying to climb the perimeter fence, but with
                         the amount of spectators in that section which is the
                         centre south section, it was impossible to get near the
                         front".

                    - A. Yes.

               Q. Is that describing your position, that it was impossible at
                  that stage to get near the front? - A. Yes.

               Q. Two last matters.   You refer on page 5 of your statement to
                  St. John's Ambulances arriving.   I think they were South
                  Yorkshire ambulances in fact, were not they, or do you not
                  remember? - A. No, I can remember some St. John's Ambulance
                  people, first-aid men, at the back, some nurses I think they
                  were.   They were not actually ambulancemen.  They were first-
                  aiders .

               Q. At the top of that page you refer to yourself and another
                  Officer - this is about 7 lines down - carrying out a man who
                  was unconscious and took him to the back.  Can you recall
                  whether you took him to the back.... - A. I took him out
f t '


                                     69

                                                           A. AITKEN


              through the tunnel.

         Q.   And did you then take him across the yard? - A. No.

         Q.   You d o n ’t? - A. I took him just outside the tunnel. Itwas
              still reasonably quiet out there.     There may be about 10
              people out there at that time, including people that were
              getting treatment.

         Q. There were already people getting treatment at that stage? -
            A. I think there were a couple sat against a wall.  This is
            where the St. John's Ambulance men seeing to them.

         Q. Thank you very much.

                            Cross-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD:

        ' Q. Officer, i want to ask you first of all about an answer you
             gave to Mr. Collins, because language is rather important in
             this case, because headlines tend to be made of answers and
             questions. It was put to you by M r . Collins, and you agreed
             with it, and I am not sure that either he or you intended
             quite what the impression may have been.   When you got to the
             end of the tunnel - do you follow? - A. Yes.

         Q. The question that was put to you was that you were faced with
            a sea of bodies? - A. Yes.

         Q.   And you agreed with that. -A. Yes.

         Q.    In fact what you were faced with was a sea of people. - A.
              Yes.

         Q. And at that stage you were not aware when you came to the
            tunnel quite what it was that happened? - A. As I said earlier
            I believed they had started fighting.  That was my first
            impression.  As I was going the tunnel I could realise.

         Q. Forgive me if it appears to be pedantic, but it may be
            important in terms of what people say and write.  When you
            came to the end of the tunnel you did not know what it was
            that had happened there? - A. No.

         Q. And you were confronted with a sea of people? - A. Yes.

         Q. And it was not until some time later that you learned that
            there were any bodies in there? - A. No.

         Q. Is that right? - A. Yes.

         Q. May I go back now to what was happening at the turnstiles. ;
            You were confronted by people coming through who were making
            complaint? - A. Yes.

         Q. And the complaint that you got time and time again was that
            there were Liverpool people who because of the choice of ends
            had not got tickets? - A. Yes.
V'Jr'
                                    70

                                                           A. AITKEN



        Q. So this was a complaint raised at the time people had been
           forced through or come through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

        Q. And they, many of them, were attributing what they were
           experiencing to a shortage of tickets? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you also observe a number of people coming through the
           turnstiles or endeavouring to come through who in fact had not
           got tickets? - A. No, mostly they were getting turned away.
           It was like I said earlier on with the turnstile men, they
           bang on the window.  We went across, "What’s the problem?".
           "There's one who had no ticket but he's gone".  He could only
           have gone a couple of feet.

        Q.   In the throng of the people at the turnstiles wanting to come
             in and see the game there were a considerably number ofpeople
             who you observed in fact did not have tickets? - A. Yes.

        Q. Now I want to ask you about another matter.  The gate B you
           saw opened through which a considerable number of people came,
           was a gate which really had got nothing to do with your
           turnstiles? - A. No, that was for the terrace turnstiles that
           they were queueing.  Our turnstiles were for the stand.

        Q. The people who were queueing for the turnstiles by the side of
           gate B were queueing to go into the terraces? -A. Yes.

        Q.   They had got the purple signs up? - A. Yes.

        Q.   When gate B opened that relieved the pressure at the
             turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Those people that came through gate B, they went towards the
             North Stand, did they? - A. They go towards the terracing up
             towards the North Stand.    They couldn't get in the North
             Stand.  There was a partition.

        Q. They went up.  If you follow the line of the pointer - take it
           to the gate again, please.  If you follow the line the usher
           points, that is the way they went, is it? - A. That is the way
           they would go, yes.

        Q. They made their way in the direction of the North Stand? - A.
           Yes.

        Q.   They did not make their way in the direction of the centre
             terrace? - A. No.  Having said that, when they went through,
             we directed them that way.  They could have easily, because
             there was quite a lot of people milling about, if they wanted
             to they could have made their way to the tunnel, but the
             majority of the flow went that way.

        Q. The general thrust of it was towards the North Stand? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Did you see whether many turned and went through the wall to
5   -   v

                                         71


                                                                A. AITKEN


                 go to the right? - A. I didn't, really.

            Q. Through the narrow entrance?    - A. When it opened, we made sure
               they went up that way, but we    had also the problem with people
               coming over the turnstiles as   well at   that time. Soreally    I
               was saying, "That way.  That    way".

            Q. They could, by going in that direction, get into the North
               tunnel? - A. Yes.

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you very much.

                             POLICE SERGEANT PAUL BURMAN Called:

                                  Examined by MR. COLLINS:

            Q.   Sergeant Paul Burman? - A. Yes, sir.

            Q.   Serial 13, on duty in the West Stand?     - A. Yes, sir.

            Q.   Just one preliminary matter.   Was it any part of your duties
                 as you understood them to monitor the filling of the pens in
                 the terraces? - A. No, sir.

            Q. When you were in that stand I think you were stationed for
               much of the time at the front? - A. Yes.  I had extra two on
               my serial that day.  I had two officers deployed on either of
               the foot of the stairs leading up into the West Stand.

            Q.   You were aware of complaints from many people about the ticket
                 allocation? - A. yes, sir.

            Q. People saying Liverpool should have had the other end? -A.
               Yes, that was from a very early stage.

            Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     May I just ask this.    You   say   that
                 was from a very early stage? - A. Yes, myLord.

            Q. What did you understand their gripe really to be about it? -
               A. Their gripe really being, I summed it up as hurt pride as
               though the Liverpool fans felt they should have by right the
               larger Kop end of the ground.

            Q. But that was at a time as I understand or began at a time when
               there had not been any crushing? - A. No, this was from some
               time before 2 o'clock, my Lord.

            Q.       MR. COLLINS:    I think you obviously could see down into
                 the terraces, and one of your duties was to stop people
                 climbing up from the terraces, was not it? - A. That was one
                 of them, yes, sir.

            Q. I want you to remember if you can a a time which you put in
               your statement as about 2 o'clock when you were at the front.
               What was the state of the pens at that time? -A. I described
               them as being full at 2 o'clock.
K   JK




                                     72

                                                                   P. BURMAN


         Q. That was your impression? - A. Full but not bursting, but yes,
            in general terms I would describe the pens as being full at 2
            p.m.

         Q.   Of 3 and 4 which appeared to fill quicker? - A. 3.

         Q.   I think you were looking down about 2 when you were aware of
              some young man who was doing things he should not have been
              doing? - A. Which one are you referring to, sir? The one on
              the barrier or on the wall?

         Q. No, on the wall? - A. On the wall, yes, sir.    There were
              several, but he was the first.

         Q. And when you told him to get down he took no notice of you? -
            A.  That is a polite way of putting it, yes, sir.

         Q. In   fact he told you to fuck off? - A. Yes, and gesticulated
            likewise, sir.

         Q. This imagine did not please you? - A. No, not at all.

         Q. So  what did you do about it? - A. He knew by lowering himself
            that I could not reach him, so I went out of the West Stand,
            down through the tunnel on to the terraces with a view to
            getting this man.

         Q. Was this on your own? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. Where did you go? - A. I came out of the West Stand, to the
            back of the West Stand, through the tunnel, the central
            tunnel, leading into pen....

         Q. We are now just about 2-ish - just after 2? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. Carry on. - A. I went to the rear of the tunnel, walked down
            the tunnel with a view to see if I could still see this same
            youth.  I could not get into pen 3.

         Q.   Why not? - A. Because of the persons there.  I could have
              forced myself in if I had wanted.  There was room to force
              myself into it but being alone I did not wish to do that and
              put myself in a position of peril.

         Q. So the numbers there were such that even at round 2 o'clock
            you would have had to forced your way in order to get in? - A.
            Yes, sir.

         Q. Did you in fact decide against it as you told us, and go back
            up on to the stand? - A. I did have sight where this youth had
            been stood, but by that time he had got down, or whatever.  He
            had disappeared.

         Q.   Did you go back up and go back to your post, and I think you
              noticed other youths doing probably the same sort of thing
              from time to time, but decided there was not any point in
              trying to go down? - A. Yes, sir.
'   *

                                  73

                                                            P. BURMAN



        Q. You were beginning to describe a youth on the barrier? - A. I
           saw two youths on that barrier.

        Q. That barrier being the one that eventually collapsed? - A.
           That is correct, sir.

        Q. What were they doing, these two youths? - A. The first one was
           stood, looking out of the back of the West Stand, on the left-
           hand side of the barrier.  He was climbing up on to the
           barrier, standing on top of the barrier, being supported by
           his colleagues around him, and he was doing this jeering and
           chanting and leading in the singing and encouraging them to
           sign and chant, and generally just jumping up and down on top
           of the barrier.

        Q. Relatively harmless? - A. Relatively harmless.

        Q. What about the other one? - A. The other one was on the right-
           hand side of the barrier, and he kept climbing on to the
           barrier and I can only describe it as diving into a swimming
           p o o l . He kept diving out on to the heads of those above him
           and in front of him.

        Q. How many times did he do this? - A. May be 10, 20 times,   I saw
           him do it.

        Q. Did it seem to please those on whom he dived? - A. Until the
           last stage, they were having a laugh and a joke about it,
           until what I presume was the last time, the last time I saw
           him do it anyway, when he probably must have caught someone or
           hurt someone, and this lad obviously turned round to
           remonstrate with him and made it plain he was not pleased with
           his conduct.

        Q. And it stopped.  What sort of time did this happen? - A. That
           was after that incident with the second youth, in the interim
           I had been to change my radio.  So that would be getting on to
           2.15 time, something like that.

        Q. Your radio had gone dead on you? - A. There was a lot of
           crackling.  It was not working correctly at all.

        Q. Did you keep an eye on the pens as time drew on? - A. I did.

        Q. What was your impression.  You said they were in your view
           full at 2 o'clock.  Did people continue to come into them? -
           A. Yes, sir.

        Q. So they got fuller? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did it occur to you at any stage that they were getting
           overcrowded? - A. Nothing of serious proportions, sir, no.

        Q. Did it occur to you at any stage they would get overcrowded
           unless something was done to stop more people going into them?
           - A. No, my answer to that would be that the people who were
                             74


                                                           P . BURMAN


     in those pens were there because they wanted to be there.
     Every football match I have policed at Hillsborough people
     tend to be like that.  I have worked both ends of the ground.
     On the Kop there will be acres of open space to their right,
     but for some reason they want to assemble in compact numbers
     in the centre of the back of the Kop.

Q. I follow that, but were you aware there was a limit, a safety
   limit, on the numbers that should be in those pens? - A . I
   presume there would be, sir, but what it is I don't know.

Q.   You did not think it necessary for you to do anything positive
     because of what you saw underneath you? - A. No, sir.

Q.   Were you aware whether control had a view of the pens? -      A.
     Being raised so high they would have some sort of view,
     obviously.

          MR. COLLINS:    Would that be convenient?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, sir.   2 o'clock.

                         (Luncheon Adjournment)
