                 M ik e H a l l , M e m b e r   of   P a r l ia m e n t   fo r   W eaver V a le




                                  HOUSE
Our Ref: MH/MF                         L O N D\


The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                                                                   ">/'

29th March 1999

Dear Jack,

Re: Hillsborough Disaster

I wrote to you regarding the above on the 29th January 1999 (for ease o f reference see attached
copy).

As o f todays date I am yet to receive a reply.

Could you please ensure that you give this letter your full attention and that I receive a response
as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely,




Mike Hall MP




                           Office 8, Castle Park, Frodsham, Cheshire WA6 6UJ
             Tel 01928 735000 • Fax 01928 735250 • e-mail: michael.hall@geo2.poptel.org.uk
Our Ref: MH/MF

The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT

29th January 1999

D ear Jack,

Re: Hillsborough Disaster

As you know I have been trying to help my constituent Eddie Spearritt establish what happened
to him at Hillsborough between 3.00pm and 5.00pm.

The Stuart-Smith Scrutiny recognises there is doubt about when Mr Spearritt was admitted to
hospital. Stuart-Smith stated “from the hospital records as to precisely when Mr Spearritt arrived
at hospital     some suggest it was 5.00pm, others that it could have been earlier” .

This statement clearly implies there are at least two sets o f records, however I have only been
able to trace one set o f records.

I understand that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had notes taken o f his informed meetings with
everyone he interviewed in respect o f his Scrutiny Report. He also had transcripts taken o f his
formal meetings and he usually followed up these meetings with correspondence.

Can you please let me have copies o f all such notes, transcripts and correspondence in relation
to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s dealing with Dr Wardrope.

I look forward to your reply in due course.

Yours sincerely,




M ike Hall MP
