From: Paul Pugh                                         cc:   Mr Boys Smith
      Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit                Miss Sinclair
      Room 529                                                Mr Granatt
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                       Mr K Sutton
      0171 273 3141                                           Mr Evans, ABCU
                                                              Mr Butler, CD
       28 August 1997                                         Mr A Cory
                                                              Ms Hellmuth
                                                              Ms Hutcheon
                                                              Mr Clifford, ABCU
                                                              Mr Edmundson
                                                              Mr Sedgwick
                                                              Mr Jones
                                                              Miss McCombie
                                                              Mr Park      /
                                                              Mr Pyne *
                                                              Ms Clifford, CD
                                                              Mr Bone
Clare Sumner


HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

Before the summer break, the Home Secretary appointed Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the
Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster in 1989.

2.     This is just to confirm that the Judge has started work and the scrutiny
unit can be contacted via its Secretary, Chris Bone, on extension 2512 at
Queen Anne’s Gate (room 1106, fax 273 2007). I expect that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith will be seeing family members of some of those who died and
others who believe they have fresh evidence during late September or
October. Most of these meetings will probably be in Liverpool and I anticipate
local or national press coverage then.

3.    The Judge has said that he hopes to make his report to the Home
Secretary by the end of the year. This report will be published.

4.       Early indications are that some of the people the Judge will see will be
critical of the way in which the inquests on the 96 victims were handled. I am
copying this to ABC Unit interests as well as to the Ministerial offices and
others who have been involved up to now.




                                               PAUL PUGH



F:\OPPU\HOU\MISC\PP0340MA.DOC
