From: Peter Edmundson                                     cc   Mr Michael
      Operational Policing                                     Mr O’Brien
      Policy Unit                                              Mr Boys Smith
      Room 527, QAG                                            Mr Pugh
      S 273 2621                                               Mr Granatt
                                                               Mr Bone
                                                               Mr Warner
                                                               Mr Owen

          19 August 1997


Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH: CORRESPONDENCE FROM LIVERPOOL CITY
COUNCIL

Issue

How to respond to the letter from Colin Moneypenny, the Committee Clerk to the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party at Liverpool City Council.

Timing and Recommendation

2.     Routine. I recommend that you write to Mr Moneypenny as in the attached
draft.

Consideration

3.     Mr Moneypenny has written on behalf of Liverpool City Council to
congratulate you on your decision to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct the
scrutiny into the disaster.

Handling

4.       There are no handling issues.




                                    Peter Edmundson




:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90180# 1
DRAFT LETTER FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

Colin Moneypenny Esq
Committee Clerk
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH



Thank you for your recent letter about my decision to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to conduct a scrutiny into the Hillsborough disaster.


I reached my decision after full consideration of the many representations which have
been received, and in view of the need to establish whether there was a case for a
further public inquiry into the disaster. It is important that we ensure no matter of
significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken.


I enclose for your information a copy of my statement to the House, which includes
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that I have undertaken to
make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.


It is my earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.




:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90180# 1
