                                                               London Fire Brigade


LFCDA
                                   ‘i ' O                      Fire Prevention Branch
                                                               Queensborough House
                           n   .   T J      e . v l v t 't .   1 2 -1 8 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7TJ

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY                        Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                                               G D Clarkson QFSM BA (Hons)

                                                               Telephone 01-587 4000
The Secretary to the                                           Telex
  Inquiry into the Hillsborough                                My extension
  Stadium Disaster                                             My reference       IF S /ADV /8 /2
50 Queen Annes Gate                                            Your reference
London     SW1H 9AT                                            Date          jU f August 1989




Dear        ,

THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - FORMAL SUBMISSION BY THE
LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

I refer to the letter, dated 19 July 1989, from S.R. Forster, Esq, LLB,
Director of Law and Administration, London Borough of Brent, in which he
writes to 'correct anumber of factual mistakes in the submission (from the
LFCDA) and to draw your attention to certain important omissions'.

I have given careful consideration to the points made by Mr Forster.
Whilst acknowledging some points which could have been open to
misinterpretation, Imust standby the majority of the points made in our
submission as matters which give rise to serious concern. I do not propose
to repeat them at length in this letter but would draw your attention to
the contents of the enclosed correspondence to Mr Forster.

I hope that this will assist in resolving any misunderstandings which may
have arisen from our submission and the subsequent correspondence from the
London Borough of Brent.

Yours sincerely,




G.D. CLARKSON
Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive
                                                London Fire Brigade
                                                Fire Prevention Branch
                                                Queensborough House
                                                1 2 -1 8 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7TJ

LONDON FIRE A ND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY        Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                                G D Clarkson QFSM BA (Hons)

 Mr Steven R Forster                            Telephone 01-587 4000
 Director of Law and Administration             Telex
 Health & Safety Licensing Division             My extension
 London Borough of Brent                        My reference      IFS/ADV/8/2/TJL
 The Town Hall                                  Your reference    LA/SRF/OP/C.754/9
 Forty Lane                                     Date              August 1989
 Wembley                         _
 Middlesex      HA9 9EZ


Dear    /it            *
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Thank you for your letter dated 19 July 1989 and for the copy of the letter of
the same date to the Secretary to the aforementioned Inquiry. I have to advise
you that, in respect of most of the matters which are addressed in the latter
correspondence, I stand by the points made in this Authority's submission to
the Inquiry.

The submission was not intended to create the impression of 'unco-operative and
unwilling local authorities who are not committed to achieving high standards
of public safety within their area of responsibility1. I can only report
however on the situation as it is perceived by the officers of this Authority.
It is our view that only by luck have situations comparable to Hillsborough and
other disasters been avoided in sports grounds in this metropolis and that it
would have been irresponsible to understate the many shortcomings we have noted
for the sake "of" public relations.

It is my hope and intention that the contents of the Authority's submission
will not prejudice the future working relationships between the Authority and
its counterparts but will rather provide a basis for full and frank discussion
and formal consultation in the future to ensure that the highest possible
levels of public safety are achieved and maintained.

I am obliged to respond to the criticisms which you made in respect of the
Authority's submission and will do so in the order in which they were raised in
your correspondence:-

1.     With regard to paragraph 4.4.2. our observation that local authority
       officers may be off duty at weekends and in the evenings and consequently
       not in attendance at some events reflects the experiences of the officers
       engaged in such duties. It was clearly a general statement however and
       not directed against your officers. I am delighted to read that all the
       Wembley events are and will continue to be covered by your officers.
In response to your comments concerning attendance at events at Wembley,
it is our policy to have an officer present at all major events.
Our records indicate 20 such events in 1988, on the following dates:

12   March   17April   25 June     27 July
19   March    7 May    14 July     31 July
23   March   14 May    16 July      5 August
27   March   21 May    22 July     20 August
16   April   11 June   23 July      2 September

It is probable that some of the events which form your list of "major
events" are counted in our "Specific Inspections" which relate to
occasional licences, inspection of special effects, etc. to which
reference is made in paragraph 2.3.1 of the submission. There were 69
such inspections in 1988. I think the fact that Brigade officers were
therefore present on 89 occasions in 1988 provides ample evidence of
our concern for public safety.                                    __

I view with great concern your comment "that the LFCDA and police be given
duplicate powers to issue prohibition notices to be quite unnecessary and
also itself dangerous" (Ref 6.3.5).

Fire Officers have long experience in using powers of prohibition by
virtue of the responsibility for the enforcement of the Fire Precautions
Act 1971 and have, it is generally acknowledged, used those powers
sensitively and with discretion.

Furthermore, we are in no way seeking to usurp the powers of the local
authority officers who may be present at a major event but merely to
ensure that in the absence of such officers, a responsible person is in a
position to act in the interest ofpublic safety.    Whether that person is
a police^-er fire officer is immaterial. The     pointis that someone is in a"
position to act immediately.

Such arrangements should not give rise to "buck passing" to use your
phraseology. It would be clearly understood that the police or fire
officer present would act only in the absence of an officer from the
licensing authority. London Fire Brigade officers would, of course, use
the powers available to them under the Fire Precautions Act 1971 (Section
10) if they considered that the situation represented a serious risk to
public safety from fire. This would, however, be the exception and not
the rule.

Finally, on this issue, I can see no reason whatever why stadium operators
should be unaware of the powers and responsibilities of the various
authorities. These are already defined and would remain unaltered apart
from the extension of this one power, which would not be difficult to
comprehend. Furthermore, I have no doubt that they would, as interested
parties, be consulted by the appropriate government department responsible
for framing amendments to the relevant legislation before the legislation
was modified.
In respect of our comments (paragraph 5.1.4) regarding the exercise which
was held at Wembley Stadium it is not denied that the London Fire Brigade
participated in the exercise. It was nevertheless the view of the
entertainments licensing officer from the Brigade who observed the
exercise that it became primarily a police exercise in public order,
involving the use of police cadets from the Metropolitan Police Training
College, Hendon, in the role of unruly spectators. The officer noted that
the police did not appear to take the opportunity to test emergency
evacuation procedures in addition to public order training. That being
said officers from the North West Area Command who were engaged in or
observed the exercise professed their satisfaction with the results.
Similar positive comments have been made in respect of 'Exercise Bravo'
which was held at the Wembley Stadium on 6 August last. I hope that
future exercises will continue in the same vein.

The example was used to give emphasis to the view that police training
should make provision for an understanding of emergency evacuation
procedures and, where perimeter fences are installed, the correct methods
and procedures for the opening of gates in the fence. Indeed the whole
thrust of that section of the submission was concerned with police
training and not the adequacy or otherwise of one exercise at the Wembley
Stadium.

With regard to our statement (paragraph 4.1.7) that Brent "did not consult
with the Brigade on the alteration to means of escape within the stadium"
our records confirm this to be the case. I agree that fire officers were
included in preliminary discussions as part of the safety team
deliberations but the Authority was never formally consulted on the matter
in accordance with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as amended by the
Local Government Act 1985 (Schedule 8). I do not regard informal
discussions at safety team meetings, which have no statutory force, as an
acceptable- substitute for formal consultation under that legislation.
The Authority was not given the opportunity to comment in detail on the
plans for the alterations to the means of escape. The fact that the
resulting improvements were to the satisfaction of the Authority does not
detract from my point in the slightest degree.

I was somewhat taken aback by your comment in this context that fire
officers hold no suitable qualifications to adjudicate on structural
matters. I do not propose to provide detail as to the range and depth of
training which is mandatory upon fire officers before they are regarded as
qualified to express professional judgements on such matters. Suffice to
say that the prime legislation for which fire authorities are responsible,
namely the Fire Precautions Act 1971 provides that 'means of escape' is
the responsibility of the fire authorities nationally. Consequently many
fire officers are more highly qualified than their counterparts in local
authorities. Their actual experience of fire has yet to be matched by any
theoretical formulae which can be studied in the abstract when means of
escape is being considered. This is why this, and indeed all fire
authorities, lay great emphasis on the opinion of officers with
operational experience.
      I am sure you will agree that it is in the interests of all the
      authorities concerned to ensure that the tenets of the appropriate
      legislation are fully complied with and that any future proposals for
      changes to means of escape will be subject to full and proper consultation
      with this Authority.

     Lord Justice Taylor has made reference, in his recently published
     interim report, to the "casual and unbusinesslike" way in which the
     Safety at Sports Ground Advisory Group established by the Sheffield
     City Council conducted its affairs (Paragraph 286, page 51 and
     paragraph 314, page 56). I am therefore very pleased to note the
     positive reports which my officers have made with regard to the
     safety team meetings organised under your auspices and that their
     deliberations are fully minuted. I maintain, however, that further
     advantage would accrue if the role of the safety team was enshrined
     in the relevant legislation. Their deliberations would then be part
     of the consultation process.

5.   In respect of occasional music licences for large outdoor pop concerts I
     would confirm that the year 1988 saw the largest number of concerts to
     date (i.e 12). My officers have indicated however that they were advised
     that a similar number were expected to be held in 1989. Unfortunately
     this advice was verbal and not confirmed in writing but was received in
     good faith. I understand that a number of concerts anticipated earlier
     this year were subsequently cancelled. The comments in paragraph 2.3.1 of
     our submission were made on this basis and were intended to reflect the
     present position and possibly the future rather than the past.

6.   Your point regarding the use of the term "sports stadium" instead of the
      correct "sports grounds" is acknowledged. Please accept my thanks for
      drawing my attention to this error.

7.   The appendices to the Authority's submission only make reference to the
     London Borough of Brent in-so-far as Appendix A lists the sports grounds
     in Brent falling within the scope of the 1975 legislation. I am therefore
     unable to identify the "factual inaccuracies" to which you refer.

     With regard to the "opinions and value judgements" which cause yo u ,-
     discomfort I would refer to them rather as the professional assessments of
     experienced fire officers engaged in ensuring the safety of members of the
     public resorting to sports grounds, and I do not offer any apology for
     bringing them to the attention of Lord Justice Taylor and his Inquiry.
     Considerable thought went into the preparation of the submission.

I hope you will recognise that this Authority had no motive other than concern
for public safety at sports grounds in making its submission to the Inquiry and
wishes that the Brent Safety Team should continue to build upon the good work
it has carried out up to the present.

Yours sincerely,




Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
LFCDA                                        London Fire Brigade
                                             Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SD

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY      Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                             G D Clarkson QFSM BA(Hons)

                                             Telephone 0 1 -5 8 7   4nnn
R.M. Whalley, ESQ,
                                             Telex 9 1 8 2 0 0
Inquiry into the Hillsborough
                                             M y extension
Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,                       M y reference          if s   /A D V /8 /2
London,                                      Your reference
SW1H 9AT.                                    Date    7      June 1989




DearN\£


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 23 May 1989 inviting me to make a specific
submission to the Inquiry. I am pleased to have been given such an opportunity
and, accordingly, enclose six copies of my submission as you requested.

May I take this opportunity to draw your attention, (particularly), to Section
4 (pages 8-11) of the submission which highlights the difficulties currently
being experienced by this Authority. The section proceeds to make general
observations, concluding remarks and finally, specific recommendations. The
appendices to the submission contain details of the most recent correspondence
with the other agencies concerned with these matters.

I shall of course, be pleased to discuss the contents of the submission with
Lord Justice Taylor and/or his representatives, should he be so minded to do
so.




G.D. CLARKSON,
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
LFCDA                                        London Fire Brigade
                                             Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SD

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY      Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                             G D Clarkson QFSM BA(Hons)

                                             Telephone 0 1 -5 8 7
R.M. Whalley, ESQ,                                                  4000
                                             Telex 9 1 8 2 0 0
Inquiry into the Hillsborough
                                             M y extension
Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,                       M y reference          i f s /ADV/8/2
London,                                      Your reference
SW1H 9AT.                                    Date    7      June 1989




Dear


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 23 May 1989 inviting me to make a specific
submission to the Inquiry. I am pleased to have been given such an opportunity
and, accordingly, enclose six copies of my submission as you requested.

May I take this opportunity to draw your attention, (particularly), to Section
4 (pages 8-11) of the submission which highlights the difficulties currently
being experienced by this Authority. The section proceeds to make general
observations, concluding remarks and finally, specific recommendations. The
appendices to the submission contain details of the most recent correspondence
with the other agencies concerned with these matters.

I shall of course, be pleased to discuss the contents of the submission with
Lord Justice Taylor and/or his representatives, should he be so minded to do
so.

Yours sincerely,




G.D. CLARKSON,
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                    LONDON FIRE AMD CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


                              LONDON FIRE BRIGADE




                               FORMAL SUBMISSION


                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                            CHAIRMAN OF THE INQUIRY
                          INTO THE EVENTS SURROUNDING


                       THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




FROM:



MR G. D. CLARKSON QFSM BA (HONS)
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
‘i n d e x

                                                                        PAGE

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS                                              1


1.           BACKGROUND                                                 2-3

1.1          (a)       From GLC to LFCDA
1.2          (b)       Technical Guidance


2.           INSPECTIONS MADE TOSPORTS VENUES BY LFCDA                  3-7

2.1          Inspections made in 1988
2.2          The Types of Inspections
2.2.1        (a)    During Performance Inspections
2.3          (b)    Specific Inspections
2.4          (c)    Annual Surveys


3.           SAFETY TEAMS                                               7-8

3.1          (a)       The Past
3.2          (b)       The Present
3.3          (c)       The Future


4.           DIFFICULTIES BEING ENCOUNTERED BY LFCDA                    8-11

4.1           (a)      Means of Escape Provisions
4.2          (b)       Safety Versus Security
4.3          (c)       Indoor Sports Licences
4.4           (d)      Prohibition Notices - Section 10 of the
                        Sports Ground Act 1975.


5.           GENERAL                                                    11-13

5.1          (a)       Police Training
5.2          (b)       Steward Training
5.3          (c)       Access to Sports Grounds
5.4          (d)       Non-Designated Sports Ground


6.           CONCLUSIONS                                                13-15


7.           RECOMMENDATIONS                                            15-16


APPENDIX A             List of Sports Grounds Visited by GLC 1985/6
APPENDIX B             Correspondence on Crystal Palace FC
APPENDIX C             Chief Officer’s letter to Chief Executives of
                        London Boroughs
APPENDIX D             Correspondence with Home Office on Legislative
                        Inconsistencies
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

1.     That the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 be amended to include a
        provision for the establishment of safety teams.

2.     That the public safety aspects are considered alongside security
        provisions when erecting perimeter fences.

3.     That the provisions to issue a prohibition notice under section 10 of
        the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 be extended to include the fire
        and police authorities.

4.     That schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 be amended so that
        local authority has to consult the fire authority on fire safety when
        considering indoor sports licences and that the local authority have
        regard to observations submitted by the fire authority.

5.     That all sports stadia that have a capacity of 10,000 or more
        spectators should now be designated.

6.     Access arrangements for spectators and emergency vehicles should be
        such as to create a "sterile zone” around the ground.

7.     Police training should emphasise team work and in particular in
        emergency procedures that apply to the grounds attended.

8.     That attendances should be restricted where the standard of steward
        training is inadequate.
r




    1.       BACKGROUND

    1.1      (a)    From GLC to LFCDA

    1.1.1    The responsibility for the issue of a safety certificate for a
              designated sports ground within the meaning of the Safety of Sports
              Grounds Act 1975 rests with the local authority.

    1.1.2    Up until 1 April 1986 the Act defined the local authority   in Greater
              London as being the Greater London Council (GLC).

    1.1.3    Until that time, the Director Generals Department (DG) issued the
             certificate and was responsible for administering the Act with
             technical support from the Department of Architecture (AR/BR) and the
             London Fire Brigade (LFB).

    1.1.4    AR/BR conducted surveys and laid down requirements on structural
             matters and on "means of escape".

    1.1.5    AR/BR consulted the LFB on other fire safety matters for inclusion in
             the safety certificate. The term fire safety included: portable and
             fixed fire fighting equipment; fire warning systems and evacuation
             procedures; private hydrants within the ground and; access for
             emergency service vehicles.

    1.1.6    The LFB also carried out two "During Performance" inspectors per annum
             to monitor safety standards.

    1.1.7    A joint annual survey was also carried out with AR/BR to ensure that
              the conditions of the safety certificate were still relevant and being
              complied with.

    1.1.8    From the 1 April 1986 the position changed. The term "local
              authority" was redefined within the Act to mean: "in Greater London,
              the London borough council or the Common Council of the City of
             London". This change was effected by paragraph 7(3)(a) of the
              Schedule 8 of the Local Government Act 1985.

    1.1.9    On the same day, the GLC was abolished and its position as fire
              authority passed to a successor body, the London Fire and Civil
              Defence Authority (LFCDA).

    1.1.10   Paragraph 7(1) of schedule 8 to the Local Government Act 1985 amended
             section 3(3) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 so that the
             London borough was required to send the fire authority a copy of an
             application for a certificate and to consult them about the terms and
             conditions to be included in the certificate.

    1.1.11 A fire authority was identified as an "interested party" who could
            appeal against the terms of a certificate.

    1.1.12   Powers of entry and inspection were also extended to include a person
             authorised by the fire authority. The LFCDA have used these powers to
             continue making "during performance" inspections.

    1.1.13   Further amendments were made to the Safety of Sports Grounds 1975 by
             the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.




                                             2.
1.1.14   By virtue of the 1987 Act the requirement for a general safety
         certificate was extended by the deletion of the term "sports ground"
         and its replacement by the term "sports stadia".

1.1.15   By virtue of the 1987 Act the local authority were granted the right
         to issue prohibition notices where a general or special safety
         certificate is in force and where it is considered that it is in the
         interest of public safety that it is necessary to prohibit or restrict
         the admission of spectators.

1.1.16 Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
       made a requirement for a special safety certificate for "regulated
        stands" with accommodation for 500 spectators or more. This provision
        came into force on 1 January 1989.

1.2      (b)   Technical Guidance

1.2.1    Following the disaster at Ibrox Park in 1971 where 66 spectators died,
         Lord Wheatley issued his findings. His report contained a technical
          appendix. This appendix was extended to include fire precautions and
         means of escape from an emergency situation. It formed the basis of
          the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" which was published in 1973
          (this became known as the "Green Guide").

1.2.2    Following the fire at Bradford City FC ground in 1985 where 56
          spectators died, Mr Justice Popplewell undertook an Inquiry. His
          final report was issued in January 1986 and incorporated the
          recommendations of a Working Group which considered the "Green
         Guide". As a result the "Green Guide" was reorganised and extended,
          "so as to reflect more closely the needs of its target audience"
          (published in 1986).

2.       INSPECTIONS MADE TO SPORTS VENUES BY LFCDA

2.1      Inspections Made in 1988 bv Officers of the LFCDA

2.1.1    Wembley Stadium
         London Borough of Brent
         During Performance Inspections           20
         Specifics                                69
         Comment:- All major events at this venue are made subject to DPs
         "specifics" include visits to review building works being carried out
         or to review arrangements for pop concerts etc.

2.1.2    Twi ckenham RFU
         London Borough of Richmond
         During Performance Inspections           9
         Specifics                                6
         Comment:- A major rebuild is just underway.

2.1.3    Lords Cricket Ground
         London Borough of Westminster
         During Performance Inspections            4
         Specifics                                10

2.1.4    The Oval
         London Borough of Lambeth
         During Performance Inspections            3
         Specifics                                11



                                          3.
2.1.5    Arsenal FC
         London Borough of Islington
         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.6    Barnet FC
         London Borough of Barnet




                                                    i—ii—i
         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.7    Brentford FC
         London Borough of Hounslow




                                                    (*i n
         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics
         Comment:-

2.1.8    Crystal Palace FC
         London Borough of Croydon




                                                    vosfta
         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics
         Comment:- Charlton Athletic FC have been

2.1.9    Chelsea FC
         London Borough of Hammersmith



                                                    <J-
         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.10   Dulwich Hamlet FC
         London Borough of Southwark
                                                    f-Hcsi

         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.11   Fulham FC
         London Borough of Hammersmith
                                                    (*i n




         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.12   Leyton Orient FC
         London Borough of Waltham Forest
         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics
                                                    in




2.1.13   Millwall FC
         London Borough of Lewisham
                                                    <j-i^




         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.14   Queens Park Rangers FC
         London Borough of Hammersmith
                                                    o in




         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics

2.1.15   Southall FC
         London Borough of Ealing
                                                    o o




         During Performance Inspections
         Specifics




                                          4.
r




    2.1.16   Sutton Utd FC
             London Borough of Sutton
             During Performance Inspections            2
             Specifics                                 0

    2.1.17   Tooting and Mitcham FC
             London Borough of Merton
             During Performance Inspections            0
             Specifics                                 3

    2.1.18   Tottenham Hotspur FC
             London Borough of Haringey
             During Performance Inspections            5
             Specifics                                24

    2.1.19   West Ham Utd FC
             London Borough of Newham
             During Performance Inspections            4
             Specifics                                10

    2.1.20   Wimbledon FC
             London Borough of Merton
             During Performance Inspections            8
             Specifics                                 7

    2.2      The Types of Inspections

    2.2.1    (a)    During Performance Inspections

             The purpose of these inspections is to ensure that the terms and
             conditions of a safety certificate relating to fire safety are being
             complied with at times when the certificate is in force and spectators
             present.

    2.2.2    This inspection includes a check of all exit gates to ensure that they
             are either open or immediately openable. Means of escape routes are
             checked to ensure that they are readily available in the event of fire
             and that they are unobstructed, and that all emergency communications
             are working.

    2.2.3    The opportunity is taken to ensure that stewards and staff are aware
             of the evacuation procedures and the fire warning systems and their
             use.

    2.2.4    Staff and stewards are also questioned at random to determine whether
             they are aware of their responsibilities and duties in the event of
             fire.

    2.2.5    In the case of League football grounds, four during performance
              inspections are programmed for each season. Two of these will be made
              to matches that take place in daylight hours and the other two during
              evening matches.

    2.2.6    In the case of Wembley Stadium and Twickenham RFUC, During Performance
              Inspectionsare made to every major soccer or rugby match.

    2.2.7    In the case of Lords and The Oval Cricket Grounds a During Performance
              Inspection is made to each test match. Additional inspections are
             made to the one day internationals and in the case of Lords to one day
              cup finals.
2.2.8    During Performance Inspections are made to non-league football clubs
         that are hosting major FA cup tie and where large numbers of
         spectators are expected.

2.2.9    Over the past two seasons Sutton United have produced good results in
         the early rounds of the FA Cup, and progressed to the stage where they
         have drawn large well known football league clubs. Problems have been
         experienced with the Local Authority who have allowed an increase in
         ground capacity without consultation. Also no action or advice was
         sought from the Brigade to improve the emergency procedures which
         catered under normal conditions for an attendance of approximately
         1500 spectators.

2.2.10   During Performance Inspections are made as deemed appropriate to major
         sports venues and events that are exempt from a requirement to hold a
         safety certificate.

2.2.11   The All England Tennis Championships held at Wimbledon for instance
         together with the major Greyhound stadia are subject to such
         inspections.

2.3      (b)    Specific Inspections

2.3.1    Some of the sporting venues also hold a special safety certificate or
         apply for occasional licences to hold events such as pop concerts or
         major boxing promotions. In these cases specific inspections will
         include both meetings prior to the events to determine the adequacy of
         proposed fire safety arrangements and an inspection whilst the event
         is in progress.

         This is a common procedure for Wembley Stadium who apply for at least
         12 occassional licences during the summer for "pop concerts".

         Other venues who have applied and where events have taken place are:

         (a)   Tottenham Hotspur FC
         (b)   West Ham FC
         (c)   Queen Park Rangers FC
         (d)   Crystal Palace FC

2.3.2    This inspection will include those elements outlined in paragraphs
         2.2.2 to 2.2.4 above and will additionally involve an examination of
         any matter arising from the event that are considered to have fire
         safety implications.

2.4      (c)    Annual Surveys

2.4.1    An annual survey is conducted each year to check that the terms and
         conditions of the safety certificate are still relevant and that they
         are being complied with.

2.4.2    Whenever possible this is done on a joint basis between
         representatives of the local authority; the fire authority; and police
         authority which collectively makes up the "Safety Team" (more fully
         discussed in section 3 below).




                                        6.
2.4.3   In any event the annual survey to football clubs is completed at an
         early stage in the calendar year. This is because clubs can apply to
         the Football Trust for financial assistance towards repairs or works
         required to improve public safety. Therefore it affords the
         opportunity of such work being completed by the beginning of the next
         season.

3.      SAFETY TEAMS

3.1     (a)   The Past

3.1.1   Up until 1 April 1986 the issue of a safety certificate was the
         responsibility of the GLC.

3.1.2   Within that organisation DGs were responsible for issuing such a
         certificate and were responsible for administering the act.

3.1.3   AR/BR conducted surveys and laid down requirements on structural
        matters and on "means of escape" provisions.

3.1.4   AR/BR consulted the LFB on other fire safety matters for inclusion in
         the safety certificate.

3.1.5   Since all three departments involved were part of the GLC it meant
         that there was a reasonably close working relationship and that on
        many occasions joint visits were carried out by AR/BR and the LFB to
         either, review proposals made, or to seek solutions to problems
         encountered.

3.1.6   Immediately following the Bradford fire in 1985 the GLC carried out a
        detailed review of all sports grounds (see attached appendix "A”).
        For this purpose representatives of the three departments formed a
         "safety team" under the chairmanship of the DGs.

3.1.7   The safety team visited sports grounds, including many that were not
         subject to designation at that time.

3.1.8   In addition the LFB identified all venues through out the GLC area
         that had a stand. These were individually surveyed and the
         owners/occupiers issued with recommendations on measures to adopt to
         bring them up to an acceptable level of fire safety.

3.2     (b)    The Present

3.2.1   After the 1 April 1986, in recognition of the new responsibilities and
         roles of both the LFCDA and London boroughs, the LFCDA wrote to all
         those boroughs with designated sports grounds.

3.2.2   It was suggested that the most appropriate way of fulfilling the
         responsibilities placed on each authority was to set up "safety teams"
         comprising; representatives of the borough in which the designated
         sports ground was situated; the fire authority; and the police.

3.2.3   There were some difficulties in getting all the sixteen boroughs
         involved to agree to this format but the concept of the safety team is
        now operating in each of them.




                                       7.
3.3     (c)    The Future

3.3.1   The LFCDA are convinced that within the existing framework of
        legislation that the "Safety Team" is the best way forward.

3.3.2   In offering guidance, the Home Office recommended the setting up of
        "safety teams" to local authorities.

3.3.3   However the LFCDA believe that in light of its experience that safety
        teams should be a requirement under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
        1975 and that it should include both the constitution of such teams
        and terms of reference.

3.3.4   In the present informal setting of safety teams, officers of the LFCDA
        have experienced difficulties (as outlined in following sections 4 and
        5) but it has been concluded that without them matters would be far
        less satisfactory.

4.      DIFFICULTIES BEING ENCOUNTERED BY THE LFCDA

4.1     (a)   Means of Escape Provisions

4.1.1   Prior to the abolition, the GLC as the fireauthority    chose to
         discharge matters relating to means of escape atdesignated sports
         grounds through the Department of Architecture (AR/BR).

4.1.2   This not only included the structural fire resistance of elements used
         in such routes used for means of escape but included those provisions
         dealing with how persons should make their escape in the event of a
         fire.

4.1.3   However as from 1 April 1986 the LFCDA became the fire authority and
         the London boroughs were required to consult the LFCDA about terms and
         conditions to be included in the certificate (section 3(3) of the
         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975).

4.1.4   London boroughs have consulted on most aspects of fire safety but
         invariably will not seek comment on means of escape provisions.

4.1.5   One possible reason is that many former employees of the AR/BR carry
         out similar functions for the London boroughs and have continued to
         make independent decisions on means of escape provisions as if they
        were still acting as members of the fire authority.

4.1.6   This attitude also prevails at safety team meetings and on several
         occasions the fire authority representative has had to point out
         inadequacies of means of escape provisions that have been solely
         decided by the local authority.

4.1.7   Examples of where this has occurred are listed as follows:

        (a)    Wembley Stadium:- Major refurbishment and building alterations
               taking place, with additional seating being installed.

               London Borough of Brent - did not consult with the Brigade on
               the alteration to means of escape within the stadium.




                                       8.
         (b)    Twickenham:- Existing west stand, the Brigade have pointed out
                that the means of escape is inadequate from the upper tier of
                 this stand at both north and south ends.

                London Borough of Richmond upon Thames - have not reacted to
                these comments and the situation still prevails.

         (c)    Millwall FC:- The Brigade were not involved in any discussion
                with the Club or the London Borough of Lewisham on the erection
                 of pitch perimeter fencing or crowd segregation barriers.
                Whilst carrying out a pre-season inspection the Brigade pointed
                 out to the local authority that pass gates had not been
                provided in either the perimeter fencing or segregation
                barriers.

         (d)    Crystal Palace FC:- The Police have approached the club direct
                 and have written to them stating that they wish to alter ground
                 segregation, and also change the evacuation procedure without
                 consultation with either the local authority or Brigade.
                 Correspondence attached as Appendix B shows police
                 recommendations on perimeter fencing, evacuation procedures etc.

         (e)    It should also be noted that recently    the London Borough of
                 Newham who have always consulted the   Brigade on means of
                 escape, have chosen to disregard the   Brigade's observations on
                 this sujbect in the refurbishment of   West Ham FC west stand.

4.1.8    As a direct consequence the Chief Officer and Chief Executive of the
         LFCDA has had to write to his counterparts in the relevant London
         Boroughs (all sixteen in fact) explaining that as the fire authority
         consultation on fire safety must include reference to means of escape
         provisions. A copy is attached as Appendix C.

4.1.9    It was added that if the situation was not rectified immediately that,
         in those circumstances where means of escape provisions were
         considered by the fire authority to be inadequate or inappropriate,
         that as an identified "interested" party that an appeal would be made
         to the Secretary of State (section 5 (3)(i) and (ii) of the Safety of
         Sports Grounds Act 1975).

4.1.10   At this early stage it is not known whether the action outlined above
         has brought the necessary results.

4.2      (b)   Safety Versus Security

4.2.1    This issue is encountered right across the spectrum of fire safety.
          However it comes into particularly sharp focus in public safety
          considerations at designated sports grounds.

4.2.2    The LFCDA recognise that due to difficulties experienced in crowd
         control that it may prove necessary to introduce security measures
         designed to keep spectators within allotted areas to separate them
         from rival fans or prevent them from gaining access to the pitch.

4.2.3    At present within the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" Chapter 8;
         Clause 101 gives guidance on ground segregation to prevent potential
         hazardous migration by spectators.

         Many of the clubs in London have erected crowd segregation barriers at
         the request of the Police, again without consultation with the
         Brigade, and as indicated in 4.1.7(c) without emergency egress.

                                        9.
4.2.4   In the event of a fire it would be normal to consider that proper
        means of escape are provided at the rear of the stands or standing
        enclosures. However sight should not be lost of the fact that in a
        fire situation spectators may decide that the pitch is a wide open
        space in which to seek refuge.

4.2.5   The erection of perimeter fences should take into account public
         safety with a view to both security and arrangements that allow egress
         through the perimeter fence in an emergency.

4.2.6   The erection of perimeter fences at sports grounds in London has been
        at the instigation of the police and/or the club concerned. However
        in no case has the fire authority been consulted on the aspects which
        might compromise other elements of public safety.

4.2.7   Indeed in some cases the police have approached the club direct and
         requested these fences without making any reference to the local
         authority whatsoever.

4*3     (c)    Indoor Sports Licences

4.3.1   Section 42 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
         amended Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 so that indoor
         sports events are subject to licensing.

4.3.2   There is a duty for an applicant to notify the fire authority of his
         intention to apply for such a licence.

4.3.3   Schedule 12 to the '63 Act applies to other entertainments licences as
        well and in that respect it has been very rare for applicants to
         fulfil this obligation and therefore it is not unreasonable to assume
         that a similar circumstance will exist in respect of indoor sports
         licences.

4.3.4   There is not requirement for the local authority to consult the fire
         authority and therefore no requirement for the local authority to have
         regard to any observations submitted by the fire authority.

4.3.5   The LFCDA finds itself in an anomalous position since all other local
         authorities in the remainder of England and Wales are duty bound to
         consult the fire authority and to have regard to any observations
         submitted by the fire authority. These requirements are laid down in
         Schedule 1 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1972.

4.3.6   Since Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 is the prime
         source for licensing places of public entertainment in London it
         follows that the remarks on absence of legislative requirements for
         the local authority to consult on indoor sports licences is only a
         small part of a far wider problem.

4.3.7   The LFCDA have already brought this matter to the attention of the
        Home Office and previous correspondence is attached as Appendix D.
        However it is anticipated that another approach will be made in the
        very near future following the results of a review of the LFCDAs role
         in entertainments licensing.

4.3.8   Nevertheless it is important that this be brought to the attention of
         the Inquiry for its consideration.




                                        10.
        (d)    Prohibition Notices - Section 10 of the Safety of Sports
               Grounds Act 1975

4.4.1   Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 provides powers to
        the local authority to prohibit or restrict the admission of
        spectators to the whole or parts of a sports ground in circumstances
        where it is considered that such admission will pose a serious risk to
        spectators safety.

4.4.2   However most sporting events of the type take place at the weekends or
        evenings. From a point of view of officers of a local authority such
        times represent "out of office" hours and therefore they will not
        necessarily be in attendance.

4.4.3   It has been established that an officer of the fire authority may take
        action under section 10 of the fire precautions act 1971 but only in
        those circumstances where fire safety may be compromised.

4.4.4   It has been further established by the Home Office that this may only
        be done in those circumstances where immediate action cannot be taken
        under section 10 of the Sports Ground Act 1975 due to the
        unavailability of the local authority.

4.4.5   It is therefore considered appropriate to amend Section 10 to the
        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, so that in circumstances where
        there is no officer available from the local authority, that the
        senior police or fire officer present is granted similar powers of
        prohibition and thereby safeguard public safety.

5.      GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

5.1     (a)   Police Training

5.1.1   A policeman's status has been defined by the Courts asthat of an
         officer whose authority is original, not delegated, and isexercised
         at his own discretion by virtue of his office.

5.1.2   Police officers receive the benefit of training designed to improve
        their efficiency in a "team" situation. However police officers
        operate as individuals in much of their work and only come together as
        "teams" at large scale events such as football matches. Further,
        their training is concerned with the maintenance of public order
        rather than assisting in means of escape and safety matters generally.

5.1.3   Their main priority at such events is to ensure public order and
        therefore in pursuit of this objective they may overlook implications
        for public safety caused by serious congestion.

5.1.4   It is known, for example, that a police exercise was held at Wembley
         Stadium but this was solely concerned with reviewing police reactions
         in a public disorder situation.

5.1.5   Section 2 (2A) of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 makes it clear
        that the provision of police officers at a ground is for the
        determination of the Chief Officer of Police.

5.1.6   However there is usually a police presence at football grounds and in
         light of the comments above it would seem appropriate that they
         receive training which would make them more aware of public safety
         factors.


                                       11.
5.1.7   Such training should include an understanding of the emergency
         evacuation procedures and where perimeter fences are installed the
        methods and procedures for the opening of gates in the fence.

5.2     (b)    Steward Training

5.2.1   The responsibility for all aspects of steward training rests with the
        management of designated sports grounds.

5.2.2   However over a period of time the LFCDA has undertaken extensive
         training of these stewards in fire and public safety. The training
        sessions normally last about 4 hours and includes; responsibilities in
         the event of an emergency; emergency evacuation procedures for that
        particular venue and; operating fire extinguishers.

5.2.3   However there is a rapid turnover in stewards and therefore aconstant
        need for re-training.

5.2.4   Such training has both a financial and staffing implications for the
        LFCDA since it is a service which is provided free of cost.

5.2.5   It would therefore seem appropriate to make it a requirement for such
        clubs to provide such training at their expense and a requirement that
        a steward has undergone such training prior to employment in that
        capacity.

5.3     Access to Sports Grounds

5.3.1   Most sports stadia have been in existence for some time. They  were
        built, in the main in urban areas and with restricted access by roads
         running around the perimeter.

5.3.2   It has resulted in serious congestion around most grounds and the lack
         of a 'sterile zone' where spectators can move prior to entry to the
        ground.

5.3.3   The restrictions also impede the movement of emergency vehicles in the
         event of an emergency.

5.3.4   Therefore unless some positive action can be taken to overcome these
        difficulties it is envisaged that these problems will constitute a
         continuing threat to public safety.

5.3.5   However it is noteworthy that congestion does occur at other venues
        such as Twickenham, Lords, The Oval and Wimbledon but has never led to
        any major problems in spectators waiting for admission.

5.3.6   This is partly due to many spectators arriving early but is probably
         equally due to the attitude of these spectators.

5.3.7   Nevertheless the manner of admitting spectators to a ground should be
        subject to some form of "systems procedure" designed to both speed up
         and control their entry to different parts of the ground.

5.3.8   It is noticeable that since Hillsborough that greater flexibility has
        been shown by the willingness to delay the "kick-off" times at
         football matches to assist such admissions to grounds. In some
         circumstances it may be the only option to counteract the shortcomings
         in access arrangements.



                                      12.
5.4     Hon-Desienated Sports Grounds

5.4.1   At present the only sports grounds that have been designated are the
        major football and rugby grounds.

5.4.2   However there are many major sports stadia that are exempted from the
        requirement of a safety certificate.

5.4.3   An obvious example is Wimbledon Lawn Tennis Club. At present it is
         dealt with on the basis of forming a series of "regulated stands".
        However such an approach does not take account of their interlinking
        by common enclosed walkways and access points between courts.

5.4.4   In such cases it is believed that designation and the provision of a
        safety certificate offers both the best method for ensuring public
        safety and for imposing managerial responsibilities.

6.      CONCLUSIONS

6.1     Safety Teams

6.1.1   It is considered that concept of the "safety team" represents the most
        sensible forum for setting public safety standards at designated
        sports grounds.

6.1.2   As an approach it allows fuller consideration of the "safety versus
         security" issue that underlies public safety discussions.

6.1.3   At present, safety teams have no basis in law and as such owe their
         existence to informal local initiatives.

6.1.4   It would therefore seem appropriate for an amendment to existing
         legislation which would require that the local authority set up a
         safety team so that a properly balanced judgements can be made on
         issues surrounding public safety.

6.2     Perimeter Fences

6.2.1   Perimeter fences are required by FIFA for matches falling within their
        control.

6.2.2   For security reasons they have become a feature at many grounds.
        However, in the LFCDAs experience, there are instances where such
         fences have been erected as a result of a directive by police to the
         club.

6.2.3   Therefore the difficulties that such fences can pose to safety of
         spectators in the event of overcrowding is not given proper
         consideration.

6.3.4   It is in precisely this sort of matter that the joint decisions of the
        safety team can offer a constructive solution.

6.3     Prohibition Notices

6.3.1   The issue of a prohibition notice under section 10 of the Safety of
         Sports Grounds Act 1975 is the exclusive preserve of officers of the
         local authority.




                                        13.
6.3.2   However these officers may not be in attendance because most sporting
        events take place at weekends or in the evenings.

6.3.3   The fire authority have limited powers under section 10 of the Fire
        Precautions Act 1971 and can only take action in those matters
        relating to fire safety.

6.3.4   The police too have power limited to dealing with disorder offences.

6.3.5   In order to ensure that public safety is given the utmost priority it
        would be sensible to extend the powers of prohibition under section 10
        of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 to officers of either the fire
        or police authority in the absence of the local authority.

6.4     Indoor Sports Licences

6.4.1   At present there is no requirement under schedule 12 of the London
        Government Act 1963 for a local authority to consult the fire
        authority.

6.4.2   Neither, therefore, is there a requirement for the local authority to
        have regard to any observations submitted by the fire authority.

6.4.3   This situation only applies to the LFCDA since in the remainder of
        England and Wales proper consultation is required under the local
         Government (miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1972.

6.4.4   It would seem appropriate for this anomaly to be removed.

6.5     Non-Desienated Sports Stadia

6.5.1   There are sports stadia that regularly receive attendance of 10,000
         spectators or more but are not made subject to designation.

6.5.2   In these cases they are dealt with as a series of regulated stands.

6.5.3   However such stands may be interconnected and by treating the stands
         in isolation may not allow the opportunity for a comprehensive
        overview of public safety.
                                                          »


6.6     Access to Sports Stadia

6.6.1   Many sports stadia are situated in urban areas on sites bounded by
        narrow roads.

6.6.2   This can lead to severe congestion for spectators and severe
        restriction for emergency vehicles in the event of an emergency.

6.6.3   In such circumstances policing arrangements are of paramount
         importance and should concentrate on establishing these roads as a
         "sterile zone".

6.7     Police Training

6.7.1   Police officers are conditioned to their "original and independant"
        status and are therefore more used to acting on an individual basis.

6.7.2   However in an emergency situation at a sports ground the accent will
        be on team work.



                                       14.
6.7.3   Therefore police training should incorporate this feature and officers
         should be made familiar with the emergency procedures that exist for
         that sports ground.

6.8     Steward Training

6.8.1   Stewards are a key element in public safety in the event of an
        emergency.

6.8.2   However there is a rapid turnover of stewards at most sports grounds
        and therefore the training need may not keep up with demand.

6.8.3   Therefore many stewards will be ill-prepared for the duties imposed by
         an emergency situation.

6.8.4   If a club cannot demonstrate that its stewards are properly trained
         then attendance to those grounds should be restricted to the ratio of
        properly trained stewards.

7.      RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1     Safety Teams

7.1.1   That an amendment be made to the Act which would require a local
         authority to set up a "safety team" to review aspects of public safety
         that fall within the considerations of a safety certificate.

7.1.2   That the composition of a safety team should be prescribed in the Act
         and should include representatives of the emergency services.

7.2     Perimeter Fences

7.2.1   That in those circumstances where the erection a perimeter fence is
         considered, that it should only be installed when it can be
         demonstrated that other facets of public safety have been satisfied.

7.3     Prohibition Notices

7.3.1   That the power to issue a prohibition notice under section 10 of the
        Act be extended to include representatives of the fire or police
         authority in the absence of the local authority.

7.4     Indoor Sports Licences

7.4.1   That schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 be amended so that
         the local authority are required to consult the fire authority.

7.4.2   That schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 be amended so that
         the local authority shall have regard to any observations submitted by
         the fire authority.

7.5     Non-Designated Sports Stadia

7.5.1   That all sports stadia that have the capacity to hold 10,000
        spectators or more should now be subject to designation.




                                       15.
    7.6     Access to Sports Stadia

    7.6.1   In existing sports stadia, with either inadequate access arrangements
            for spectator entrance to the ground or severe restrictions for
            emergency vehicle movements, policing arrangements should be directed
            to making the surrounding roads a "sterile zone".

    7-7     Police Training

    7.7.1   Greater emphasis should be placed on the team work aspect of policing
            at sports grounds.

    7.7.2   Police who attend sports grounds should be thoroughly conversant with
            the emergency procedures for those grounds.

    7-8     Steward Training

    7.8.1   If a club cannot demonstrate that its stewards are properlytrained,
            then this should bereflected in theplacement   of restrictions on the
            number of spectators based on a direct ratio to the number of fully


•
            trained stewards.




                                          16.
           SSG IN NUMERICAL ORDER                                                                                APPENDIX A


1    W EM BLEY S T A D I U M .          E M P IR E WA Y .          B R EN T
2    WEST HAM F . C . .              UPTON       PARK.          E13       NEWHAM
3    TW ICKENHAM           R.F.C..          W H ITT O N        ROAD.        RICHM OND
4    Q U E E N S PAR K        RANGERS           F . C . . SOUTH A F R IC A             R O AD .    W 12 H A M M E RS M ITH
5    ARSENAL           F.C..        AVENALL           ROAD.        N5     IS L IN G T O N
6    T OTT E N H A M H O T S P U R S        F.C..           H IG H R D . T O T T E N H A M .      N 1 5 H A R IN G E Y
7    CH ELSE A        F.C. .       S T A M F O R D BR ID G E          GROUNDS.          SW6 HAM M ERSM ITH
B    CHARLTON F . C . .              F L O Y D R O A D . S E 7 G REENW ICH
9    CRYSTAL PALACE                  F . C . . S E L H U R S T P A R K . SE2S CROYDON
10   FULHAM         F.C ..       STEVENAGE             ROAD.          SW6 HA M M ERSM ITH
11   LEYTON         O R IE N T     F.C. .      B R IS B A N E     ROAD.           E 1 0 WALTHAM        FOREST
12   M IL L W A L L    F.C. .       CO LD BLOW              LANE.        S E 14    LEWISHAM
13   BRENTFORD            F.C. . 8R00K               ROAD.        HO UNSLO W
14   W IM B LE D O N      F.C..        DURNSFORD              ROAD.        S W 19     MERTON
15   TE R E N C E     M C M IL L A N    s t a d iu m    .    P R IN C E    REG ENT L A N E .         E13    NEWHAM
16   THE O V A L .       K E N N IN G T O N      OVAL.          S E ll     LAMBETH
17   LORDS C R IC K E T G R O U N D .               ST.      J O H N S W OO D.         NWS W ES TM IN ST ER
18   ALL    EN G LA N D T E N N IS C L U B .                CHURCH R O A D .           SW 19 MERTON
19   THE Q U E E N S C L U B .          P A L L IS E R       ROAD.        W 1 4 HAMMERSMITH
20   DULW ICH H A M L E T F . C . . DOG K E N N E L H I L L . S E 2 2 SOUTHWARK
21   W IM B LE D O N ( D O G ) S T A D I U M . P L O U G H L A N E . S W 17 MERTON
22   CRYSTAL PALACE                 R E C R E A T IO N       GROUND.          CR YS TA L PALACE PARK ROAD
23   H A R R lN G A Y I DO G ) S T A D I U M . G R E E N L A N E S . N 4 H A R IN G E Y
24   W ALTHAM STO W I D O G ) S T A D I U M . C H IN G F O R D R O A D . E 4 W ALTHAM F O R E S T
25   W ALTHAM STO W           AVENUE           F.C..         P R IO R Y    COURT.        E 1 7 WALTHAM F O R E ST
26   D A G EN H A M     F.C. .       V IC T O R IA     ROAD.          B A R K IN G
27   H A YES S T A D I U M .        JU DG E HEATH              LANE.       H IL L IN G D O N
28   L O N D O N W E LSH R . F . C . .              O LD D E E R P A R K .           RICH M ON D
29   R IC H M O N D R . F . C . .       O LD DE ER PARK. I A T H L ET IC G R O U N D ) .                   RICH M ON D
30   R O M FO R D S T A D I U M .       L O N D O N R O A D . H A V E R IN G
31   C A TF O R D     (O O G i     S T A D IU M .     ADENMORE             ROAD.       SE6     LEWISHAM
32   E R I7 H   AND BELVEDERE                  F.C..         LOWER R O A D .          B EXLEY
33   HO RN C H U R C H      F.C..        B R ID G E     AVENUE.            H A V E R IN G
34   W E L L IN G     U N IT E D    F.C..       PARK         V IE W    ROAD.         BEXLEY
35   ST.    8ARTH0LEMEW S                R.F.C..            PERRY         STREET.       C H IS L E H U R S T . BEXLEY
36   FULHAM         RUGBY          LEAGUE       CLUB.         C H IS W IC K .      HOUNSLOW
37   CARSHALTON             F . C . (W A R      M E M O R IA L G R O U N D ) .          CO LSTO N A V E N U E .          SU T T O N
38   WEST L O N D O N         S T A D IU M .     DU C A N E           ROAD.       W 1 2 H A M M E RS M ITH
39   CH E LS E A      SPORTS C E N T R E .            CHELSEA            MANOR STREET.              SW3 K E N S IN G T O N
40   E N F IE L D     F.C..        SOUTHBURY R O A D .                E N F IE L D
41   F IN C H L E Y F . C . . S U M M E R S L A N E . N 1 2 B A R N E T t s e e SSG 8 5                       fo r   R u g b v C lu b )
42   B A R N E T F . C . . W ESTCOMBE D R I V E . B A R N E T
43   W EALDSTONE            F.C..       S T A T IO N        ROAD.        HARROW
44   SUTTON         F.C..        GANDER GREEN                  LANE.       S UTTO N
45   T O O TIN G      8t M ITC H U M      F.C..        SANDY          LANE.        MERTO N
46   CR OYD ON        F.C..        A L B E R T R O A D . S E 2 5 SOUTH NORWOOD
47   BROMLEY          F.C..        HAYES L A N E . BROMLEY
48   LEY70NS70NE              F.C..       C R A N L E IG H       ROAD.          E 1 0 W ALTHAM FOREST
49   ROSSLYN          PARK         R.F.C..          UPPER       R IC H M O N D R O A D .       S W 15 WANDSWORTH
SSG   50     HACKNEY           S T A D IU M .     W A T ER D EN       ROAD.        E 1 5 HACKNEY
SSG 51       8L A C K H EA TH        R.F.C..           CHARLTON            ROAD.       S E 3 G REENW ICH
SSG 5 2      WOODFORD TOWN                     F.C..      265    SNAKES           LANE.        REDBRIDGE
SSG 5 3      H A R L E Q U IN S      R.F.C..           STOOP M E M O R IA L           GROUND.          TWICK.        RICHM OND
SSG 5 4      BANK OF E N G 'LA N D S S PO R T S G R O U N D . P R IO R Y L A N E . WANDSWORTH
SSG 5 5      HA M PTO N F . C . . O F F S T A T IO N R O A D . H A M P T O N . RICHMOND
SSG 5 6      K! NGST ON I A N         F.C..         BURTON        R O A D /R IC H M O N D R O A D .             K IN G S T O N
SSG 5 7      F IS H ER      A T H L E T IC     F . C . . ( M E L L IS H    PAR K J .       SA L T ER R O A D . S E 1 6 .        SOUTHWARK
SSG 5 8      H A R IN G E Y BO RO UG H             F . C . .W H IT E      HA RT     LANE.        N17        H A R IN G E Y
SSG 5 9      OLD D A G E N H A M          PAR K       F.C..      S IV IT E R      WAY.       DAGENHAM.            B A R K IN G
SSG 6 0      NEW R IV E R S P O R T S C E N T R E . W H ITE H A R T L A N E .                          N17       H A R IN G E Y
SSG 61       8 A R K IN G F . C . . LODGE A V E N U E . B A R K IN G
SSG 6 2      MAYSBROOK             PARK         ARENA.        LODGE         AVENUE.          B A R K IN G
SSG 6 3      EAST HAM            U N IT E D     F.C..       EAST H A M          MANOR W A Y .          E6       NEWHAM
SSG 6 4      CLAPTO N          F.C..         UPTON       LANE.        E7       NEW HAM
S S G .65    HARROW F . C . .            E A R L S M E A D /C A R L Y O N          AVENUE.         HARROW
SSG 6 6      LEYTO N W IN G A T E .             LEA      B R ID G E     ROAD.       E 1 7 WALTHAM FOREST
SSG 6 7      H A R E F lE L D U N IT E D         F.C. .      BREAKSPEARE               ROAD.       H IL L IN G D O N
SSG 6 8      W IM B LED O N        PARK        SPORTS C E N T R E .           HOME PARK A V E N U E .                S W 19 M ER T O N
SSG 6 9      HE R NE H I L L        S T A D IU M .      8URRAGE           ROAD.       SE24        SOUTHWARK
SSG   70     K IN G S L E Y     TOWN         F.C..      TOWNSEND             ROAD.         NW9        BRENT
SSG   71     S O UTHALL          F.C..         W ESTERN         ROAD.        SOUTHALL.             E A L IN G
SSG 7 2      EDGWARE F . C . .               DEANSBROOK               ROAD.       BARNET
SSG   73     W ASPS R . F . C . .            HEATON        AVENUE.            BRENT
SSG 7 4      HURL IN G H A M P A R K S PO R T S S T A D I U M . BROOM HOUSE R O A D . SW6 H A M M E R S M IT H
SSG 7 5      WEMBLEY F . C . . W A T F O R D R O A D l V A L E F A R M SPO RTS C E N T R E J . B R E N T
SSG 7 6      R A Y N E R S L A N E F . C . . R A Y N E R S L A N E . HARROW
SSG 7 7      HENDON           F.C..      CLAREMONT               ROAD.        NW 2         BARNET
SSG 7 8      U XSR lO G E       F.C..        HORTON         ROAD.          H IL L IN G D O N
SSG 7 9      STREATHA M & C R O Y D O N                  R.F.C..            159    BRIGSTOCK R O A D .             CROYDON
SSG 8 0      NORTHWOOO              F.C..        CHESTNUT A V E N U E               R E C .G R O U N D .      H IL L IN G D O N
SSG 81       O S TER LEY         R . F . C . . TENTELON           AVENUE.            SOUTHALL.          E A L IN G
SSG 8 2      HO UNSLO W           F .C ..D E N B IG H        ROAD.         HOUNSLOW
SSG 8 3      SARACENS            R.F.C..GREEN                R O A D .C H A S E       S ID E .   N14.        E N F IE L D
SSG 8 4      OLD L Y O N IO N S          F.C.       P IN N E R    V IE W .     HA RRO W
SSG 8 5      F IN C H L E Y     RUGBY          F .C ..S U M M E R S        L A N E . N 1 2 . B A RN E T l s e e s s q 4 1          fo r   F.C.)
SSG 8 6      LONDON          H O S P IT A L     R . F . C . . W ADH AM R O A D .               WALTHAM FOREST
SSG 8 7      R A IN H A M      TOWN       R . F . C . . W E N N IN G T O N          ROAD.        RA I N H A M . H A V E R IN G
SSG 8 8      FORDS U N IT E D           F.C..         RU SH G R E E N         ROAD.          ROMFORD.          H A V E R IN G
SSG 8 9      Q UEEN         E L IZ A B E T H    SPORTS C E N T R E .            G R E A T CAMBRIDGE R O A D .                 E N F IE L D
SSG 9 0      C R IC K L E F IE L D     A T H L E T IC    F IE L D .     GREEN        LANES.        ILF O R D
SSG 91       COPTHALL S P O R T S C E N T R E . G R E A T                    N O RTH W A Y /A S H L E Y         A V E N U E . NW 4         BARNET
SSG 9 2      W lL L E S D O N     A T H L E T IC     S T A D IU M .     ALL       SOULS A VEN U E.             NW 10          BRENT
SSG 9 3      GUYS H O S P IT A L             R.F.C..        6R0CKLEY            R IS E .     S.E.23.        LEWISHAM
SSG 9 4      M IDDLE SEX H O S P IT A L              R.F.C..          PERRY        STREET.        C H IS L E H U R S T .      BEXLEY
SSG 9 5      SlDCU P R . F . C . .             CRESCENT          FARM.        S ID C U P .     BEXLEY
SSG 9 6      FELTHAM           R.F.C..           PARK      ROAD.          HA N W O R TH P A R K .       HO UNSLO W
SSG 9 7      S T A IN E S     R.F.U..           FELTHAM H IL L             ROAD.       HO UNSLO W
SSG 9 8      C.A.V.          SPORTS G R O U N D .            R U IS L IP      ROAD.        NORTHOLT.            H IL L IN G D O N
SSG 9 9   HEN DO N R . F . C . . GREAT N O RTH W A Y . C O P T H A L L P L A Y IN G F IE L D S . B A R N E T
SSG 1 0 0 P O L Y T E C H N IC S P O R T S G R O U N D . H A R T IN G T O N R O A D . W 4 HO UNSLO W
SSG    101   EAST     LONDON            S T A D IU M .     C O P P E R F IE L D     ROAD.        E1    TOWER H A M LE TS
SSG   1 0 2 BARRA S S T A D I U M .              H O U N D S F IE L D      ROAD.      EDMONTON.                E N F IE L D
SSG    1 0 3 HAYES       F.C..         CH URC H R O A D .          HAYES.          H IL L IN G D O N
SSG    1 0 4 FELTHAM           F.C..         SHAKESPEARE              AVENUE.          FELTHAM.         HOUNSLOW .
SSG    1 0 5 R U IS L IP      M AN OR F . C . . G RO S V E N O R V A L E . R U IS L IP .                     H IL L IN G D O N .
SSG    1 0 6 R U IS L I P     F . C . . BREAKSPEARE R O A D . H IL L IN G D O N .
SSG    1 0 7 PROPOSED             MULTI        PUR POSE S T A D IU M .             W ANDLE VA LLE Y SOUTH.                    M ER T O N
                 SSG IN NUMERICAL ORDER                                                                                APPENDIX A


SSG   1    W EM BLEY S T A D I U M .          E M P IR E W A Y .         BRENT
SSG 2      WEST HAM           F.C..      UPTON         PARK.        E13     NEWHAM
SSG 3      TWICKENHAM            R.F.C..         W H ITT O N     ROAD.          RICH M ON D
SSG 4      Q U E E N S PARK          RANGERS           F . C . . SOUTH A F R IC A          ROAD,      W 12     HA M M E R SM ITH
SSG 5      ARSENAL           F.C..      AVENALL           ROAD.        N5     IS L IN G T O N
SSG 6      TOTTENHAM HOTSPURS                     F.C..         H IG H    R D . TOTTENHAM.            N15      H A R IN G E Y
SSG   7    C H ELS EA        F.C..      S T A M F O R D B R ID G E G R O U N D S .           SW6 HA M M ER S M ITH
SSG 8      CHARLTON           F.C..      FLOYD R O A D .           SE7      G REENW ICH
SSG 9      CRYSTAL           PALACE      F.C..         SELHURST           PARK.      S E 2 5 CROYDON
SSG   10   FULHAM          F.C..     STEVENAGE              ROAD.        SW6 H A M M ERSM ITH
SSG   11   L E Y TO N      O R IE N T   F.C..         B R IS B A N E     ROAD.      E 1 0 W ALTHAM           FOREST
SSG   12   M IL L W A L L     F.C..      C O L D BLOW           LANE.         SE14    LEWISHAM
SSG   13   BRENTFORD            F.C..         8R00K        ROAD.         HO UNSLO W
SSG   14   W IM B LE D O N      F.C..         DURNSFORD ROAD.                   S W 19 M ERTO N
SSG   15   TERENCE           M c M lL L A N    S T A D IU M .    P R IN C E     RE G E N T      LANE.   E13       NEWHAM
SSG   16   THE O V A L .        K E N N IN G T O N      OVAL.          SE11     LAMBETH
SSG   17    LORDS C R IC K ET G R O U N D .               ST.    JO HNS WOOD.              NWS W E S T M IN S T E R
SSG   18   ALL     EN G L A N D T E N N IS         CLUB.        CHURCH R O A D .           S W 1 9 M ERTO N
SSG   19    THE Q U E E N S C L U B .          P A L L IS E R    ROAD.        W 1 4 HA M M E R SM ITH
SSG 2 0    D U LW ICH H A M LE T F . C . . DOG                  K E N N E L H I L L . S E 2 2 SOUTHWARK
SSG 21     W IM B L E D O N ( D O G ) S T A O IU M .            P L O U G H L A N E . S W 17 M ERTON
SSG   22   CRYSTAL           PALACE       R E C R E A T IO N     GROUND.           C R Y S TA L PA L A C E PARK ROAD
SSG 2 3    H A R R IN G A Y I D O G ) S T A O t U M . G R E E N L A N E S . N 4 H A R IN G E Y
SSG 2 4    W ALTH AM STO W t DOG ) S T A D I U M . C H IN G F O R D R O A D . E 4 W ALTHAM                                  F O R E ST
SSG 2 5    W ALTH AM STO W           AVENUE           F.C. .     P R IO R Y C O U R T .         E 1 7 W ALTHAM        F O R E ST
SSG 2 6    DAGENHAM            F.C..       V I C T O R IA     ROAD.       B A R K IN G
SSG 2 7    HA Y ES S T A D I U M .       JU D G E H E A TH         LANE.        H IL L IN G D O N
SSG 2 8    L O N O O N W ELSH R . F . C . .               O LD DE ER P A R K .           RICH M ON D
SSG 2 9    R IC H M O N D     R.F.C..          OLO D E E R       PARK.l A T H L E T IC G R O U N D       I .     R ICH M O N D
SSG 3 0    RO M F O R D S T A D I U M .        LONDON           ROAD.       H A V E R IN G
SSG 31     C A TF O R D      tD O G J    S T A D IU M .     ADENMORE            ROAD.        SE6    LEWISHAM
SSG 3 2    ERITH      AND BELVEDERE                 F.C..        LOWER R O A D .           BEXLEY
SSG 3 3    HORNCHURCH              F.C..       B R ID G E     AVENUE.           H A V E R IN G
SSG 3 4    W E L L IN G U N IT E D F . C . . P A R K V IE W R O A D . BEXLEY
SSG 3 5    S T . 8 A R T H 0 L E M E W S R . F . C . . P E R R Y S T R E E T . C H IS L E H U R S T .                BEXLEY
SSG 3 6    FULHAM          RUGBY        LEAGUE C L U B .          C H IS W IC K .     H O UN SLO W
SSG 3 7    CARSHALTON              F.C.IWAR            M E M O R IA L     G R O U N D ).     CO LSTO N       AVENUE.            S UTTO N
SSG 3 8    WEST L O N D O N          S T A D IU M .     DU C A N E        ROAD.      W 1 2 H A M M E R S M ITH
SSG 3 9    CHELSEA SPORTS C E N T R E .                     CHELSEA           MANOR S TR EET.           SW3 K E N S IN G T O N
SSG 4 0    E N F IE L D      F.C..      SOUTHBURY            ROAD.        E N F IE L D
SSG 4 1     F IN C H L E Y    F.C..      SUMMERS            LANE.         N12     B A R N E T tse e   SSG 8 5        fo r   R u a b v C lu b )
SSG 4 2    BARNET          F.C..        W ESTCOMBE          D R IV E .    BARNET
SSG 4 3    W EALDSTONE             F.C..       S T A T IO N     ROAD.         HARROW
SSG 4 4    SU T T O N      F.C..        GANDER         GREEN       LANE.         SUTTON
SSG 4 5     T O O T IN G     & M ITC HUM        F.C..        SANDY        LANE.       MERTON
SSG 4 6    CR O YD O N        F.C..      ALBERT          ROAD.         SE25     SOUTH NORWOOD
SSG 4 7     BR O M L EY      F.C..       HAYES         LANE.      BROMLEY
SSG 4 8     LEYTONSTONE              F.C..       C R A N L E IG H      ROAD.        E 1 0 W ALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG 4 9     ROSSLYN           PARK      R.F.C..           UPPER        R IC H M O N D R O A D .     S W 15 WANDSWORTH
    SSG 5 0     HA CKN EY S T A D I U M .             WATERDEN            ROAD.        E 1 5 HACKNEY
    SSG 51      BLACKHEATH R . F . C . .                  CHARLTON             ROAD.       S E 3 GREENW ICH
    SSG 5 2     WOODFORD TOWN                     F.C..      265     SNAKES           LANE.        REDBRIDGE
    SSG 5 3     H A R L E Q U IN S R . F . C . .          STOO P        M E M O R IA L G R O U N D .         T W ICK .      RICH M O N D
    SSG 5 4     B A N K OF E N G L A N D S              SPORTS G R O U N D .            P R IO R Y     LANE.        WANDSWORTH
    SSG 5 5     HA M P TO N        F.C..         OFF     S T A T IO N     ROAD.        HAMPTON.              RICHM OND
    SSG 5 6     K 1 N G S T 0 N IA N      F.C..        BURTON           R O A D /R IC H M O N D      ROAD.           K IN G S T O N
    SSG 5 7     F IS H E R      A T H L E T IC     F . C . . IM E L L IS H     PARKJ.          SALTER        ROAD .S ET 6 .         SOUTHWARK
    SSG 5 8     H A R IN G E Y 8 0 R 0 U G H           F.C..WHITE            HART L A N E .          N17       H A R IN G E Y
    SSG 5 9     OLD D A G EN H A M           PARK F . C . .          S IV IT E R      WAY.        DAGENHAM.            B A R K IN G
    SSG 6 0     NEW R IV E R S P O R T S C E N T R E . W HITE H A R T L A N E .                            N17         H A R IN G E Y
    SSG 61      8 A R K I N G F . C . . LODGE A V E N U E . B A R K IN G
    SSG 6 2     MAYSBROOK PAR K                     ARENA.        LODGE A V E N U E .             B A R K IN G
    SSG 6 3     EAST HAM U N IT E D                 F.C..       E A ST HAM          MANOR W AY.              E6       NEWHAM
    SSG 6 4     C L A PT O N       F.C..         UPTON       LANE.        E7       NEWHAM
    SSG. 6 5    HARROW F . C . .             E A R L S M E A D /C A R L Y O N          AVENUE.          HARROW
    SSG 6 6     LE YTO N W IN G A T E .              L EA B R ID G E       ROAD.        E 1 7 W ALTHAM             FOREST
    SSG 6 7     H A P E F IE L D U N IT E D          F.C..       BREAKSPEARE               ROAD.        H IL L IN G D O N
    SSG 6 8     W iM B LE D O N       PAR K        SPORTS C E N T R E .            HOME P A R K A V E N U E .             S W 1 9 M ERTON
    SSG 6 9     H E R N E H IL L        S T A D IU M .     8URRAGE           ROAD.        SE24         SOUTHWARK
    SSG 7 0     K IN G S L E Y TOWN              F.C..      TOWNSEND ROAD.                     NW9       BR ENT
    SSG   71    SO U T H A L L       F.C..         W ESTERN        ROAD.         SOUTHALL.              E A L IN G
    SSG 7 2     EDGWARE F . C . .                DEANSBROOK              ROAD.        BARNET
    SSG   73    W ASP S R . F . C . .            HEATON         AVENUE.          BRENT
    SSG 7 4     H U R L IN G H A M       PAR K S P O R T S S T A D I U M .             BR OO M HO USE R O A D .              SW6 H A M M E R S M IT H
    SSG 7 5     WEMBLEY            F.C..         W A T FO R D    R O A D IV A L E       FARM        SPORTS C E N T R E J .            BRENT
    SSG 7 6     RAYNERS            LANE      F.C..         RAYNERS           LANE.        HARROW
    SSG 7 7     HEN D O N        F . C . . CLAREMONT                ROAD.          NW 2        BARNET
    SSG 7 8     U X B R ID G E      F.C. .        HORTON        ROAD.          H IL L IN G D O N
    SSG 7 9     STREATHA M & C R O Y D O N                   R.F.C..            159    B R IG S T O C K R O A D .        CROYDON
    SSG 8 0     NORTHWOOD F . C . .                  CHESTNUT           AVENUE          R E C .G R O U N D .       H IL L IN G D O N
    SSG 81      OSTERLEY R . F . C . . T E N T E L ON                   AVENUE.           SOUTHALL.            E A L IN G
    SSG 8 2     HO U N SLO W F . C . .D E N B IG H               ROAD.         HOUNSLOW
    SSG 8 3     SARACENS R . F . C . . GREEN                      R O A D .C H A S E S I D E .        N14.        E N F IE L D
    SSG 8 4     OLD L Y O N IO N S F . C . P I N N E R V I E W . HARRO W
    SSG 8 5     F IN C H L E Y RU G B Y F . C . . S U M M E R S L A N E . N 1 2 . B A R N E T I s e e s s q                      41     fo r   F.C.)
    SSG 8 6     LON DO N H O S P IT A L              R.F.C..        W ADHAM           ROAD.        W ALTH AM          FOREST
    SSG 8 7     R A IN H A M       TOWN          R.F.C..        W E N N IN G T O N        ROAD.       R A I N H A M . H A V E R IN G
    SSG 8 8     FORDS U N IT E D            F.C..         RUSH G R EEN             ROAD.          ROMFORD.          H A V E R IN G
    SSG 8 9     Q UEEN          E L IZ A B E T H    SPORTS C E N T R E .            G R E A T C A M B R ID G E R O A D .            E N F IE L D
    SSG 9 0     C R IC K L E F IE L D A T H L E T IC         F IE L D .     GREEN         LANES.         IL F O R D
    SSG 91      COPTHALL SPORTS C E N T R E .G R E A T                           NORTH W A Y /A S H L E Y              A V E N U E .N W 4       BARNET
    SSG 9 2     W IL L E S D O N      A T H L E T IC S T A D I U M .         ALL      SOULS A V E N U E .           NW 10           B R EN T
    SSG 9 3     G U Y S H O S P IT A L           R.F.C..        BROCKLEY            R IS E .      S.E.23.         LEW ISHAM
    SSG 9 4     M ID D L E S E X H O S P IT A L R . F . C . .             PERRY STREET.                 C H IS L E H U R S T .      BEXLEY
    SSG 9 5     S ID C U P R . F . C . .           CRESCENT F A R M .              S ID C U P .    BEX LEY
    SSG 9 6     FELTHA M           R.F.C..           PAR K      ROAD.        H A N W O R TH       PARK.       H O U N SLO W
    SSG 9 7     S T A IN E S R . F . U . .           FELTHAM H IL L             ROAD.       HO U N S LO W
    SSG 9 8     C.A.V.           SPORTS G R O U N D .             R U IS L IP      ROAD.          NORTHOLT.           H I L L IN G D O N
    SSG 9 9     HEN D O N         R.F.C..           G REAT      NORTH W A Y .             COPTHALL           P L A Y IN G    F IE L D S .      BARNET
    SSG   1 0 0 P O L Y T E C H N IC S P O R T S G R O U N D .               H A R T IN G T O N      ROAD.        W4      H O UN SLO W
    SSG   101    EAST        LONDON         S T A D IU M .      C O P P E R F IE L D      ROAD.       E1     TOWER H A M L E T S
    SSG   10 2 BARRAS S T A D IU M .                 H O U N D S F IE L D      ROAD.       EDMONTON.                 E N F IE L D
    SSG   1 0 3 HAYES F . C . .            CHURCH R O A D .              HAYES.         H IL L IN G D O N
    SSG   104    F ELT H A M       F.C..         SHAKESPEARE              AVENUE.           FELTHAM.              HOUNSLOW .
    SSG   105    R U IS L I P     MANOR          F.C..       GROSVENOR              VALE.         R U IS L IP .    H IL L IN G D O N .
    SSG   106    R U IS L I P     F.C..      BREAKSPEARE                  ROAD.        H IL L IN G D O N .
    SSG   107    PRO PO SED M U L T I              PURPOSE         S T A D IU M .      WANDLE V A LLEY SOUTH.                         MERTON




!
                                                                                            H p f e - n c K x   6

                           HORTORP, CHATiLTOI-; ATHLETIC rOu- —
GPY FOR n'i R .       G.

                                                                                tfc?




                                                                       M E T R O P O L IT A N POLICE

                                                                        " Z " DIVISIO N POLICE STATION
R.G. Koad.es, tisq. ,                                                   i c i c LONDON ROAD
Chairman,                                                               N O R B U R V . LONDON, SW16 4EU
Crystal Palace Foot Dal- -5-                                            T e le p h o n e 0 1 —680 6212
       AtM-etic clu b >                                                                                             O u r r e f .:
                                                                            Y o u r ref.:
Selhurst Park,                                                                                                      zm-\z.n 2 /131*3*3
LONDON, SE25 6PIJ


                                                                                       "Vrd June, 19^


 D-'-ar M r . N o a d e s ,                                                             .
                                               n r t h e im p ro m p tu m e e tin g w itn
      I am w r i t i n g ^ ^ S ^ n ^ c t o r T i n k l e r a n d y o u r s e l f o n
 Super i n t e n d e n t C o o p e r , C m e f
 Tuesday, 27th Kay, l.Go.

                                 ' , ' - - . H v 1 nr ^a~+cc .r. b e t w e e n C r y s t ad lu r Pi n^ gc - CMe i g u o . ^ o u i c
                  o ro tio sed ’ i n e r t l y
  C h a r l t o n A t h l e t i c - h i c h was t o h a v e ^ ^ P - ^ ^                                      ^      th e sta d iu m ,
  p re se n t ^ l i c ^ r d e r ^ x 0^                                           w ith « »                                           *
  I understand th                   y                  tivefixture is                                  the'season in the

                          Charlton Athl
  *est possible atmosphere.                                                                                          ^

         It 5s perhaps appropriate to                                             f   ground im?rove=ents .o        ^
   ! = « »hei X made certain                                                     trust that the a r r a n g i n g —
   be considered lor    -he19 / " 4   Given                                       that the neu soason


    w ork w h ic h P o l i c e w o a le a s k            to       /
    th e   se a so n :-                                                                                                 (e .e .          & feet
                                                                   -    -         -ta b le o f s c a l i n g        v e .fe.

    ^tsrrsrsrs -                    ■ „ , » Police Control R » » ( «
                                                                                              *»                                     .
     2)         Construct a purpose o           ^      Members Stand) o
       '         .   t) a Pnom   t o r e p l a c e on&v - -              .      E x n u t e s o_ w-
     s e p a r a t e F*A*           f      T h i s i s a s recom m ended m
     cainsbury s flat roox.                         tqra
     o ain sD iu y              ^ J a n u a r y , 1 9 o°*
     meeting neld                                                       ^ rvont of Compounas
                               pv-istine p e r i m e t e r fencing in - rlirabing over on to
      t         3“          nH o L s X
                                     dali S a ^ end to prevent people c l i ^

      the pitch.                                                                        _ ^n nnur^s                       1 , 2 and 3
                                                                            i * Vi ^iviPGS ^omoour*                           1
      \l    p                 r                ™                  - o - S j a c e ^ t         Compounds.
                               -2-

O   Construct vertical (i.e. at right   angles to the pitch) crash
hlrriers in the Arthur Wait Enclosure   to prevent lateral movemen
n^suDporters'   As a minimum two such   barriers would be required
( i H n e beliu block X and the other   in the area below blocks
U and V).
    Concrete over the grass triangular area at the Park Roaa side of
the Compound J. This prevents access to potential missiles un
the grass.
7)   Re-build/repair the turnstiles at the rear of Compound 3-

M   rvpCt a barbed wire addition to the wall which separates Compound
3 and the Arthur Wait Enclosure to prevent people climbing ou„ o,
the Compound 3 into the Enclosure.

      I aDDreciate that time may prevent the completion


S    ^ e s e m e L s the safety of the public can best be ens^ea.


                             s sincerely,




                         Chief,      intendent.
                                                                                                                                 V: {      / V' <>



                                                                        Ills                                                               /ck;


                                                                        M E TR O P O LITA N           POLICE . . .

M r . R . G . Header:                                                   SOUTH NORWOOD POLICE STATION/
Chairman,         "' '                                                  11’: OLIVER'GROVE • • - “ it * ,
                                                                        SOUTH NORWOOD              ' A V -
Crynt.al' Fa]nee Football. Club,'                                       LONDON SE25GED          . X '-V.
oelhurnt Tark,                                                          Telephone 01 -G 5 3 8568     '
SE25 6 FU                                                                   Your ref.!                             Oui ref.:




                                                                                      18 Ui A p r i l ,    1939



I ' e a r Mi-, tl o a d e r . ,

          Wjl-h r e f n r e n e e l.o y e u r m e c t. i ng eri Monday, 17i.li A p r i l , 1 9 ^ 9
at, o e l h u r s t . P a r k w i t h Chi o f I n s p e c t o r P e r r y , 1 u n d e r s t a n d 1.1mt-
yo u i mvf .ag r e e d l.o r e m o v e t h e w i r e an d s u p p o r t i n g s t a n e h i o n r - a t
1-lie f r o n t o f CVmj-ouudr- 1 and 2 , a n d t o rennove a s i x f o o t o e n l . r o
r e e l i o n o f t h e b a r r l c r r a t t h e f r o n t o f t .h o re c o m p ou n ds .

             In v j ' v o f t h e t r a g i c event.r. at. H i l l s b o r o u g h we a r e l o o k i n g
 c r r c f u . 1 3 ? -'it. t h e r e q i u r o H i e n t r . o f t h e g r o u n d s a f e t y c e r t , i f . i . c n l - e ,
■•’ rid e nv ir - 'j ge a n u m be r o f mod i f i cn 1.5 onf> w h i c h 1 f e e l w i l l net. l.o o u r
iiulu.-’ l I ' m M ' i t. m i d e a l i n g r-t" f e e I. i Vf-ly w i t h c rov.’d r . a f e t y a n d c o n t r o l
a 1,             ur: I P a r k .

      in cr-ier !.<:» dir.ou-rr. t.here, modi fi ea ti onr;, rany I G-nggert. I.hat a
meet ing !.*•t-w^on nr. 5r- arranged-for a date s'oon aft.er t.he nnfe.t-y
inrj-eel.ion of I.he ground »>n -? 1 April. We are already in I.he yy.'r<’rt
of     jev:.ing our con to ngency pin ms, nnd I would .suggest that it’ nJglit.
be appre.rrriat.p l.o hold a "l.ablle-V'P." e^orei^c-^iiivolving your rt-p.ff, ',
olher eir-crg^iiey r.orv.ic"r. and ourr-elver. duriiiTfM.he eloped .'-ear-on.

                                                Yours r-ineerely,



                                                Sally Hubbard,
                                                Chief Superjntenderit.                                     L O N D O N flRE W.IGADE              j
                                                                                                           RUE fftrrEHTWN                        j.
                                                                                                              fctcetveo                          i

                              j SWT. SECT. REC'D.                       .                                         2     4 A P R 198*9 •          i
                              • FILE N                     o                < 5................
                                                                                                          fire p r o t e c t i o n     SECTION
                              j R eferred t o                                                                   f j : TEfttXlNMENTS
                              I soo             '          ______                                                              .an*i     ■ ■
                             I g o .. S £ l 'rn £ n                 1
                              ADO
                              STN.C
                              STN.O
                                  STKO
                                                ^ rm a w n rn ^
                                       M E TR O P O LITA N POLICE

Mr. R.G. Noades,                       south   n 'Or w o o d p o l ic e   s t .;:   ION
Chairman,                              11 OLIVER GROVE
Crystal Palace Football Club,          SOUTH NORWOOD
                                       LONDON SE25 6ED
Selhurst Park,                         Telephone 01 - 653 8568
SE25 6 PU                               Yout ref.:                    Our r e ‘.:




                                               27th April, 1989

Denr Mr. Noades,

     Thank you for your letter of 2^th April, 1989, to which I
reply in conjunction with the results of our meeting at Selhurst
Park on 25th April. In view of the large number of issues raised
at that meeting, it will be easier if I deal with them point•by-
point.

Police Control Room.     It was agreed that, the siting and internal
ari’angeraent of the Portakabin provided to Police will be completed
before the beginning of the 1989-90 season. A direct outside telephone
line will be provided to the control room.

Cinder Track (Saj.nsbury1s Terrace).  The cinder track in front cf the
Sainsbury Terrace is to be concreted to allow it to be used as a childrens
enclosure as already provided for in front of the Arthur Wait Stand and
Holmesdale Terrace. Vie welcome this proposal.

Direct Internal Communic-vtion. A direct communication facility
(e.g. telephone or intercom) is to be installed between the Directors
P.ox and the Police Control Room to allow rapid communication betvreen the
senior club official present and the police match Commander in the e\ent of
a major incident.

Electronic Counter.    A proper electronic means of establishing the number
of spectators .in each pr-.rt of t.he ground at any time before and during the
match is to be installed, a remote monitor, showing the same information
is to be installed in the police control room before the beginning of the
next season.

Sub-division of the Arthur Wait non-members enclosure. A barrier, running
from front to rear of the non-members enclosure, is to be sited in front
of seated block 1U 1, thereby sub-dividing the area.



                                                             - cont. -
P .A . Announcements■ With the siting of the P.A. override
facility in the Police control room, Police will make the
emergency announcements (i.e. alert, stand-down, and evacuation
message). The wording of various schedules to the Safety
Certificate will need amendment to clarify responsibility for
P.A. announcements.

Crowd Safety Officer. We agree that, whilst C.P.F.C. should
remain responsible for the structural safety of the ground, a
Charlton Athletic Club official should be appointed to act for
that club as Crowd Safety Officer on their match days.

Extension of Membership, Family and Seated Area.   We support the
Club in their intention to extend these areas.

Stewards. The effectiveness of Stewards in enforcing the ground
regulations needs to be improved. Police can and will take action
in cases of unacceptable behaviour, but the initiative and support-
of Stewards is essential, particularly in areas of the ground which are
lightly policed. This may on occasion require sufficient commitment
to become involved as witnesses for a prosecution.

Stewards will also keep clear the steps between the Arthur Wait Stand
and the Sainsbury's Terrace.

Call Signs for Stewards. In order to improve radio communications
between Stewards and Police, it was suggested that Stewards be
allocated call signs appropriate to their location and function. I
suggest a meeting between the Chief Steward and Chief Inspector Perry
to discuss and agree this.

Outside P.A. facility. lour suggestion to install P.A. loudspeakers
outside the ground to enable direct communication with waiting
spectators is certainly welcome and we would support any application
to the Football Trust to fund this.

       Wishing the Club well in these last few nail-biting matches.

                         Yours sincerely,



                         Sally.Hubbard,
                         Chief Superintendent.
                                                              45 75

Borough Planning Officer
London Borough of Croydon                                     IFS/SSG9
Planning and Transportation
 Department                                                   I   ____ G Q
Taberner House                                                '         ^
Park Lane
Croydon CR9 1JT




Dear Sir/i-iadara,

SAFETY O f SPORTS GROUND ACT 1 9 7 5
CRl'S’iA ii ir’ALACi F C , isiiLrilliiS'f PARK, Sii2;>

Thank you for copies of letters forwarded to these offices with reference to the
above-mentioned club "by yourselves and the jfolice, regarding safety matters
within the ground, which have previously been imposed on the club by the General
Safety Certificate which was issued under the above-mentioned legislation.

In the past, it has not been Council practice to consult the Brigade on matters
relating to "means of escape", however, in view of recent events, I must aavise
you that the brigade will, in any future consultation, be commenting on all
matters of fire safety, including means of escape arrangements.

With reference to the letter sent by the i'ietropolitan Policc direct to the Club,
it is brought to your attention that any amendments or alterations to the Safety
Certificate should be made via the Council. Action taken arbitrarily without
due regard for other requirements of the Safety Certificate could have or create
other problems within the ground.

If it is proposed to alter the condition of the ground, as detailed in tne
General Safety Certificate, it is recommended that an urgent meeting of the
Safety Team be called to discuss any changes, so that all parties concerned are
seen to be working collectively.

Within the letter from the Metropolitan Police, it has been noted that they are
looking at existing contingency plans.

It is assumed that they are referring to their own overall strategy on match
days, and not the evacuation procedures as approved in Schedule 4 of the General
Safety Certificate for which the Brigade are responsible after consultation.




                                                    -1 -
      i     Brigade would welcome any exercise being considered and, once details of the
    ' date and time ara known, the information will be forwarded to the Area Commander
      of South West Area for operational input.

     The foregoing is forwarded for your information and attention.

     Yours faithfully,




     A. R. JONES
H
     Assistant Chief Officer
     Information and Fire Safety




                                            -2 -
EX T        :   760-5485
Y O U R REF:
M Y REF     :   BPO/HS
DATE            17TH M a y 1989
TO          :   P L A NNING A N D T R A N S P O R T A T I O N D E P A R T M E N T

SUBJECT    :    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS A C T 197 5
                FIRE S A F E T Y A N D SA FETY OF PLACES OF SPORT A C T 1987
                SELHU R S T P ARK STAD I U M


                A G E N D A for m e e t i n g to be h e l d at T a b e r n e r House on
                THURSDAY, 18th M a y 1989 at 2.30 P.M.In ROO M 12.11


                1. Re p o r t b y the M e t r o p o l i t a n Police on last Satu r d a y ' s
                   incident.

                2. Pitch p e r i m e t e r      fencing.

                3. A l t e r n a t i v e Sa f e t y staff       for C h a r l t o n A t h l e t i c
                   matches.

                4. Gate      12.

                5. A n y o t h e r Business.
                                                                               Reference                                                 ...........................

                                                                                                                                  QsJUut-p             V-'C -

                                                                                                         ^ vfiikuJUji Q x > 4 ^




                                l^iotp               '^cav         V-c L p .



                 t M         J                                                                           J p          W       - t        * *                                   ^


                                  G        ^ b J                                             ^                                                                         C X ^ A ^         .


                 P o -L ltf            &       t e f c d               f e t "           ^



    “&          <^L^>             ,voc(U                                                                   c u S z u U *t°,


    h   , ,          i u    w           < t=              *            v           *                                                                                   7           ~




    u. — • —                                                                                                                                                               *

    ^                                                                                                ^                    +              M        “      ~      T


<       W              t u        j .                * «       ,           “   J 1-      1       -                «       '   4      —                    Ju               ^


*           J               f c    ,              U      J                                   4            —                   T 1-           ■—                                f * * “



L>\         <££fcrfi2M_J2J? .



                 ^                         J     L       ^ c       ^       o   ,       t e o k                ^                                                                ^



    j w         c ^        . , cdi               p         «       ^                   « i       e 0 ^                               ^ cce^                  . tl7                 *"
                                                                               i             .. /                     /       - /                            \0 j 2J ta ~
- k a ,                                              ^                                                                    ^
                                                         «*>           ^                                                                     +     -



    So|2|7</*-t£^*
                         2.       :                               ^                             ^         C.C..             ^


                  UO^iten                  C   a        ^        P        o           X     a        . p'ovl^

                  tb,                                                                                                   ^ W "


              Q ^ jitx ^ . WjjU ;

                                           M U          f\ lo o J U ^

                                                                                                               atO              ^cA&Cu
                                                                                                                                * CttLft-C_D
                                                   S.Uov-W              W»




             U . < L          C / V ^ A o -                                                          U     j    f       c   ^      ^


             |l\io                                 .
                   1


         €tev.          a-.

                                                   1^            <^           u W i                 a^c^r                ^slr



     ^L      u a   J    ooj^               W                    p«^<Oai=>                       ts                          ^

      C^T          ^>cJ£              .                     ^                         ^     °


     \jtp          ^ u ib                  tte ^ u                ^               ^                            ^                   ^


  o      ^    u     J    b                 4   -                                    l l W       ~     ^             ^


     ^       ^vv^cJL>                          « ^ L            o a * j^      .

                              U                                             07^2            ArS^      ^ rQ C s z ^ z A ^

  toi^                 CUuo^                                    U/vbd              C/tjjk'fei             QcSxxxJ>

  c s ^ ^ J b i                           tkjB^             S-Qoi/Dew .




                         ^            U'^ajvvajJ                     ~U*P          Q i^aju^xt—                      o^

                                                       I'fc^i          €>         COO^              LLAvUm^c^ ^ • ' t


C X u l            Sctfli"*               fetJ o \o < V M ^           U A J tiU -         A x J & b '           ta s
 F       I               i                     i i                                                         U ^—             4-         I
FORM 4 00 3                                           R eference.                                    .....


                                                         o\jl^       (tv              CXJL-dJUjO *-v




                                ULt)    »&vdl    c£   H*p                           \,W-   t-          Cr©^ctcD^>.


              ^fcjfcl       fetl       tk^      u^K**?                  ^       ^^CCl^vvilxD                    ^ -C -


              V^ A j   c id /l- £ ^    Qj u L   <VvoJiQ     a ^ )f* £ r^ r^ J S )      o i i j 2A t^ fc u ^ ^       ^


              c   W    ^£>03^         OAi   Avjfc?       o J b * ^     SactcoK^            —    ^                       .




                                                                                                            'S lD
                                                                                                                        «
Building Control
                                                                                  \
London Borough of Croydon                                      IFS/SSG9/JLC/PG
Taberner House
Park Lane
Croydon
CR9 3JT

(For the attention of Mr Wilson)




Dear Sir,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT
CRYSTAL PALACE F.C., SELHURST PARK, SE25

Further to the safety meeting of 18 May 1989 at your offices, the following
points were raised by the Brigade which they were unaware of;-

1.   The Brigade have made comment with reference to Gate 12. However, it would
     now appear that Sainsburys intend to carry out alterations to the car park
     layout which might have an adverse affect on access/egress of emergency
     vehicles. I suggest that details are forwarded so that consideration can
     be given to any proposals.

2.   The actual roadway within the car park is not capable of withstanding the
     weight loading of an emergency^vehicle. I have written to the South West
     Area Commander requesting any observations he may have to offer in respect
     to this matter and I will contact you again in due course.

3.   Following the Hillsborough tragedy it is understood that following a
     meeting with council officers, the Police and the club that an opening has
     been made in compounds 1 & 2.

The Brigade were not party to this inspection and would ask that details be
forwarded for information at your earliest convenience.

Yours faithfully,




for Assistant Chief Officer
Information and Fire Safety
       c                                       London Fire Brigade
                                               Albert Embankment, London SET 7SD

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY       Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                              G D Clarkson QFSM BA(Hons)

                                              Telephone 01-587 4000
                                              Telex 918200
Mr M M Caller
                                              My extension
Chief Executive
London Borough of Barnet                      My reference
Town Hall                                     Your reference
Hendon                                        Date            May 1989
London NW4 4BG




Dear Mr Caller                                           ‘

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

One of the requirements of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 is that the
local authority (in this case the relevant London borough) should consult the
fire authority about the terms and conditions to be included in a general
safety certificate. Such consultation has taken place, but there has been one
area of notable omission in that local authorities are making independent
decisions on provisions "for means of escape in case of fire" without any
reference to the fire authority.

Most London local authorities have set up "safety teams" to review standards of
safety at such sports grounds. However, even within this arena of discussion
local authority representatives have declined to ask for, or chosen not to
accept, fire authority comments relating to "means of escape" provisions.

For example, it has been decided to erect perimeter fences at some sports
grounds to enhance crowd cohtrol. Where this has occurred, there has been no
consultation with the fire authority to consider what measures can be adopted
to overcome any difficulties that such structures may present to people trying
to escape a fire.

Within the context of fire safety, "means of escape" is the single most
important issue. Therefore I shall be instructing my officers that they will
make comments on all aspects of fire safety during the consultation process.
Similarly, officers will be directed to address the issue of "means of escape"
in any future discussions of the "safety teams" and they will formally record
their findings and recommendations for submission to the relevant local
authority.
I trust that this action will be positively received and that it resolves this
issue so that in future the fire authority is fully consulted.

However, if this expectation is not realised, the fire authority will make an
appeal to the Court as an "interested party" in those cases where it is
considered that proper arrangements have not been made to secure means of
escape in case of fire.

jYours sincerely




G D CLARKSON
Chief Fire”Officer and Chief Executive
London Fire and Civil Defence Authority
       l UA                                   The County Hcii
                                              London SE1 7PB

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
                                              Clerk to the Authority
                                              Mrs D M Buckle BSc(Soc)Lond

 J.A.Howard Esq.,                             Telephone 01 -633
 Home Office,                                                                  5131
                                              Room                             103
 Queen Anne’s Gate                            My reference                     CL/DB
 London SW1H 9AT
                                              Your reference
                                              Date                     5 September 1986




Dear Mr Howard,

PREMISES LICENSED FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT - INSPECTIONS
BY THE FIRE AUTHORITY

The Authority’s Urgency Committee at their meeting on 14 August 1986
considered a report by the Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive on the
question of the Authority’s future policy for the inspection of premises
licensed for public entertainment and certain other premises of a similar
nature. Copies of the report and the full text of the Committee’s decisions
thereon are enclosed.

Arising -from these'decisions, there are two aspects on which I need to write
to you: Cl) The need to seek an increase in the Authority's approved
establishment; and (2) To express concern about inconsistencies in the
legislation relating to entertainments licensing and similar matters.

(i)   The need for an Increase in the Authority’s approved establishment

The report (in section 2) examines the Authority’s statutory responsibilities
in relation to the inspection of places of public entertainment from the fire
safety point of view and concludes that in certain respects the current level
of inspections falls short of what is required. It goes on (in section 4) to
propose a series of options for discharging the Authority’s own functions in
relation to such premises and for offering to the London borough councils (as
licensing authorities) an agency service for the carrying out of more detailed
inspections.

The Committee decided that the Authority should adopt Option D, i.e. both to
provide a level of service which takes account of its statutory
responsibilities and includes an assessment of the relative risk’s-associated
with the different uses of premises such as to reflect the'Authority’s concern
for public safety, and to provide a full agency service to the 18 London
borough councils which provisionally accepted the offer made by the Authority
in its interim phase to provide such a service. In addition the Committee
decided to repeat the offer of an agency service to the fifteen London borough
councils which previously declined it.
The proposed level of inspections considered necessary to meet the Authority’s
statutory responsibilities, taking into account the risks presented by
different uses of premises, is as follows:

Numbers       Types of      Annual        Other           Other Public        Estimated
of premises    premises   Inspections     Daytime         Safety Insps.         Total
    —                                   Inspection        while in use

 105         Cinemas           1                                3                420
  39         Dance Halls       1                                3                156
   5         Exhib. Halls      1                         Depending on use         -


   5         Libraries         1                                0                     5
 621         Other (clubs,
          discos, rest'rnts)    1                               2               1863
 223         Public Halls
               (small)          1                               1
             Public Halls                                                        300
               (large)          1                               2
 560         Pubs
             (a) discos         1                               2
             (b) video or                                                       1400
                music only      1                               0
   5         Schools            1                               1                 10
  96         Theatres           1                    1          6                768
  10         University         1                               1                 20
                                                                                4942
                                Plus revisits and specifics @ 20X               1000
                                                                                6000

Taking into account the devolvement of the inspection function where
appropriate to station commanders and other station personnel (with consequent
staff savings), it is estimated that the above 6000 inspections a year could
be undertaken with a net requirement over and above the Brigade's approved
establishment for 1986—87 as follows:

                           Uniformed staff

                           7 x Station Officer

                           Non-uniformed staff

                           2 x Main Grade 11
                           2 x Main Grade 12                        Total 11

The total number of additional staff required to provide an agency service in
the 18 ’accepting’ boroughs is estimated to be as follows:

                           Ifalformed staff

                           1 x Divisional Officer III
                           5 x Station Officer

                           Non-uniformed staff

                           1 x Main Grade 10                        Total 7
                 S t c t f f who WOllld fos lTSQtll          IF t*V»a l ^   __ •   _

  follows- Were n0W t0 accept the ^ thority's offer, is e ^ i L L n r b e T , 1"8
  follows:

                                    Uniformed staff

                                    2    x Station Officer

                                    No^-uniformed staff

                                             jiain Grade 10                        Total 3

 Accordingly, the Secretary vof State’s approval is now sought in accordance
 Support^erv?     °f^ 6 FirC aUd CiVil tefence Authorities (Establishment,
         SefVlc®8 *nd Management Schemes) Regulations 1985 to an inrease of 21
 follows:8        ^thoritjr.s approved eatabliataant for tha y e a A T 86 - 7 , L


                                    Uniformed staff

                                 1 x Divisional Officer III
                                14 x Station Officer

                                    Non-unlformed staff

                                    2 x Main Grade 10
                                    2 x Main Grade 11
                                    2 x Main Grade 12

t ^ H ^ Z f , 18 T 8ht °n th^ under8tandlng that the three positions relating
the A u t h o °4 anJ ? 1 enCy18efVlCe f°r horo^ h3 whlch previously refused
the Authority's offer will only be filled if a sufficient number of these
boroughs now accept it.                                   ....

The estimated full-year costs (at November 1985 prices) of the above 21
   Z       8ta5f* lllcludln? 8alarle8» “ t10" 11 insurance and superannuation
the p W                     * ±S £309’976* of thl8 sum* £151.575 relates to
the eleven additional positions required to enable the Authority to meet its
          responsibilities and will therefore be met by the Authority; and
fir     rreiateL t0 tI?e t6n P°8ltlon8 required to provide an agency service
for the Iondon borough councils and will be fully recoverable from those
         *   J1*1* C°8tS in the current f a u c i a l year will depend upon the dates
             positions are filled. For the purpose of charging the boroughs
for the agency service, the staff costs will be increased by some 36 per cent
to recoup related overhead costs such as accommodation and central
administration.

I would point out that the possible need for the additional positions for
which approval, is now sought was referred to in paragraph l(a)(iii) of the
letter dated 6 March 1986 frofi? the former Clerk to the Authority (Mr
T.Musgrave) to yourself (your reference FIR/86 500/24/1). It is also now
clear that the Authority's Establishment Scheme for 1986-7, as submitted to
you and subsequently approved by the Home Secretary, was based on a
misapprehension of the statutory role of the Authority in relation to




                                —       V-

                                                   -   3 -
entertainments licensing. With regard to the proposed agency service to the
18 'accepting* boroughs, it is understood that all these boroughs have relied
on the Authority's offer of an agency service being fulfilled in making their
own arrangements to carry out their entertainments licensing functions.

In the light of the above factors and the important public safety
considerations involved it is hoped that this request will be considered
sympathetically.

(2)   Inconsistencies in legislation relating to entertainments licensing
      and similar matters

The legislation relating to the licensing of entertainments premises is
contained in a number of statutes with differing provisions. Under the
Cinemas Act 1985 the fire authority is required to be notified by applicants
for the grant, renewal or transfer of a licence and in deciding on the
application, the licensing authority is specifically required to have regard
to any observations made by the fire authority. Under the provisions of
Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963, which apply in the case of
premises licensed for a variety of public entertainments (see Appendix A of
the enclosed report), there is no such specific requirement on the licensing
authority. In the case of similar premises outside London, by contrast, under
the local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 the licensing
authority is specifically required to have regard to observations by the fire
authority. More significantly, under the Theatres Act 1968 there is no
statutory requirement that the fire authority be notified in connection with
licence applications. The provisions also differ as regards the fire
authority's power of entry. Under Schedule 12 and under the Theatres Act 1968
the fire authority has a power of entry for the purpose of ascertaining
whether licence conditions etc. are complied with, whereas under the Cinemas
Act 1985 an authorised officer of the authority is also empowered to inspect
for the purpose of ensuring that there are adequate fire precautions and that
relevant provisions (including regulations and licence conditions etc.)
relating to fire precautions are complied with.

The Authority wishes to express   concern regarding these discrepancies and
inconsistencies, which increase   the difficulty in establishing the respective
roles of the fire authority and   the licensing authority, and to ask that
action be taken at the earliest   opportunity to standardise the relevant
legislation, preferably in line   with the Cinemas Act 1985.

Yours sincerely,




MRS D.M.BUCKLE
Clerk to the Authority
 ' “ r - iN L U - A   O


    $                 HOME OFFICE
                      Q ueeii A n n e ’s Gate L ond on S W l r f 9 A T                                            : i l..-
                                                                  D ire c t l b : 01-213    -      5
                                                                                                   55
                                                                                                    2
                                                                S w itc h b o a rd 01-213 3000




Mrs D Buckle B.Sc                                                                          Your reference *

Clerk to the London Fire and                                                               CL/DB
                                                                                           O u r rcfcrcncc
  Civil Defence Authority
Room 103                                                                                   FIR/86 500/24/3
                                                                                           D ste
The County Kali
LONDON                                                                                          17 December 1986
SET 7PB____________________


               M /i


PREMISES LICENCED FOR.PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT: INSPECTIONS BY THE FIRE AUTHORITY

I am sorry that you have not received an earlier substantive reply to your letter
of 5 September.

We are content with the Authority's proposed arrangements for the inspection of
premises licenced for public entertainment, both in respect of discharging i-s own
statutory responsibilities and providing an agency service to the London borough
councils. Consequent upon this we agree to an amendment of the-establishment scheme
to provide 21 fire prevention posts to undertake this work.

However the 21 pests will have to be found from within the existing establisnment.
The approval for their redeployment to fire prevention duties does not convey approval
for an overall increase to the establishment.

We note the Authority's comments about inconsistencies in legislation relating to
entertainments licensing and similar matters. We would expect tnat any I'juiire
legislation in this area would be in line with the relevant arrangements in -ne
Cinemas Act 1985.

We would be happy to discuss any of this with the Authority.                                                           ^
                                                                                                VavjfS.
                                                                                                    I         r./ *
                                                                                                   |4/U o t v u T U
                                           0vLondori Fire Brigade


LFCDA
                                               iFre Prgsention Branch
                                             Que'ensborough House
                                             ‘1 2-1 8 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7TJ

LONDON FIRE A ND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY     Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                             G D Clarkson QFSM BA (Hons)

                                             Telephone 01-587 4000
 Mr C. Wood BSc, MICE, Dip TP, MRTPI         Telex
 Chief Executive                             My extension
 London Borough of Brent
                                             My reference     IFS/ADV/8/2
 Town Hall                                   Your reference
 Forty Lane
 Wembley                                                  2 C=I June 1989
 HA9 9HX



 Dea:

 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

 As you will be aware the Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Taylor to
 inquire into the events at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on
 15 April 1989, which led to the tragic loss of 95 lives.

 Lord Justice Taylor has asked-me to make a specific submission to the inquiry,
 which I have provided. A copy is enclosed for your information.

 As you will read, the submission includes recommendations which have
 significant implications for the control of sports grounds in the future.

 Reference is made to the concerns I expressed in my recent letter (May 1989)
 concerning the erection of perimeter fencing and the implications for meins of
 escape (Section 4.1 refers).

 Amendments are proposed to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 to make
 "safety teams" obligatory and enable police or fire authority representatives
 to issue prohibition notices, under Section 10 of the Act, in the absence of a
 local authority representative (Sections 3 and 4.4 refer).

 The Local Government Act 1963 - Schedule 12 - should be amended to oblige the
 licensing authority to consult the fire authority, and take cognizance of its
 recommendations, when considering an application to licence an indoor sports
 facility (Section 4.3 refers). This would put London on an equal footing with
 the remainder of England and Wales where the Local Government (Miscellaneous
 Provisions) Act 1972 applies.

 I regard these, and all of the other recommendations made in the submission,
 as essential if the interests of those members of the public using such
 facilities are to be adequately safeguarded.

 Yours sincerely,




 G. D. CLARKSON
 Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive
                                                            & Z j2 ^    .

                                                                       csLus.


Wembley Stadium - Emergency Procedures Meeting
Held on Tuesday 30th May 1989 at Wembley Stadium


Present -

Stuart Monro (Chair)                   -   Supt. Traffic 7 Area HQ
George Henderson                       -   Inspector of Traffic Finchley
Colin Wickes                           -   L.B. of Brent Licensing
Ray Pepper                             -   L.B. of Brent Traffic
Alan Ward                              -   L.B. of Bremt Traffic
Chris Palmer                           -   Wembley Stadium Community Relations
Sid Franks                             -   Wembley Stadium Security
Alan Coates                            -   National Car Parks
Tony Hollingsworth                     -   S D A London Ambulance Service
Ted Edwards                            -   D A O London Ambulance Service
Nigel Sawyer                           -   D O London Fire Brigade
Arthur Potter                          -   Special Events Kingsbury
Andy Taylor                            -   Special Events Kingsbury



1     Minutes of last meeting
      Agreed and approved

2     Points arising

LFB

2.1       Brent licensing asked that the LFB take particular care in their
           announcement to their units regarding the nature of the incident
           noted by LFB.

2.5       It was agreed and confirmed that George Wise would be at the
           Stadium offices to meet the initial response from LFB.

2.10      A room, most probably the press lounge would be made available
           for the de-brief.


LAS

2.1        7 Staff Cars from as far as Hillingdon and Friern Barnet would be
           utilised for the exercise.

2.2        Wembley Stadium stated that     R.V.P.3 would be ready and usuable.
           An anticipated pop concernt at the arena had not been booked.

           Comments - Wembley asked if St John Ambulance Brigade would be
           used in the exercise. LAS stated that they would be present
           but not involved.
                                             MAJOR INCIDENT EXERCISE
                                     LIST OF CO-OR DI NA TI NG AUTHORITIES


 HOSPITALS

 Miss ________________ Out-Patient                  Services                 Telephone
 Administrator;
 ADDRESS:            Central Middlesex                                       965   5733
                     A c t o n Lane,
                     L o n d o n , N W i O 7NS .


 is .                                Senior Administrative Assistant
ADDRESS                             eneral                                   952 2 3 c 1




                                Act in g Unit Administrator;
                               iltant, A c c i d e n t   and Emergency:
 iDDRESS:           Northwick Park                                           8
                                                                             645
                                                                               3       ii
                    Watford Road,
                    Harrow,
                    H A 1 3UJ .


Rcval N at io na l O r t h o p a e d i c Hospital                            9 5 4 2 3 00
Brcckley H i l l ,
S tanrr.ore ,
H A 7 4LP.


L O N D O N A M 3 o L A N C z S^-^VICn

M r.    E .C .   EDWARDS, Assistant Divisional               Officer;
ADDRESS:            Kenton Ambulance Station                                 2 04 0 2 3 1
                    The M a l l ,
                    Kenton,
                    H a r r o w , H A 3 9 TF .


L O N D O N B O R O U G H 0? 5 R E N T

M r.                             Safety Officer;
ADDRESS:           R o o m 5-6,                                              900 5184
                    Brent House ,
                     3 49 H i g h R o a d ,
                    W e m b l e y , H A 9 6 AD.

LONDON      FIRE AND CIVIL D E F EN CE A UT HORITY
Mr.     R.V.     MARKS,   Divisional Officer;
ADDRESS:           London Fire Brigade
                    Nor th West Area,
                                                                             5
                                                                             874
                                                                               73
                                                                                5
                    5 9 1A H a r r o k R o a d ,
                    Wembley, Middx, HAO 2 E G .

                                                                             902 2222
                                    Page 3



       EXERCISE PLANNING MEETINGS


       7th JANUARY 1987




       21st JANUARY 1987




      4th FEBRUARY 1987




           FEBRUARY 1987




      EXERCISE


\-J       FEBRUARY 1987
                        lapsed wall as a fire a n d d r u n k e n footbaM fans
                        raged a r o u n d the m at W e m b l e y S tad iu m on
                        T u e s d a y night.
                             This was.not an o th e r disaster, how ev er, in the B rad fo rd or
                         Hevsel Stadium tradition. T h e sta d iu m was m erely practising
                                                                                                          stage make believe
                                                3
                                                0.0
                                                  00
                         for a real disaster sh ould it e v er occur.
                             Wembley spent £               to stage the practice in conjunc-
                         tion v*ith the local police an d o t h e r em ergency services. 1,000
                         peo ple took part in the exercise in total.                          ’
                                                                                                            ‘serious incident’
                             Police from W em bley station, firem en from W em bley and
                         P ark Koval stations an d staff from the C en tral M iddlesex and
                         Northwick Park hospitals too k p a rt in th e exercise.
                            Observers from the H o m e Office, th e Fo o tb all Association
                        a n d other interested bodies w ere o n h an d to watch.
                            T h e scenario for the disa ster was th at a wall had collapsed
                        a n d a fire b ro ken out during a football m atch.
                             To ad d realism fans lay u n d e r n e a th ru bb le-strew n terraces
                        " c ry ing " with agony while in the b a c k g ro u n d the ro ar of (he
                        crowd bellowed out.
                            It was decided that the m ajority of fans d id not realise what
                        was happening an d the " m a t c h ” was sup p o sed to be co n tin u ­
                        ing.
                            T h e police were the first into action an d they w o rk ed with
                        the Fire Brigade to pull the inju re d from the rubble.
                            V' hile the police c o rd on ed off an area the firemen would
                       (end to any fires.
                            W em hley medical staff t e n d e d the injured while the m o re
                       seriously h urt were treated by field hospitals m a n n e d by local
                       hospital personnel.
                           A m b ulan ces an d police vans sto o d by ready to ferry those
                       needing greater attentio n to waiting hospitals.
                           David Griffiths, w em b ley ’s chief executive, w ho instigated
                       (he e x e r a s e after seeing film of the B r a d f o rd City disaster,
ip to deal with both   afterw ard s declared himself well pleased with th e n ig h t’s
                       evenis.
   before they are
                           “ It was an overwhelm ing success," h e said. “ W e have
                       learned an awful lot. "




                             • “DRUNKEN louts” on the ram page at
                             W embley. In fact, they are cadets from Hen-
                             don.                                                                • AGONY acting from one of the “casualties"




                                                                                                      '
           THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF
             FIRE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

                           your ref                                             please reply to:




               INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS» ASSOCIATION




                                               June 1989




                                General Manager: K. E. Rose, IPFA, FRVA
      Registered Office: Fire Service Headquarters, Lancaster Circus Queensway, Birm ingham B4 7DE
SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS* ASSOCIATION




1.     Introduction

1.1   The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers’ Association (CACFOA) is
      the professional organisation representing all Principal Fire Brigade
      Officers in Local Authority Fire Brigades in Great Britain.        The
      Association is non political and is not a trade union. The objectives
      of the Association include arrangements for members to act as advisers
       to the Home Secretary's Central Fire Brigades’ Advisory Council, to
       Fire Authorities and many technical organisations,      including the
       British Standards Institution.

1.2   With regard to matters associated with the Safety at Sports Grounds
      Act, 1975, and its related provisions, many of our members represent
       their respective Fire Authorities.  The position of the Fire Authority
       is that of an ’interested party’ which has the right to appeal against
       anything in, or the omission of anything from, the Safety Certificate,
       or against refusal of a local authority to amend or replace a Safety
       Certificate.   In practice, fire officers are closely involved in the
       drafting of Fire Certificates for sports grounds and generally there is
       an excellent liaison with the Police, the Building Authority and other
       persons involved in this process.

1.3   Fire Service Officers are suitably qualified, trained and experienced
       in the command and management of fire and rescue incidents.        Such
       duties have entailed considerable involvement and expertise in the
       procedures and practical application of emergency evacuation of varying
       numbers of persons from buildings and other areas affected by fire or
       suspected fire. In these circumstances, we suggest that our views will
       be relevant to your Inquiry.

1.4   It is relevant to point out that in the past Principal Fire Service
       Officers have given forewarning of the likelihood of various disasters,
       including those involving football stadia.    It is unfortunate that a
       disaster or series of small catastrophes have been necessary before
       safety legislation has been enacted.     The information contained in
       Appendix ’A ’ to this submission gives a startlingly clear, prophetic
       picture of a view given by a Chief Fire Officer over 20 years ago
       concerning potential disasters at football grounds.       The concerns
       expressed by this officer formed the basis of the report which was
       subsequently submitted by Chief Fire Officers to the Wheatley Committee
       following the serious accidents at Ibrox Park Football Ground in 1971.
       That same report was appended to our submission to Justice Popplewell
       following the tragic fire at Bradford City Football Club; we make no
       apologies for including the original paper yet again, as many of the
       points it contains are current and valid when looking at Safety at
       Sports Grounds.
Ift      «**b«i»si©n' we -have- addressed our views and reeorattendations
mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Service and the legislative
aspects pertinent to safety at sports grounds.     We have not dwelt on
the fire related measures.     This is intentional as our views on fire
safety were expressed to Justice Popplewell in relation to the Inquiry
held after the Bradford stadium fire disaster. In these circumstances,
the following submission relates to relevant measures for crowd safety
and the means of escape provisions contained in the legislation
governing Safety Certificates for Sports Grounds and Stadia.

Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadia

We regard a sports ground as any place where sport or similar
competitive activities take place in the open air and where the
accommodation is covered or open with seating or standing facilities
for   spectators.   A   sports  stadium   is  a sports ground  where
accommodation for spectators wholly or partially surrounds the area
used for the activities taking place therein.

For the purpose of this submission, any reference to sports       ground,
sports stadium or stadia should be considered to be the same.

The Wheatley Report

We have taken into consideration that     in May 1972 the Rt. Hon. Lord
Wheatley submitted to the Secretary of     State for the Home Department
and the Secretary of State for Scotland    the report of his Inquiry into
Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds. It was    from his report that the Safety
at Sports Ground Act 1975 evolved.

Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia of football and
rugby clubs patronised by paying members of the public who attend in
large numbers to watch sporting events. Under the heading "The Nature
of the Problem” , on pages 2 and 3, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report,
Lord Wheatley identified the problem areas common to most stadia.

Following Lord Wheatley’s report, and subsequently that of Justic
Popplewell,  major  steps have been taken to improve the safety
provisions and relative legislation applicable to sports grounds and
stadia.

The Popplewell Report

We consider that many people lose sight of the fact that Justice
Popplewell was not only looking at the tragic fire which engulfed the
stand at Bradford City with the loss of 56 lives, he was also taking
into consideration the trouble which occurred on that same fateful day
in May 1985 at Birmingham City Football Club where crowd disturbances
caused considerable damage at the ground which resulted in the collapse
of a wall, killing one young man and injuring seventeen other people;
hence the title of the Inquiry being ’’Committee of Inquiry into Crowd
Safety and Control at Sports Grounds” .
Justice Popplewell made a number of specific recommendations in his
Report. Inthis connection, it would be useful to ascertain the extent
to which these recommendations have been applied in respect of
training, the provision of stewards and the manning of exit gates, etc.
at various premises.   It is for this reason that we would advise that
Justice Popplewell's recommendations are reviewed and those which have
not been implemented as statutory requirements be made so, especially
where they are relevant to crowd control and behaviour.

Safety at Sports Grounds and Stadia

Whether premises used for sports are called sports stadia or sports
grounds is immaterial;      whether the competition is concerned with
football, cricket, rugby, athletics or even horse racing, is equally of
only passing interest.   The real problems which need addressing are the
numbers  of   spectators   likely  to attend,   whether  the facilities
available are suitable and whether members of the public and other
people entering those premises for any purpose can escape safely and
without injury if the need arises for whatever reason.

The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in 1986 and commonly
referred to as the ’Green Guide’ is, in our view, a helpful document.
However, the status of the Green Guide should be strengthened from its
present voluntary standard, with no legal force, to a mandatory
standard similar to the mandatory rules in Part B of the English
Building Regulations.     This means that the safety requirements for
sports grounds could only be achieved by complying with the contents of
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.   Where local circumstances are
such that it is excessive to require the standards in the Green Guide
as a matter of course, either because of the very limited attendance or
the low risk presented by the layout of the ground, then the local
authority should be able to relax them subject to the agreement of the
other interested parties.

The Green Guide is aimed primarily at advising on safety and, as such,
it takes account of      the constraints and difficulties^ which are
present.  The general principles of the Guide make the point that the
inter-relation of all the components in the safety formula is essential
and that none of them should be considered in isolation. We feel that
the principle which must over-ride all others in the safety system is
that it should fail to safety.     This principle is well used by Fire
Officers in assessing fire safety requirements of public buildings and
places of work and historically has proven to be successful.   Reliance
should not be placed     upon anything other than the occupants* own
unaided efforts to enable them to proceed to a place of safety in the
event of a fire or any other emergency.

We believe that casualties may not have occurred at all if the guidance
contained in the Green Guide had been followed both before and during
the incident which is the subject of this Inquiry.        Therefore, we
believe the full emphasis ought not to be on the investigation and the
adequacy of the standards in the Guide, but upon their implementation
and practice by the relevant authorities/organisations.
We consider there is a tendency for time to dim awareness       of the
importance of some safety provisions and the need to rehearse them,
together  with   the   assessment  of priorities    between commercial,
f     i     n     a      n     c    i     a     l     t     o    o
easily recede to     the back of the mind, rather than stay in the
forefront as it properly should.    The responsibilities for safety can
be misunderstood due to the involvement of many interested parties.
There is a particular need for the provisions of the Green Guide to be
mandatory with respect to the responsibilities of management.

Having regard to the problem of crowd control in the event of any
emergency, it is our view that the over-riding factor in the selection
of sports grounds for major national and international events should be
the fulfilment of all the "requirements" of the Green Guide as a
condition of that selection.

It is not our intention to restate our views on aspects of construction
relating to stands, their fire safety and structural integrity;    this
we have already done at some length to Justice Popplewell.

In other respects, we recommend that the following aspects in Sections
6 to 11 of this submission be taken into account and implemented as
appropriate by relevant authorities, developers and operators of stadia.

Restraints of Existing Design and Sites

Having regard to the difficulties in adapting existing sites and
designs to current safety needs, it appears essential for relevant
guidance to be strengthened.    We recognise there can be serious
problems arising external to sports grounds as well as within their
curtilage.

Externally

Many grounds are situated in densely populated suburban areas, the
access to the ground being by way of streets through domestic areas.
It follows that access will be naturally restricted due to the widths
of roads, lack of car parking and the ground being short of external
space.  These factors are confirmed if one looks at the site plan of
Hillsborough Football Ground and are contributory to large numbers of
fans congregating at turnstile areas, as was witnessed there.

These restrictions would have the same limiting effects if the ground
were to be evacuated in an emergency.   It is well known that people
having achieved a position of personal safety slow down or stop to
observe what is happening around them.

Turnstiles should be clearly marked and identifiable as to which part
of the ground they give access and, on occasions when specific tickets
have been   issued, turnstiles  should be specially designated to
co-ordinate tickets allowing access to that section of the ground
specified.
We are satisfied with paragraph 189, chapter 11, of the Green Guide
referring to "Access for EmergencyVehicles*'. However,                ^
that the need for regular liaison between the Emergency Services with
regard to this and other such matters common to their involvement.
(See 11.7, Special Risk Plans.)

The Green Guide at Chapter 6, Paragraph 5, covers signposting and we
doubt whether this recommendation is being favoured; we would advocate
that signposting, as detailed in this paragraph, is made mandatory to
form part of the certificate of the sports ground.

Further consideration should be given to Chapter 5, Paragraph 46, of
the Green Guide, with regard to contingency plans for situations where
available entrances at a ground have proved insufficient to stop unduly
large crowds from gathering outside.

We cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances without
adequate crowd control and limitation of numbers.

We have total sympathy with the predicament of the police in     such
situations, but would rather debate now a tangible solution to
preventing such a situation arising than accept it as part and parcel
of spectator activity, which seems more prevalent and problematic to
football than any other sport attracting large crowds.

Internal

With regard to internal safety provisions, we appreciate that much
consideration has been given to these features.       Indeed, we have
assisted the considerations of means of escape and fire safety.     In
this respect, we are glad that many of our recommendations have been
implemented.  However, we would ask that further attention be given to
matters in the paragraphs which follow.

Perimeter fences appear to be needed to discourage pitch invasions and
their use is widespread particularly at football grounds.   There does
not seem to be a common standard type of fence, the design of which
varies from club to club.

We would recommend that where it is considered essential to provide
perimeter fencing, this fencing has sufficient gates to permit crowd
evacuation on to the pitch in a controlled condition.

The design and size of gates in perimeter fences   should be subject to
further investigation.

Control of gates should be vested with the police or suitably trained
stewards under their command.

One of the strongest recommendations we would make in this submission
is for the provision of all-seater stands.
7   Whilst accepting that this recommendation will be unacceptable to
    sports ground managements,    we feel that   it would prevent the
    overcrowding from occurring, i.e. when all the seats are full - the
    ground is full!

8   Justice Popplewell addressed this point and Chapter 6, Paragraph 6.16
    refers.   However, it is still the case that serious incidents arise
    from crowd misbehaviour, and it is our view that further attention
    should be given to the reference made by Justice Popplewell to the
    idiosyncrasies of football fans.

9   If a view is taken that all-seater grounds are not yet feasible, we
    would advocate that grounds are separated into 'spectator pens* with
    sufficient means of escape provision to accommodate the numbers in each
    pen.

10 The density of the occupation of pens should be strictly in accordance
   with the Green Guide.    However, emergency lateral movement should be
   provided and sufficient stewards or Police should be available to
   monitor and control access to each pen.

11 Public address systems should be capable of being used in separate
   areas of the ground, both inside and outside.    They should be audible
   and of distinct clarity to overcome the noise generated by the crowd.

12 Crowd ’reservoir’ areas to the rear of the turnstiles should be
   sufficiently large to accommodate the numbers being admitted to that
   specific area, with sufficient pass door facilities available to permit
   exit from the ground in an emergency.     Cognizance should be given to
   the fact that spectators tend to congregate in areas directly behind
   turnstiles waiting for friends to gain admission.

13 These areas should be strictly controlled by stewards or Police to
   ensure free flow in either direction, should the need arise. The Green
   Guide, Chapter 6, Paragraph 66, relating to the exit gates should be
   strictly followed.

14 Ideally, turnstiles should only permit access to specific areas of the
   ground and numbers entering the area should be monitored by the sports
   ground management.

    Ground Capacities

    As Lord Wheatley recognised, it is important to maintain flexibility in
    any system of control so as to take account of the differing
    circumstances at individual grounds. Characteristics such as age, size
    and mode of construction vary widely from ground to ground.

    Under normal circumstances, most spectator sports attracting a^ regular
    attendance do not suffer problems caused by g r o u n d overcrowding. It
    may be that a proportion wish to view from one particular part of the
    ground and, with regard to football, this is very often behind the two
    goal areas.  In general, this does not affect the overall capacity of
    the grounds.
It is worth considering making more extensive use of the existing
certi#ic#*?l;#ft#pPoeems, to. limit levels of spectator ■attendance, taking
account of any specified works which ought to be carried out.

All of the above would be easily rectified if our recommendation for
all-seater stands was accepted and ground capacities calculated in
accordance with the Green Guide.

We must not lose sight of the special nature of the event taking place
at Hillsborough and we would recommend that those sports grounds
designated as being suitable to accommodate such events are limited in
number and geographically sited to suit all needs.

Stewards

Justice Popplewell was quite specific in his views on the training, use
and provision of stewards at sports grounds.      We consider that his
views, plus the recommendations contained in the Green Guide at Annexe
• B ’ - stewarding, and also Chapter 2 - Management Responsibility in
relation to stewards, are not being properly carried out.

We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the Act
with regard to the responsibility of sports ground managements to
provide and train, etc. suitable numbers of stewards to be responsible
for all apsects of the ground whilst spectators are in attendance.

The number of stewards required at a sports ground to be determined by
the Chief Constable and the Local Authority’s inspection team.

Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis and at times they
may not even turn up.      A responsibility should be placed on the
management of the sports ground to ensure that the pre-determined
number required are on duty.    Failure to provide sufficient stewards
should be reflected in a reduced number of people being allowed in and
a substantial fine being levied against the sports ground management.

Even with the recommendations previously made in the Green Guide, it is
known that stewards are often ill-trained in the nature          of the
responsibilities that go with the job.    It is essential that they are
fully conversant with all emergency procedures and possess a special
knowledge of the area for which they are responsible.

A way to improve the standard of stewards would be for sports ground
managements to provide a list of points which stewards must know and do
(as Annexe ’B ’ Green Guide) and then for them to be tested to ensure
that they are competent, preferably by the Police.    The management of
the sports ground would then issue a certificate of competence which
should be renewed annually.   This is an area where Fire Brigades could
make a positive contribution in respect of fire safety training.
A specified number of stewards should be under control of chief
stewards, dtigf #feewards should be similarly tested bat to a higher
standard to reflect their greater level of responsibility and their
co-ordinating role.

All stewards should come under    the jurisdiction   and   control   of   the
Senior Police Officer present.

Evacuation Control

We are not satisfied that the Police and stewards, at their current
numbers, would be sure of being able to evacuate quickly all or a major
part of many sports grounds.   This is a matter which must be addressed
and, preferably, by our colleagues in the Association of Chief Police
Officers (ACPO).

From our own experience in evacuation for fire purposes, we would
suggest that the starting point is to decide on the evacuation
procedure to be deployed and the part ground staff, principally
stewards, have to play.    The ideal situation would be to make use of
the public address system to relay a coded message that will alert
stewards and other staff to the nature and vicinity of the problem.

No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm in
public areas.   As with other areas of public entertainment,     public
areas situated below a stand should be provided with buzzers and lights
to give staff an indication of a problem.

Effective means of verbal communication should be provided adjacent to
stewards’ positions so that they can contact the control rooms to pass
on information or raise the alarm in the event of an emergency.

Once it is determined that there is a situation which warrants either a
partial   or total   evacuation   and stewards   are   in position,    an
announcement should be made on the public address system          asking
spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as directed by the stewards.

Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators should be relayed
to all emergency service control rooms for information purposes.

Should any assistance be required, as much information relating to the
occurrence must be passed to ensure the correct resources and
assistance are mobilised;  this is of course a matter for local liaison
but needs to be stressed.

Maintenance of Standards

A major concern must be that of ensuring that high standards of safety
are maintained once provided to the satisfaction of the Local Authority
inspection team. The following points should assist that objective.

Any certificate or recommendation should explain fully all the measures
which should be in force and should state the reasons.
                                       10


10.3   'During Performance* inspections in the form of spot cheeks should be
       made to monitor safety standards and the aspects conditional to the
       certificate by designated members      of the Local Authority inspection
       team or Officers acting on their behalf.

10.4   Regular liaison and discussion should take place between management of
       sports grounds and representatives   of the Local Authority inspection
       team.

10.5   Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to all
       employees, both full and part-time.     This must be a management
       responsibility which   should be  reinforced as necessary by the
       professional assistance of the Police, Fire Officers and First Aid
       Instructors.

10.6   The attitude of clubs and management has, on occasion, been unhelpful.
       We would suggest that this is an appropriate time to introduce tougher
       penalties against management who      fail to discharge their duties in
        ensuring standards of public safety and who do not conform to the
        recommendations given to them by official bodies, i.e. Police or Fire
        Service, or disregard the conditions laid down in their certificate or
        the provisions of the Green Guide.   This principle of tougher measures
        should be directed towards the directors and senior management of clubs
        and sports grounds.

10.7   In addition to the conditions imposed, it would be advantageous to
        issue management of sports grounds with a list of ’rules of management
       which explicitly details their responsibilities with regard to public
        safety.
                                                  A
11«    Fire Service Resources

11.1   As indicated at the beginning of this submission, the involvement of
        the Fire Service with regard to      theSafety at Sports Grounds Act
        revolves principally around the fire safety and means of escape
        provision.  However, with regard to operational emergency incidents,
        the relevant local authority Fire Brigade is rightly responsible in law
        for all firefighting and associated operations.   In addition, the Fire
        Brigade normally undertakes the command and rescue needs and other
        categories of emergency incident, but existing law is unclear in
        respect of the responsibilities of command and control at non-fire
        incidents.  Therefore, we consider that the local situation should be
        clarified to confirm the vital role of local authority Fire Brigades.

11.2   As this Inquiry is looking specifically at the disaster which occurred
        at Hillsborough, our operational expertise at such an incident would be
        concerned with the rescue role.

11.3   Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the title ’Fire and Rescue Service’
        and for good reason, as a large proportion of the incidents attended by
        Brigades  are non-fire    situations,  involving danger to life and
        requiring a rescue capability.
11.4    The Fire Service is the only emergency service which has the personnel,
        resources, training, experience and capability to deal with most rescue
        situations.

11.5    The practical involvement of the Fire Service at incidents such as
        Hillsborough is limited and mainly revolves around physically removing
        casualties from a dangerous environment, making the scene safe,
        carrying out resuscitation and first aid until the casualties can be
        handed over to the ambulance service.

11.6    It is recognised that at emergency incidents the Police are usually
        heavily involved in maintaining law and order, organising crowd control
        and dealing with the situation in hand.

11.7    There is a need for the emergency services to liaise, together with the
        management of the sports ground, to formulate ’Special Risk Plans’
        which should take account of every conceivable type of incident that
        could occur and the resources which would be required to deal with it.

11.8    The Fire Service have special appliances dedicated to accident and
        rescue work carrying specialist cutting and rescue equipment, including
        resuscitation apparatus, backed up by disciplined personnel, trained in
        the use of this equipment and qualified to administer first aid.

11.9    At an incident such as Hillsborough, it is essential that effective,
        on-scene liaison takes place between the Senior Officers of all
        emergency services so that maximum utilisation is made of personnel and
        resources available.

11.10 One qualification we would stress is that Fire Service personnel and
       equipment must not be used for crowd control purposes where a civil
       disturbance has occurred.    The Fire Service would, of course, respond
       and deal with fires and rescue of casualties trapped in buildings or
       fires, in debris or wreckage under such conditions as deemed necessary.

11.11 It is essential that all the emergency services are aware of each
       others’ resources, skills and capabilities, as time is of the essence
      when life     is at stake.     A sensible option would be to hold
       inter-service exercises at designated sports grounds involving staff
       with a scenario recommended by the Local Authority inspection team.




5045h
                                                                        APPENDIX ' A 1

                           A C h i e f O f f i c e r ' s View in 1965

                      S a f e t y in F o o t b a l l and S p o r t s S t a d i a



O ccasio n f o r D i s a s t e r

Cinemas and t h e a t r e s a r e a l r e a d y s t r i c t l y c o n t r o l l e d by l e g i s l a t i o n ,
and t h i s has been based p r i m a r i l y upon e x p e r i e n c e g ai n e d from
d i s a s t e r s which have o c c u r r e d b ot h in t h i s Country and in o t h e r
p a r t s of t h e w o r l d . There have, of c o u r s e , been d i s a s t e r s in
f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s , b u t so f a r t h e r e a p p e a r s l i t t l e e v i d e n c e t h a t
a n y t h i n g has been done t o p r o f i t from p r e v i o u s d i s a s t e r s by way of
impr oving t h e s a f e t y s t a n d a r d s f o r s p e c t a t o r s in f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s .

In 1946 a t B o l t o n , 33 p eo p l e were k i l l e d and o v e r 500 i n j u r e d when
t h o u s a n d s o f p e o pl e f o r c e d t h e i r way i n t o t h e f o o t b a l l ground,
c r u s h i n g o t h e r s p e c t a t o r s a g a i n s t b a r r i e r s , and when t h e s e c o l l a p s e d
t h e s p e c t a t o r s , i n c l u d i n g women, were s u f f o c a t e d and t r a m p l e d upon.

In 1964 o v e r 80 pe o p le were i n j u r e d i n somewhat s i m i l a r
c i r c u m s t a n c e s a t S u n de r la nd F o o t b a l l Ground.

In Lima, P e r u , 300 p e o p l e were k i l l e d and o v er 1, 000 i n j u r e d w h i l s t
t r y i n g t o e s c a p e from a f o o t b a l l ground where a r i o t was in p r o g r e s s
and where t h e P o l i c e were u s i n g t e a r g a s .

And t h e n only r e c e n t l y 34 p eo p l e were k i l l e d and many i n j u r e d                   at a
f o o t b a l l match in Tu r key .

All t h e i n g r e d i e n t s f o r a d i s a s t e r can s t i l l be p r e s e n t p a r t i c u l a r l y
amongst t h e e m o t i o n a l l y c h a r g e d , and o f t e n t i g h t l y packed s p e c t a t o r s
on t h e s p i o n kops of f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s .     When l a r g e and ground
c a p a c i t y crowds a r e a t t e n d i n g cup t i e s , and l o c a l d e r b i e s , one can
o f t e n o b s e r v e a c c e s s gangways b l o c k e d s o l i d l y w i t h s p e c t a t o r s , who,
once i n s i d e t h e g r ound, a r e u s u a l l y l o c k e d s e c u r e l y in u n t i l abo u t
15 m i n u t e s b e f o r e t h e game e n d s .

L i g h t i n g p y l o n s , c a t e r i n g s t a l l s , and f r a g i l e s t a n d r o o f s , a l l
p r o v i d e p r e c a r i o u s v a n t a g e p o i n t s f o r t h e more a g i l e s u p p o r t e r s .
Apar t from t h e obvious d a n g e r t o t h e s u p p o r t e r s t h e m s e l v e s t h e y
p resen t a g re a t p o te n tia l t h r e a t t o th e innocent s p e c t a to r s s i t t i n g
or standing underneath.

As e x c i t i n g i n c i d e n t s b u i l d up n e a r t o goal mouths and in o t h e r
p a r t s of t h e g r ound, one can s e e v a s t numbers of s p e c t a t o r s , p r e s s i n g
f o r w a r d , and t h i s movement wave runs t h r o u g h t h e whole crowd u n t i l
i t i s a r r e s t e d by c r u s h b a r r i e r s , o r by t h e u l t i m a t e comp r es s io n of
t h e s p e c t a t o r s in t h e l owe r s e c t i o n s o f t h e t e r r a c e s i n t o a
d an g er ou s s o l i d mass of h uma ni t y . Although i t i s p e r h a p s d i f f i c u l t
t o imagine t h e South American o r T u r k i s h t y p e r i o t s happeni ng
amongst t h e p h l e g m a t i c B r i t i s h s p e c t a t o r s , I n e v e r t h e l e s s b e l i e v e we
s h o u l d no t be d el u d ed i n t o t a k i n g r e f u g e i n a compl ace nt a t t i t u d e
t h a t i t co u ld no t happen h e r e .
I f , as t h e s i g n s o f t h e t i m e s a p p e a r t o i n d i c a t e , t h a t h o o l i g a n i s m
and rowdyism a r e on t h e i n c r e a s e , t h e n i t becomes i n c r e a s i n g l y
d i f f i c u l t t o f o r e c a s t , i n d e ed who can p r e d i c t t h e p r o b a b l e e f f e c t s
of p a n i c , h o o l i g a n i s m and p a r t i s a n s h i p upon t i g h t l y packed crowds of
spectators.              I t i s not d i f f i c u l t t o imagine a t cup t i e s or l o c a l
d e r b i e s on t h e ground o f one of t h e l ower d i v i s i o n c l u b s r e c e i v i n g a
crowd p u l l i n g team which r e s u l t s in a c a p a c i t y gr ound, where in such
c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h e l e v e l of f a c i l i t i e s and crowd c o n t r o l e x p e r i e n c e
and know how, l e a v e somet hing t o be d e s i r e d . The e x c i t e m e n t and
at mos ph er e i n h e r e n t in t h e r i v a l r y of t h e game, t h e p a r t i s a n s h i p
f a c t i o n s in t h e cr owd s, t h e s t i m u l o u s of a few p i n t s of b e e r b e f o r e
t h e game, a r e a f i r s t c l a s s p r e l u d e t o d i s a s t e r , so t h a t a l l t h a t i s
now r e q u i r e d i s an e l em e n t of rough p l a y , c ou p l ed w i t h a few
c o n t e n t i o u s d e c i s i o n s , and t h e p a t t e r n i s s e t .

R ecent E vents

Recent e v e n t s have only emphas is ed t h e l a c k of e l e m e n t a r y s a f e t y
p r e c a u t i o n s in f o o t b a l l grounds t o p r o t e c t t h e s p e c t a t o r s and
prevent th e spread of f i r e in th e s t a n d s .

In a S c o t t i s h League match between D u nf er ml i ne A t h l e t i c and C e l t i c ,
one pe r s on was k i l l e d and 49 p e o p l e i n j u r e d . Crash b a r r i e r s
c o l l a p s e d and hun d r ed s were s e n t t u m b l i n g on t o t h e f o o t b a l l p i t c h .

In C o v e n t r y , t h e main s t a n d was s e v e r e l y damaged by f i r e ,
n e c e s s i t a t i n g i t s d e m o l i t i o n and r e c o n s t r u c t i o n . The d e s i g n and
c o n s t r u c t i o n of t h e o l d s t a n d f a c i l i t a t e d t h e r a p i d s p r e a d o f f i r e .

Two days l a t e r t h e f o o t b a l l s t a d i um a t Swansea was s e v e r e l y damaged
by f i r e .       F o r t u n a t e l y bot h s t a n d s were empty of s p e c t a t o r s when t h e
f i r e s o c c u r r e d . The b e g i n n i n g o f t h i s y e a r ' s f o o t b a l l s ea s o n was
marred by t h e f i r e which o c c u r r e d a t Notti ngham F o r e s t ' s , F o o t b a l l s
S ta d i u m. T h i s f i r e s t a r t e d w h i l s t t h e match was in p r o g r e s s and t h e
f i r e s p r e a d so r a p i d l y t h a t 4 , 0 0 0 s p e c t a t o r s had t o be h u r r i e d l y
evacuated. Furthermore, i t is reported t h a t the f i r e f i g h t i n g
o p e r a t i o n s were h i n d e r e d by c a r s p ar ke d i n t h e v i c i n i t y of t h e
g r ou nd . From t h e p r e l i m i n a r y r e p o r t s i t a p p e a r s t h a t a d i s a s t e r was
once a g a i n j u s t n a r r ow l y a v e r t e d .

F ir e R isk s

I t would p r o b a b l y be t r u e t o         say t h a t t h e r i s k s where l a r g e crowd
s i t u a t i o n s are p r e s e n t, f a l l   i n t o two b a s i c c l a s s i f i c a t i o n s . There
i s a l i f e and p e r s o n a l s a f e t y      r i s k , w i t h an a t t e n d a n t f i r e and p a n i c
r i s k where t h e o l d e r t y p e o f        c o m b u s t i b l e t y p e s t a n d s and f i x t u r e s
ar e s t i l l in use.



                                              conti nued
P r o ba b ly t h e p r i n c i p l e f i r e r i s k in t h e a v e r a g e f o o t b a l l ground i s
t h e t r a d i t i o n a l c ov e r e d s t a n d , b u i l t p r i m a r i l y of t i m b e r w i t h t h e
us u al c o r r u g a t e d i r o n or a s b e s t o s r o o f . Once a f i r e s e c u r e s a hold
i n t h i s t y p e of s t r u c t u r e i t , of c o u r s e , s p r e a d s r a p i d l y , and can
d e s t r o y t h e s t a n d o f t e n b e f o r e e f f e c t i v e f i r e f i g h t i n g measures can
be b r o u g h t i n t o e f f e c t .     F i r e f i g h t i n g o p e r a t i o n s can be c o m p l i c a t e d
by t h e vo i ds and s p a ce s b e n e a t h t h e s t a n d s , where o f t e n , c o m b u s t i b l e
r u b b i s h and d i s u s e d and worn out equipment i s s t o r e d , and i t i s
t h e r e f o r e , in t h e s e p l a c e s where f i r e can s p r e a d u n d e t e c t e d .

Where t h e s p ac e s u n d e r s t a n d s a r e u t i l i s e d f o r o f f i c e s and d r e s s i n g
rooms, e t c . , t h e s e a r e a s a r e o f t e n f u r t h e r sub d i v i d e d by t i m b e r
s t u d d e d p a r t i t i o n s c o v e r e d by c o m b u s t i b l e hardwood o r s o f t b o a r d .    In
such s t r u c t u r a l c o n d i t i o n s f i r e can s p r e a d r a p i d l y t h r o u g h t h i s t y p e
o f accommodation due t o t h e ab s en ce o f a meas ure of f i r e r e s i s t i n g
co m p a r t m e n t at i on.

F ir e P rev en tio n

All s p ac e s    u n d e r s t a n d s s ho u ld be c l e a r e d of c o m b u s t i b l e r u b b i s h and
m aterials,       and a c a r e f u l i n s p e c t i o n made of a l l f l o o r s o v er v oi ds
f o r cracks      and h o l e s t h r o u g h which c i g a r e t t e ends and l i g h t e d
mat ches or       smoking m a t e r i a l s co u ld f a l l .

Dur ing t h e t i me s p e c t a t o r s a r e occupyi ng s t a n d s f r e q u e n t i n s p e c t i o n s
s h o u l d be made of t h e v o i d s and a f i n a l i n s p e c t i o n made a t l e a s t
t h i r t y mi n u t es a f t e r t h e s p e c t a t o r s have l e f t t h e s t a n d .

All e l e c t r i c a l equi pment and w i r i n g s ho u l d be examined and t e s t e d by
a competent e l e c t r i c a l c o n t r a c t o r a t l e a s t once i n e v e r y t h r e e
years.           I t s h ou ld be e n s u r e d t h a t a d e q u a t e a p p r o p r i a t e f i r s t a i d
f i r e f i g h t i n g equi pment i s s t r a t e g i c a l l y p o s i t i o n e d in t h e s t a n d s ,
and i f t h e r e i s any doubt ab ou t t h e adequacy or e f f e c t i v e n e s s of t h e
a p p a r a t u s t h e C h i e f F i r e O f f i c e r f o r t h e a r e a s ho u l d be r e q u e s t e d t o
a d v i s e on f i r e d e f e n c e a r r a n g e m e n t s .

S p e c t a t o r s * S a f e t y a n d C o m f o rt on G ro u n d s a n d S t a d i a

To e n s u r e r e a s o n a b l e s t a n d a r d s of s a f e t y f o r t h e g e n e r a l p u b l i c
a t t e n d i n g l a r g e crowd e v e n t s , i t i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t c e r t a i n r ef or ms
s h o u l d be c a r r i e d o u t and t h e f o l l o w i n g a r e a few s u g g e s t i o n s in
this regard:-

a)      Crowds s ho u l d be e f f e c t i v e l y compartmented by more c r u s h
        b a r r i e r s . These c r u s h b a r r i e r s and r e t a i n i n g w a l l s s h o u l d be
        c o n s t r u c t e d t o some r e c o g n i s e d s t a n d a r d o f s a f e t y i n s p e c t e d by
        a q u a l i f i e d b u ild in g in s p e c to r t o ensure t h a t they w ill
        w i t h s t a n d maximum crowd p r e s s u r e s w i t h g en er o u s s a f e t y ma r g in ;


                                              continued
b)      P r o v i d i n g s t e w a r d s , (members o f S u p p o r t e r s Clubs) who a f t e r
        s u i t a b l e t r a i n i n g co ul d s u p e r v i s e each compartment t o o b v i a t e
        o v e r f i l l i n g and keep a c c e s s gangways c l e a r of s p e c t a t o r s .
        Such an a r r a n ge me n t would be of c o n s i d e r a b l e a s s i s t a n c e t o t h e
        c l u b i n t h e p r o v i s i o n of e f f e c t i v e crowd c o n t r o l e f f i c i e n c y ,
        and would h e l p t h e P o l i c e i n l o c a t i n g and c o n t r o l l i n g t r o u b l e
        makers when a d i s t u r b a n c e was i n t h e o f f i n g . Stewards co u ld
        a l s o be t r a i n e d in t h e p r o j e c t i n g o f t h e f a m i l y e n t e r t a i n m e n t
        image, and t h e r e a f t e r would be t h e s o c i a l c o n t a c t and l i n k man
        i n each crowd co mp ar tment . The s t e w a r d s co ul d be t r a i n e d in
        f i r s t a i d t o t h e i n j u r e d , crowd c o n t r o l p y s ch ol og y , and
        elementary f i r e prevention.                     In a c o m p a r a t i v e l y s h o r t p e r i o d of
        t i m e , bec a us e s p e c t a t o r s u s u a l l y f o r e g a t h e r i n s i m i l a r p l a c e s
        week by week, each compartment would become a s o c i a l e n t i t y ,
        common t o t h e p e r s o n a l i d e n t i t i e s of t h e r e g u l a r s u p p o r t e r s ,
        t h e i r f a m i l i e s and a s s o c i a t e s ;

c)      The p r o v i s i o n o f a d e q u a t e pr i mar y and s e c o nd ar y l i g h t i n g i s
        p a r t i c u l a r l y i m p o r t a n t d u r i n g f l o o d l i g h t games;

d)      The p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l e n c l o s u r e s f o r c h i l d r e n and o t h e r
        s p e c i a l s e c t i o n s o f t h e p u b l i c who c a n n o t p a r t i c i p a t e in t h e
        u sual s p e c t a t o r f a c i l i t i e s .

Stadium and F o o t b a l l Ground Design

I t would a p p e a r t h e r e i s ample scope f o r some of our s c h o o l s or
f a c u l t i e s o f a r c h i t e c t u r e t o c a r r y ou t a comp r eh en s i v e r e s e a r c h
s t u dy i n t o t h e s p e c t a t o r l o g i s t i c s of f o o t b a l l ground and s ta di um
d e s i g n t o a c h i e v e t h e s t a n d a r d s o f s a f e t y and co mf or t b e f i t t i n g t h i s
C o u n t r y ' s app r oac h t o t h e l a t e s i x t i e s and s e v e n t i e s .

Legislation

The l e g a l p o s i t i o n r e g a r d i n g f o o t b a l l and s p o r t s s t a d i a i s not
c l e a r ; i t would a p p e a r t h a t S e c t i o n 59 o f t h e P u b l i c H e a l t h Act 1936
a p p l i e s t o t h e b u i l d i n g s w i t h i n t h e c u r t i l a g e of t h e f o o t b a l l s t a d i a
and, t h e r e f o r e , s a f e i n g r e s s and e g r e s s can be s e c u r e d f o r
s p e c t a t o r s in th e s t a n d s .       Where l i c e n s e d b a r s or l i c e n s e d c l u b s a r e
p r o v i d e d u nd e r t h e s t a n d s , t h e usual p u b l i c e n t e r t a i n m e n t s a f e t y
s t a n d a r d s such as s e c o n d a r y l i g h t i n g , e x i t s i g n s , a d e q u a t e e x i t s ,
f i r e f i g h t i n g e q u i p m e n t , and t h e flame p r o o f i n g of f u r n i s h i n g and
d e c o r a t i o n s , c a n be i n s i s t e d upon u nd er t h e L i c e n s i n g Act o f 1964.

The l e g a l p o s i t i o n o f t h e t e r r a c e d s e c t i o n s , sometimes r e f e r r e d t o
as "Spion Kops" and o t h e r open a i r s t a n d i n g s p a c e s , where t h e
s p e c t a t o r s a r e t i g h t l y packe d, i s o b s c u r e b e c a u s e t h e s e p l a c e s
c a n n o t be d e f i n e d as s t r u c t u r e s .     S a f e t y measure in t h e s e s i t u a t i o n s
a r e t h e r e f o r e l e f t t o t h e i n d i v i d u a l a t t i t u d e s o r common s e n s e of
f o o t b a l l managements, which of c o u r s e v a r i e s a c c o r d i n g t o t h e
q u a l i t y of t h e management, and t o o t h e r p r e v a i l i n g c i r c u m s t a n c e s
which w i l l i n f l u e n c e t h e s t a n d a r d s , n o t - l e a s t of a l l b ei n g t h e
p r o s p e r i t y and t h e f i n a n c i a l c a p a b i l i t y of t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n .
I t w i l l be obv i o u s t o anyone who t h i n k s ab ou t a s p e c t s of s a f e t y t h a t
c o n d i t i o n s in many f o o t b a l l grounds l e a v e a l o t t o be d e s i r e d and
f u r t h e r l e g i s l a t i o n i s c l e a r l y needed t o r e g u l a r i s e t h e p o s i t i o n .
I t would be r e f r e s h i n g t o hope t h a t l e g i s l a t i o n t o p r o v i d e f o r
r e a s o n a b l e s a f e t y s t a n d a r d s f o r t h e p u b l i c in r e s p e c t of t h e u s e of
open a i r t e r r a c i n g on s p o r t s and f o o t b a l l grounds c o u l d be s e c u r e d
b e f o r e a n o t h e r d i s a s t e r o c c u r s , r a t h e r t h a n f o l l o w i n g t h e usual
p r a c t i c e of l o c k i n g t h e l e g i s l a t i v e door a f t e r t h e h o r s e has a l r e a d y
bolted.

P a s t h i s t o r y has i n d i c a t e d t h a t f o l l o w i n g a d i s a s t e r , remedial
l e g i s l a t i o n has s w i f t l y f o l l o w e d , b u t t h e e x c e p t i o n t o t h i s r u l e i s
t h e f o o t b a l l i n d u s t r y which a p p e a r s t o be i n t h e realm of t h e
untouchable.

The M i n i s t e r of S p o r t has a do pt ed t h e now s t a n d a r d d e l a y i n g t a c t i c
b el o v e d of a l l p o l i t i c i a n s of a p p o i n t i n g a Committee, b u t a f t e r
s t u d y i n g c o n s t i t u e n t membership and i t s o b j e c t i v e s I ca n n ot e n v i s a g e
any improvements f o r t h e s a f e t y of s p e c t a t o r s in t h e f o r e s e e a b l e
future.

I t i s obvious t h a t d i s a s t e r s can be cau s ed by f i r e , ; t h e r e i s
a l r e a d y ample e v i d e n c e t h a t f o o t b a l l s t a n d s can be s e t on f i r e y e t
t h e r e a p p e a r s t o be no r e c o g n i s e d f i r e e n g i n e e r on t h e Committee t o
a d v i s e on f i r e d e f e n c e and means of e s c a p e a s p e c t s . C o l l a p s i n g
c r u s h b a r r i e r s and s t r u c t u r a l a s p e c t s a r e a n o t h e r well proven c a u se
o f i n j u r y , b ut a g a i n t h e r e a p p e a r s no s t r u c t u r a l s a f e t y e n g i n e e r on
t h e Committee.

I have some d i f f i c u l t y i n r e c o n c i l i n g a Committee so h e a v i l y
w e i g h t e d by r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of t h e s p o r t , o b j e c t i v e l y c o n s i d e r i n g
s a f e t y h avi ng r e g a r d t o c o n s eq u e n t f i n a n c i a l and o r g a n i s a t i o n a l
i mpli c a t i o n s .

I t i s not a p l e a s a n t p a s t i m e t o be a p r o p h e t of doom, b u t I
r e i t e r a t e t h a t t h e p o i n t s which I made in my a r t i c l e n e a r l y a y e a r
ago have been f u l l y j u s t i f i e d by s u b s e q u e n t e v e n t s . Those who
a t t e n d f o o t b a l l mat ches as s p e c t a t o r s must f a c e up t o t h e
p o s s i b i l i t y t h a t t h e y may i n t h e a p p r o p r i a t e c i r c u m s t a n c e s be d i c i n g
with d i s a s t e r .       F a r be i t f o r me t o p r e - j u d g e t h e work of t h e
Committee b u t w h a t e v e r t h e outcome t h e i r e f f o r t s w i l l n e v e r be
e f f e c t i v e w i t h o u t l e g i s l a t i v e b a c k i n g . Th is i s a p a i n f u l bu t
historical fact.
            THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF
              FIRE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

                            your ref                                            please reply to:




               INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION




                                               June 1989




                                 General Manager: K. E. Rose, IPFA, FRVA
       Registered Office: Fire Service Headquarters, Lancaster Circus Queensway, Birmingham B4 7DE
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH S

SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION




1.     Introduction

1.1   The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers’ Association (CACFOA) is
       the professional organisation representing all Principal Fire Brigade
      Officers in Local Authority Fire Brigades in Great Britain.         The
      Association is non political and is not a trade union. The objectives
       of the Association include arrangements for members to act as advisers
       to the Home Secretary’s Central Fire Brigades’ Advisory Council, to
       Fire Authorities and many technical organisations,      including the
       British Standards Institution.

1.2   With regard to matters associated with the Safety at Sports Grounds
      Act, 1975, and its related provisions, many of our members represent
       their respective Fire Authorities. The position of the Fire Authority
       is that of an ’interested party’ which has the right to appeal against
       anything in, or the omission of anything from, the Safety Certificate,
       or against refusal of a local authority to amend or replace a Safety
       Certificate.  In practice, fire officers are closely involved in the
       drafting of Fire Certificates for sports grounds and generally there is
       an excellent liaison with the Police, the Building Authority and other
       persons involved in this process.

1.3   Fire Service Officers are suitably qualified, trained and experienced
       in the command and management of fire and rescue incidents.^ Such
       duties have entailed considerable involvement and expertise in the
       procedures and practical application of emergency evacuation of varying
       numbers of persons from buildings and other areas affected by fire or
       suspected fire. In these circumstances, we suggest that our views will
       be relevant to your Inquiry.

1.4   It is relevant to point out that in the past Principal Fire Service
       Officers have given forewarning of the likelihood of various disasters,
       including those involving football stadia.    It is unfortunate that a
       disaster or series of small catastropheshave been necessary^ before
       safety legislation has been enacted.    The information    contained in
       Appendix ’A ’ to this submission gives a startlingly clear, prophetic
       picture of a view given by a Chief Fire      Officer over 20 years ago
       concerning potential disasters at football grounds.       The concerns
       expressed by this officer formed the basis of the report which was
       subsequently submitted by Chief Fire Officers to the Wheatley Committee
       following the serious accidents at Ibrox Park Football Ground in 1971.
       That same report was appended to our submission to Justice popplewell
       following the tragic fire at Bradford City Football Club; we make no
       apologies for including the original paper yet again, as many of the
       points it contains are current and valid when looking at Safety at
       Sports Grounds.
In this submission we have addressed our views and recoranendations
mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Service and the legislative
aspects pertinent to safety at sports grounds.     We have not dwelt on
the fire related measures.    This is intentional as our views on fire
safety were expressed to Justice Popplewell in relation to the Inquiry
held after the Bradford stadium fire disaster. In these circumstances,
the following submission relates to relevant measures for crowd safety
and the means of escape provisions contained in the legislation
governing Safety Certificates for Sports Grounds and Stadia.

Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadia

We regard a sports ground as any place where sport or similar
competitive activities take place in the open air and where the
accommodation is covered or open with seating or standing facilities
for   spectators.   A   sports  stadium   is  a sports ground  where
accommodation for spectators wholly or partially surrounds the area
used for the activities taking place therein.

For the purpose of this submission, any reference to sports        ground,
sports stadium or stadia should be considered to be the same.

The Wheatlev Report

We have taken into consideration that      in May 1972 the Rt. Hon. Lord
Wheatley submitted to the Secretary of      State for the Home Department
and the Secretary of State for Scotland     the report of his Inquiry into
Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds.   It was   from his report that the Safety
at Sports Ground Act 1975 evolved.

Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia of football and
rugby clubs patronised by paying members of the public who attend in
large numbers to watch sporting events.   Under the heading "The Nature
of the Problem” , on pages 2 and 3, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report,
Lord Wheatley identified the problem areas common to most stadia.

Following Lord Wheatley’s report, and subsequently that of Justic
popplewell,  major  steps have   been taken   to improve the   safety
provisions and relative legislation applicable to sports grounds and
stadia.

The Popplewell Report

We consider that many people lose sight of the fact that Justice
Popplewell was not only looking at the tragic fire which engulfed the
stand at Bradford City with the loss of 56 lives, he was also taking
into consideration the trouble which occurred on that same fateful day
in May 1985 at Birmingham City Football Club where crowd disturbances
caused considerable damage at the ground which resulted in the collapse
of a wall, killing one young man and injuring seventeen other people;
hence the title of the Inquiry being ’’Committee of Inquiry into Crowd
Safety and Control at Sports Grounds” .
Justice Popplewell made a number      of   specific   recommendations   in his
-SepocfevIn: this connection, it
to which these recommendations have been applied in respect of
training, the provision of stewards and the manning of exit gates, etc.
at various premises.   It is for this reason that we would advise that
Justice Popplewell’s recommendations are reviewed and those which have
not been implemented as statutory requirements be made so, especially
where they are relevant to crowd control and behaviour.

Safety at Sports Grounds and Stadia

Whether premises used for sports are called sports stadia or sports
grounds is immaterial;     whether the competition is concerned with
football, cricket, rugby, athletics or even horse racing, is equally of
only passing interest. The real problems which need addressing are the
numbers  of spectators likely to attend, whether the facilities
available are suitable and whether members of the public and other
people entering those premises for any purpose can escape safely and
without injury if the need arises for whatever reason.

The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in 1986 and commonly
referred to as the ’Green Guide’ is, in our view, a helpful document.
However, the status of the Green Guide should be strengthened from its
present voluntary standard, with no legal force, to a mandatory
standard similar to the mandatory rules in Part B of the English
Building Regulations.     This means that the safety requirements for
sports grounds could only be achieved by complying with the contents of
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.   Where local circumstances are
such that it is excessive to require the standards in the Green Guide
as a matter of course, either because of the very limited attendance or
the low risk presented by the layout of the ground, then the local
authority should be able to relax them subject to the agreement of the
other interested parties.

The Green Guide is aimed primarily at advising on safety and, as such,
it takes account of        the constraints and difficulties which are
present.  The general principles of the Guide make the point that the
inter-relation of all the components in the safety formula is essential
and that none of them should be considered in isolation. We feel that
the principle which must over-ride all others in the safety system is
that it should fail to safety.      This principle is well used by Fire
Officers in assessing fire safety requirements of public buildings and
places of work and historically has proven to be successful.    Reliance
should not be placed     upon anything other than the occupants’ own
unaided efforts to enable them to proceed to a place of safety in the
event of a fire or any other emergency.

We believe that casualties may not have occurred at all if the guidance
contained in the Green Guide had been followed both before and during
the incident which is the subject of this Inquiry.        Therefore, we
believe the full emphasis ought not to be on the investigation and the
adequacy of the standards in the Guide, but upon their implementation
and practice by the relevant authorities/organisations.
We consider there is a tendency for time to dim awareness of the
importance of some safety provisions and the need to rehearse them,
together  with   the  assessment   of priorities    between   commercial,
financial and safety
easily recede to the back of the mind, rather than stay in the
forefront as it properly should.    The responsibilities for safety can
be misunderstood due to the involvement of many interested parties.
There is a particular need for the provisions of the Green Guide to be
mandatory with respect to the responsibilities of management.

Having regard to the problem of crowd control in the event of any
emergency, it is our view that the over-riding factor in the selection
of sports grounds for major national and international events should be
the fulfilment of all the "requirements" of the Green Guide as a
condition of that selection.

It is not our intention to restate our views on aspects of construction
relating to stands, their fire safety and structural integrity;    this
we have already done at some length to Justice Popplewell.

In other respects, we recommend that the following aspects in Sections
6 to 11 of this submission be taken into account and implemented as
appropriate by relevant authorities, developers and operators of stadia.

Restraints of Existing Design and Sites

Having regard to the difficulties in adapting existing sites and
designs to current safety needs, it appears essential for relevant
guidance to be strengthened.    We recognise there can be serious
problems arising external to sports grounds as well as within their
curtilage.

Externally

Many grounds are situated in densely populated suburban areas, the
access to the ground being by way of streets through domestic areas.
It follows that access will be naturally restricted due to the widths
of roads, lack of car parking and the ground being short of external
space.  These factors are confirmed if one looks at the site plan of
Hillsborough Football Ground and are contributory to large numbers of
fans congregating at turnstile areas, as was witnessed there.

These restrictions would have the same limiting effects if the ground
were to be evacuated in an emergency.   It is well known that people
having achieved a position of personal safety slow down or stop to
observe what is happening around them.

Turnstiles should be clearly marked and identifiable as to which part
of the ground they give access and, on occasions when specific tickets
have been   issued,  turnstiles  should be specially designated to
co-ordinate tickets allowing access to that section of the ground
specified.
We are satisfied with paragraph 189, chapter 11, of the Green Guide
referring to "Access for Emergency Vehicles". However, we would stress
that the need for regular liaison between the Emergency Services with
regard to this and other such matters common to their involvement.
(See 11.7, Special Risk Plans.)

The Green Guide at Chapter 6, Paragraph 5, covers signposting and we
doubt whether this recommendation is being favoured; we would advocate
that signposting, as detailed in this paragraph, is made mandatory to
form part of the certificate of the sports ground.

Further consideration should be given to Chapter 5, Paragraph 46, of
the Green Guide, with regard to contingency plans for situations where
available entrances at a ground have proved insufficient to stop unduly
large crowds from gathering outside.

We cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances without
adequate crowd control and limitation of numbers.

We have total sympathy with the predicament of the police in such
situations, but would rather debate now a tangible solution to
preventing such a situation arising than accept it as part and parcel
of spectator activity, which seems more prevalent and problematic to
football than any other sport attracting large crowds.

Internal

With regard to internal safety provisions, we appreciate that much
consideration has been given to these features.       Indeed, we have
assisted the considerations of means of escape and fire safety.     In
this respect, we are glad that many of our recommendations have been
implemented.  However, we would ask that further attention be given to
matters in the paragraphs which follow.

Perimeter fences appear to be needed to discourage pitch invasions and
their use is widespread particularly at football grounds.   There does
not seem to be a common standard type of fence, the design of which
varies from club to club.

We would recommend that where it is considered essential to provide
perimeter fencing, this fencing has sufficient gates to permit crowd
evacuation on to the pitch in a controlled condition.

The design and size of gates in perimeter fences should be subject to
further investigation.

Control of gates should be vested with the police or suitably trained
stewards under their command.

One of the strongest recommendations we would make in this submission
is for the provision of all-seater stands.
                                            7


•   6.3.7   Whilst accepting that this recommendation will be unacceptable to
            sports  ground managements,   we feel that it would prevent the
            overcrowding from occurring, i.e. when all the seats are full - the
            ground is full!

    6.3.8   Justice Popplewell addressed this point and Chapter 6, Paragraph 6.16
            refers.   However, it is still the case that serious incidents arise
            from crowd misbehaviour, and it is our view that further attention
            should be given to the reference made by Justice Popplewell to the
            idiosyncrasies of football fans.

    6.3.9   If a view is taken that all-seater grounds are not yet feasible, we
            would advocate that grounds are separated into ’spectator pens’ with
            sufficient means of escape provision to accommodate the numbers in each
            pen.

    6.3.10 The density of the occupation of pens should be strictly in accordance
           with the Green Guide.    However, emergency lateral movement should be
O          provided and sufficient stewards or Police should be available to
           monitor and control access to each pen.

    6.3.11 Public address systems should be capable of being used in separate
           areas of the ground, both inside and outside.    They should be audible
           and of distinct clarity to overcome the noise generated by the crowd.
•
    6.3.12 Crowd ’reservoir* areas to the rear of the turnstiles should be
           sufficiently large to accommodate the numbers being admitted to that
           specific area, with sufficient pass door facilities available to permit
           exit from the ground in an emergency.     Cognizance should be given to
           the fact that spectators tend to congregate in areas directly behind
9          turnstiles waiting for friends to gain admission.

    6.3.13 These areas should be strictly controlled by stewards or Police to
           ensure free flow in either direction, should the need arise. The Green
           Guide, Chapter 6, Paragraph 66, relating to the exit gates should be
           strictly followed.

    6.3.14 Ideally, turnstiles should only permit access to specific areas of the
           ground and numbers entering the area should be monitored by the sports
           ground management.

    7.      Ground Capacities

    7.1     As Lord Wheatley recognised, it is important to maintain flexibility in
            any system of control so as to take account of the differing
            circumstances at individual grounds. Characteristics such as age, size
            and mode of construction vary widely from ground to ground.

•   7.2     Under normal circumstances, most spectator sports attracting a regular
            attendance do not suffer problems caused by ground overcrowding.    It
            may be that a proportion wish to view from one particular part of the
            ground and, with regard to football, this is very often behind the two
            goal areas.  In general, this does not affect the overall capacity of
            the grounds.
                                         8

7.3   It is worth considering making more extensive use of the existing
       certif:i«*fei^eipre©e#s:'.to ,
                                    ■limit' -levels- of spectator attendance, taking
       account of any specified works which ought to be carried out.

7.4   All of the above would be easily rectified ifour recommendation for
       all-seater stands was accepted and ground capacities calculated in
       accordance with the Green Guide.

7.5   We must not lose sight of the special nature of the event taking place
      at Hillsborough and we would recommend that those sports grounds
      designated as being suitable to accommodate such events are limited in
      number and geographically sited to suit all needs.

8.    Stewards

8.1   Justice Popplewell was quite specific in his views on the training, use
      and provision of stewards at sports grounds. We consider that his
      views, plus the recommendations contained in the Green Guideat Annexe
       ’B ’ - stewarding, and also Chapter 2 - Management Responsibility in
      relation to stewards, are not being properly carried out.

8.2   We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the Act
      with regard to the responsibility of sports ground managements to
      provide and train, etc. suitable numbers of stewards to be responsible
       for all apsects of the ground whilst spectators are in attendance.

8.3   The number of stewards required at a sports ground to be determined by
      the Chief Constable and the Local Authority’s inspection team.

8.4   Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis and at times they
      may not even turn up.       A responsibility should be placed on the
      management of the sports ground to ensure that the pre-determined
      number required are on duty.     Failure to provide sufficient stewards
       should be reflected in a reduced number of people being allowed in and
       a substantial fine being levied against the sports ground management.

8.5   Even with the recommendations previously made in the Green Guide, it is
      known that stewards are often ill-trained in the nature of the
      responsibilities that go with the job.    It is essential that they are
       fully conversant with all emergency procedures and possess a special
      knowledge of the area for which they are responsible.

8.6   A way to improve the standard of stewards would be for sports ground
      managements to provide a list of points which stewards must know and do
       (as Annexe ’B ’ Green Guide) and then for them to be tested to ensure
      that they are competent, preferably by the Police.    The management of
      the sports ground would then issue a certificate of competence which
       should be renewed annually.  This is an area where Fire Brigades could
      make a positive contribution in respect of fire safety training.
A specified number of stewards should be under control of chief
stewards. /              should b e , similarly
standard to reflect their greater level of responsibility and their
co-ordinating role.

All stewards should come under    the   jurisdiction   and   control   of the
Senior Police Officer present.

Evacuation Control

We are not satisfied that the Police and stewards, at their current
numbers, would be sure of being able to evacuate quickly all or a major
part of many sports grounds.   This is a matter which must be addressed
and, preferably, by our colleagues in the Association of Chief Police
Officers (ACPO).

From our own experience in evacuation for fire purposes, we would
suggest that the starting point is to decide on the evacuation
procedure to be deployed and the part ground staff, principally
stewards, have to play.    The ideal situation would be to make use of
the public address system to relay a coded message that will alert
stewards and other staff to the nature and vicinity of the problem.

No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm in
public areas.   As with other areas of public entertainment,     public
areas situated below a stand should be provided with buzzers and lights
to give staff an indication of a problem.

Effective means of verbal communication should be provided adjacent to
stewards' positions so that they can contact the control rooms to pass
on information or raise the alarm in the event of an emergency.

Once it is determined that there is a situation which warrants either a
partial   or  total  evacuation   and stewards   are   in position,    an
announcement should be made on the public address system          asking
spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as directed by the stewards.

Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators should be relayed
to all emergency service control rooms for information purposes.

Should any assistance be required, as much information relating to the
occurrence must be passed to ensure the correct resources and
assistance are mobilised;  this is of course a matter for local liaison
but needs to be stressed.

Maintenance of Standards

A major concern must be that of ensuring that high standards of safety
are maintained once provided to the satisfaction of the Local Authority
inspection team. The following points should assist that objective.

Any certificate or recommendation should explain fully all the measures
which should be in force and should state the reasons.
r
#


                                                10

#
I   .    10.3   'During Performance* inspections in the form of spot cfaecksshouldbe
                made to monitor safety standards and the aspects conditional to the
                certificate by designated members of the Local Authority inspection
                team or Officers acting on their behalf.

•        10.4 Regular liaison and discussion should take place between management of
              sports grounds and representatives of the Local Authority inspection
              team.

        10.5    Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to all
                employees,   both full and part-time.   This must be a management
0               responsibility which   should be  reinforced as necessary by the
                professional assistance of the Police, Fire Officers and First Aid
                Instructors.

        10.6    The attitude of clubs and management has, on occasion, been unhelpful.
                We would suggest that this is an appropriate time to introduce tougher
#               penalties against management who fail to discharge their duties in
                 ensuring standards of public safety and who do not conform to the
                recommendations given to them by official bodies, i.e. Police or Fire
                 Service, or disregard the conditions laid down in their certificate or
                 the provisions of the Green Guide. This principle of tougher measures
                 should be directed towards the directors and senior management of clubs
#               and sports grounds.

        10.7    In addition to the conditions imposed, it would be advantageous to
                 issue management of sports grounds with a list of 'rules of management'
                which explicitly details their responsibilities with regard to public
                 safety.
•
        11.     Fire Service Resources

        11.1    As indicated at the beginning of this submission, the involvement of
                 the Fire Service with regard to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
                 revolves principally around the fire safety and means of escape
#               provision.   However, with regard to operational emergency incidents,
                 the relevant local authority Fire Brigade is rightly responsible in law
                 for all firefighting and associated operations.   In addition, the Fire
                 Brigade normally undertakes the command and rescue needs and other
                 categories of emergency incident, but existing law is unclear in
                 respect of the responsibilities of command and control at non-fire
#               incidents.   Therefore, we consider that the local situation should be
                 clarified to confirm the vital role of local authority Fire Brigades.

        11.2    As this Inquiry is looking specifically at the disaster which occurred
                 at Hillsborough, our operational expertise at such an incident would be
                 concerned with the rescue role.

        11.3    Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the title ’Fire and Rescue Service'
                 and for good reason, as a large proportion of the incidents attended by
                 Brigades  are non-fire    situations,  involving danger to life and
                 requiring a rescue capability.
11.4    The Fire Service is the only emergency service which has the $>er*onael, ,
                                                                                 ■
        resources, training, experience and capability to deal with most rescue
        situations.

11.5    The practical involvement of the Fire Service at incidents such as
         Hillsborough is limited and mainly revolves around physically removing
         casualties from a dangerous environment, making the scene safe,
         carrying out resuscitation and first aid until the casualties can be
         handed over to the ambulance service.

11.6    It is recognised that at emergency incidents the Police are usually
         heavily involved in maintaining law and order, organising crowd control
         and dealing with the situation in hand.

11.7    There is a need for the emergency services to liaise, together with the
        management of the sports ground, to formulate ’Special Risk Plans'
        which should take account of every conceivable type of incident that
         could occur and the resources which would be required to deal with it.

11.8    The Fire Service have special appliances dedicated to accident and
         rescue work carrying specialist cutting and rescue equipment, including
         resuscitation apparatus, backed up by disciplined personnel, trained in
         the use of this equipment and qualified to administer first aid.

11.9    At an incident such as Hillsborough, it is essential that effective,
         on—scene liaison takes place between the Senior Officers of all
         emergency services so that maximum utilisation is made of personnel and
         resources available.

11.10 One qualification we would stress is that Fire Service personnel and
       equipment must not be used for crowd control purposes where a civil
       disturbance has occurred.    The Fire Service would, of course, respond
       and deal with fires and rescue of casualties trapped in buildings or
       fires, in debris or wreckage under such conditions as deemed necessary.

11.11 It is essential that all the emergency services are aware of each
       others' resources, skills and capabilities, as time is of the essence
       when life    is at stake.     A sensible option would be to hold
       inter—service exercises at designated sports grounds involving staff
       with a scenario recommended by the Local Authority inspection team.




5045h
                                                                       APPENDIX ‘A 1

                           A C h i e f O f f i c e r ' s View in 1965

                      S a f e t y in F o o t b a l l and S p o r t s S t a d i a



O ccasio n f o r D i s a s t e r

Cinemas and t h e a t r e s a r e a l r e a d y s t r i c t l y c o n t r o l l e d by l e g i s l a t i o n ,
and t h i s has been based p r i m a r i l y upon e x p e r i e n c e g a i ne d from
d i s a s t e r s which have o c c u r r e d both in t h i s Country and in o t h e r
p a r t s of t h e w o r l d . There have, of c o u r s e , been d i s a s t e r s in
f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s , but so f a r t h e r e a p p e a r s l i t t l e e v i d e n c e t h a t
a n y t h i n g has been done t o p r o f i t from p r e v i o u s d i s a s t e r s by way of
improving t h e s a f e t y s t a n d a r d s f o r s p e c t a t o r s in f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s .

In 1946 a t B o l t o n , 33 p e o p l e were k i l l e d and o v er 500 i n j u r e d when
t h o u s a n d s o f p eo p l e f o r c e d t h e i r way i n t o t h e f o o t b a l l gr ound,
c r u s h i n g o t h e r s p e c t a t o r s a g a i n s t b a r r i e r s , and when t h e s e c o l l a p s e d
t h e s p e c t a t o r s , i n c l u d i n g women, were s u f f o c a t e d and t r a m p l e d upon.

In 1964 o v er 80 p e o p l e were i n j u r e d i n somewhat s i m i l a r
c i r c u m s t a n c e s a t S u nd e r l a nd F o o t b a l l Ground.

In Lima, P e r u , 300 p e o p l e were k i l l e d and o v er 1, 000 i n j u r e d w h i l s t
t r y i n g t o e s c a p e from a f o o t b a l l ground where a r i o t was i n p r o g r e s s
and where t h e P o l i c e were u s i n g t e a r g a s .

And t h e n only r e c e n t l y 34 p eo p l e were k i l l e d and many i n j u r e d                 at a
f o o t b a l l match in T ur k e y .

All t h e i n g r e d i e n t s f o r a d i s a s t e r can s t i l l be p r e s e n t p a r t i c u l a r l y
amongst t h e e m o t i o n a l l y c h a r g e d , and o f t e n t i g h t l y packed s p e c t a t o r s
on t h e s p i on kops of f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s . When l a r g e and ground
c a p a c i t y crowds a r e a t t e n d i n g cup t i e s , and l o c a l d e r b i e s , one can
o f t e n o b s e r v e a c c e s s gangways b l o c ke d s o l i d l y w i t h s p e c t a t o r s , who,
once i n s i d e t h e gr ou n d , a r e u s u a l l y l o c k e d s e c u r e l y i n u n t i l ab ou t
15 m i n u t e s b e f o r e t h e game e n d s .

L i g h t i n g p y l o n s , c a t e r i n g s t a l l s , and f r a g i l e s t a n d r o o f s , a l l
p r o v i d e p r e c a r i o u s v a n t a g e p o i n t s f o r t h e more a g i l e s u p p o r t e r s .
Apar t from t h e o bv i ou s d an g e r t o t h e s u p p o r t e r s t h e m s e l v e s t h e y
present a g re a t p o te n tia l t h r e a t t o the innocent s p e c t a to rs s i t t i n g
or standing underneath.

As e x c i t i n g i n c i d e n t s b u i l d up n e a r t o goal mouths and i n o t h e r
p a r t s of t h e gr oun d , one can s e e v a s t numbers of s p e c t a t o r s , p r e s s i n g
f o r w a r d , and t h i s movement wave runs t h r o u g h t h e whole crowd u n t i l
i t i s a r r e s t e d by c r u s h b a r r i e r s , o r by t h e u l t i m a t e co mp re s s io n of
t h e s p e c t a t o r s in t h e lower s e c t i o n s of t h e t e r r a c e s i n t o a
d a n ge r ou s s o l i d mass o f h uma ni t y . Al though i t i s p e r h a ps d i f f i c u l t
t o imagine t h e South American or T u r k i s h t y p e r i o t s hap pen i ng
amongst t h e p h l e g m a t i c B r i t i s h s p e c t a t o r s , I n e v e r t h e l e s s b e l i e v e we
s ho u ld n ot be d e l u d e d i n t o t a k i n g r e f u g e i n a complacent a t t i t u d e
t h a t i t c o u l d no t happen h e r e .

                                             conti nued
                                                     -   2   -




     I f , as t h e s i g n s o f t h e t i m e s a p p e a r t o i n d i c a t e , t h a t h o o l i g a n i s m
     and rowdyism a r e on t h e i n c r e a s e , t he n i t becomes i n c r e a s i n g l y
     d i f f i c u l t t o f o r e c a s t , in de ed who can p r e d i c t t h e p r o b a b l e e f f e c t s
     of p a n i c , h o o l i g a n i s m and p a r t i s a n s h i p upon t i g h t l y packed crowds of
     spectators.              I t i s not d i f f i c u l t t o imagine a t cup t i e s or l o c a l
     d e r b i e s on t h e ground of one of t h e l ower d i v i s i o n c l u b s r e c e i v i n g a
     crowd p u l l i n g team which r e s u l t s in a c a p a c i t y ground, where i n such
     c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h e l e v e l of f a c i l i t i e s and crowd c o n t r o l e x p e r i e n c e
     and know how, l e a v e s omet hing t o be d e s i r e d . The e x c i t e m e n t and
     at mo sp h er e i n h e r e n t in t h e r i v a l r y of t h e game, t h e p a r t i s a n s h i p
     f a c t i o n s in t h e cr owds, t h e s t i m u l o u s of a few p i n t s of b e e r b e f o r e
     t h e game, a r e a f i r s t c l a s s p r e l u d e t o d i s a s t e r , so t h a t a l l t h a t i s
     now r e q u i r e d i s an e l em e n t of rough p l a y , c ou p l e d w i t h a few
     c o n t e n t i o u s d e c i s i o n s , and t h e p a t t e r n i s s e t .

2.   R ecent E vents

     Recent e v e n t s have only emphasised t h e l a c k of e l e m e n t a r y s a f e t y
     p r e c a u t i o n s i n f o o t b a l l grounds t o p r o t e c t t h e s p e c t a t o r s and
     pre vent t h e spread of f i r e in t h e s t a n d s .

     In a S c o t t i s h League match between D u n fe r ml i ne A t h l e t i c and C e l t i c ,
     one per so n was k i l l e d and 49 p e o p l e i n j u r e d . Crash b a r r i e r s
     c o l l a p s e d and hundr eds were s e n t t u m b l i n g on t o t h e f o o t b a l l p i t c h .

     In C o v e n t r y , t h e main s t a n d was s e v e r e l y damaged by f i r e ,
     n e c e s s i t a t i n g i t s d e m o l i t i o n and r e c o n s t r u c t i o n . The d e s i g n and
     c o n s t r u c t i o n of t h e o l d s t a n d f a c i l i t a t e d t h e r a p i d s p r e a d of f i r e .

     Two days l a t e r t h e f o o t b a l l st ad i um a t Swansea was s e v e r e l y damaged
     by f i r e .       F o r t u n a t e l y b ot h s t a n d s were empty of s p e c t a t o r s when t h e
     f i r e s o c c u r r e d . The b e g i n n i n g of t h i s y e a r ' s f o o t b a l l s e a s on was
     mar red by t h e f i r e which o c c u r r e d a t Notti ngham F o r e s t ' s , F o o t b a l l s
     S t ad i u m. Th is f i r e s t a r t e d w h i l s t t h e match was in p r o g r e s s and t h e
     f i r e s p r e a d so r a p i d l y t h a t 4 , 00 0 s p e c t a t o r s had t o be h u r r i e d l y
     evacuated. Furthermore, i t is reported t h a t the f i r e f i g h t i n g
     o p e r a t i o n s were h i n d e r e d by c a r s p a r ke d in t h e v i c i n i t y of t h e
     g r ou nd . From t h e p r e l i m i n a r y r e p o r t s i t a p p e a r s t h a t a d i s a s t e r was
     once a g a i n j u s t n a r r o w l y a v e r t e d .

3.   F i r e R isks

     I t would p r o b a b l y be t r u e t o say t h a t t h e r i s k s where l a r g e crowd
     s i t u a t i o n s a r e p r e s e n t , f a l l i n t o two b a s i c c l a s s i f i c a t i o n s . There
     i s a l i f e and p e r s o n a l s a f e t y r i s k , w i t h an a t t e n d a n t f i r e and p a n i c
     r i s k where t h e o l d e r t y p e of c o m b u s t i b l e t y p e s t a n d s and f i x t u r e s
     a r e s t i l l in use.



                                                  conti nued
P r o b ab l y t h e p r i n c i p l e f i r e r i s k in t h e a v e r a g e f o o t b a l l ground i s
t h e t r a d i t i o n a l c o v e r e d s t a n d , b u i l t p r i m a r i l y of t i m b e r w i t h t h e
us ual c o r r u g a t e d i r o n or a s b e s t o s r o o f . Once a f i r e s e c u r e s a hold
in t h i s t y p e of s t r u c t u r e i t , of c o u r s e , s p r e a d s r a p i d l y , and can
d e s t r o y t h e s t a n d o f t e n b e f o r e e f f e c t i v e f i r e f i g h t i n g measures can
be b r o u g h t i n t o e f f e c t .      F i r e f i g h t i n g o p e r a t i o n s can be c o m p l i c a t e d
by t h e v o id s and s p a c e s b en e a t h t h e s t a n d s , where o f t e n , c o m b u s t i b l e
r u b b i s h and d i s u s e d and worn ou t equipment i s s t o r e d , and i t i s
t h e r e f o r e , in t h e s e p l a c e s where f i r e can s p r e a d u n d e t e c t e d .

Where t h e s p a c e s u n d e r s t a n d s a r e u t i l i s e d f o r o f f i c e s and d r e s s i n g
rooms, e t c . , t h e s e a r e a s a r e o f t e n f u r t h e r sub d i v i d e d by t i m b e r
s t u d d e d p a r t i t i o n s c ov er e d by c o m b u s t i b l e hardwood or s o f t b o a r d .       In
such s t r u c t u r a l c o n d i t i o n s f i r e can s p r e a d r a p i d l y t h r o u g h t h i s t y p e
o f accommodation due t o t h e a b s e n ce of a measure of f i r e r e s i s t i n g
compartmentation.

F ir e P rev en tio n

All s p a c e s   under s t a n d s s ho u ld be c l e a r e d o f c o m b u s t i b l e r u b b i s h and
m aterials,       and a c a r e f u l i n s p e c t i o n made of a l l f l o o r s o ver vo i d s
fo r cracks       and h o l e s t h r o u g h which c i g a r e t t e ends and l i g h t e d
mat ches or       smoking m a t e r i a l s c o u l d f a l l .

Dur ing t h e t i me s p e c t a t o r s a r e occupyi ng s t a n d s f r e q u e n t i n s p e c t i o n s
s h o u l d be made of t h e v o i d s and a f i n a l i n s p e c t i o n made a t l e a s t
t h i r t y mi nu t e s a f t e r t h e s p e c t a t o r s have l e f t t h e s t a n d .

All e l e c t r i c a l equi pment and w i r i n g s h o u l d be examined and t e s t e d by
a comp et en t e l e c t r i c a l c o n t r a c t o r a t l e a s t once i n ev er y t h r e e
years.           I t s ho u ld be e n s u r e d t h a t a d e q u a t e a p p r o p r i a t e f i r s t a i d
f i r e f i g h t i n g equi pment i s s t r a t e g i c a l l y p o s i t i o n e d in t h e s t a n d s ,
and i f t h e r e i s any doubt a b o u t t h e adequacy or e f f e c t i v e n e s s of t h e
a p p a r a t u s t h e C h i e f F i r e O f f i c e r f o r t h e a r e a s ho u l d be r e q u e s t e d t o
a d v i s e on f i r e d e f e n c e a r r a n g e m e n t s .

S p e c t a t o r s ' S a f e t y a n d C o m f o rt on G ro u n d s a n d S t a d i a

To e n s u r e r e a s o n a b l e s t a n d a r d s of s a f e t y f o r t h e g e n e r a l p u b l i c
a t t e n d i n g l a r g e crowd e v e n t s , i t i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t c e r t a i n r ef or ms
s h o u l d be c a r r i e d o u t and t h e f o l l o w i n g a r e a few s u g g e s t i o n s in
this regard:-

a)      Crowds s ho u ld be e f f e c t i v e l y compartmented by more c r u s h
        b a r r i e r s . These c r u s h b a r r i e r s and r e t a i n i n g w a l l s s ho u l d be
        c o n s t r u c t e d t o some r e c o g n i s e d s t a n d a r d of s a f e t y i n s p e c t e d by
        a q u a l i f i e d b u ild in g in s p e c to r t o ensure t h a t they will
        w i t h s t a n d maximum crowd p r e s s u r e s w i t h g en e r o u s s a f e t y ma r g i n ;


                                              continued
b)      P r o v i d i n g s t e w a r d s , (members of S u p p o r t e r s Clubs) who a f t e r
        s u i t a b l e t r a i n i n g c o u l d s u p e r v i s e each compartment t o o b v i a t e
        o ver f i l l i n g and keep a c c e s s gangways c l e a r of s p e c t a t o r s .
        Such an a r r a n g em e n t would be of c o n s i d e r a b l e a s s i s t a n c e t o t h e
        c l u b i n t h e p r o v i s i o n of e f f e c t i v e crowd c o n t r o l e f f i c i e n c y ,
        and would h el p t h e P o l i c e i n l o c a t i n g and c o n t r o l l i n g t r o u b l e
        makers when a d i s t u r b a n c e was in t h e o f f i n g . Stewar ds c o u l d
        a l s o be t r a i n e d i n t h e p r o j e c t i n g o f t h e f a m i l y e n t e r t a i n m e n t
        image, and t h e r e a f t e r would be t h e s o c i a l c o n t a c t and l i n k man
        in each crowd c omp ar t ment . The s t e w a r d s c o u l d be t r a i n e d in
        f i r s t a i d t o t h e i n j u r e d , crowd c o n t r o l p y s c h o l o g y , and
        elementary f i r e p revention.                     In a c o m p a r a t i v e l y s h o r t p e r i o d of
        t i m e , b eca u se s p e c t a t o r s u s u a l l y f o r e g a t h e r i n s i m i l a r p l a c e s
        week by week, each compartment would become a s o c i a l e n t i t y ,
        common t o t h e p e r s o n a l i d e n t i t i e s of t h e r e g u l a r s u p p o r t e r s ,
        t h e i r f a m i l i e s and a s s o c i a t e s ;

c)      The p r o v i s i o n of a d e q u a t e p r i m a r y and s e c o n d a r y l i g h t i n g i s
        p a r t i c u l a r l y i m p o r t a n t d u r i n g f l o o d l i g h t games;

d)      The p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l e n c l o s u r e s f o r c h i l d r e n and o t h e r
        s p e c i a l s e c t i o n s of t h e p u b l i c who ca n n ot p a r t i c i p a t e i n t h e
        usual s p e c t a t o r f a c i l i t i e s .

Stadium and F o o t b a l l Ground Design

I t would a p p e a r t h e r e i s ample scope f o r some of our s c h o o l s or
f a c u l t i e s of a r c h i t e c t u r e t o c a r r y ou t a c ompr ehen s i v e r e s e a r c h
s t u d y i n t o t h e s p e c t a t o r l o g i s t i c s of f o o t b a l l ground and st ad i um
d e s i g n t o a c h i e v e t h e s t a n d a r d s of s a f e t y and c o mf or t b e f i t t i n g t h i s
C o u n t r y ' s app r oac h t o t h e l a t e s i x t i e s and s e v e n t i e s .

Legislation

The l e g a l p o s i t i o n r e g a r d i n g f o o t b a l l and s p o r t s s t a d i a i s not
c l e a r ; i t would a p p e a r t h a t S e c t i o n 59 o f t h e P u b l i c H e a l t h Act 1936
a p p l i e s t o t h e b u i l d i n g s w i t h i n t h e c u r t i l a g e of t h e f o o t b a l l s t a d i a
a n d , t h e r e f o r e , s a f e i n g r e s s and e g r e s s can be s e c u r e d f o r
s p e c t a t o r s in t h e s t a n d s .      Where l i c e n s e d b a r s o r l i c e n s e d c l u b s a r e
p r o v i d e d under t h e s t a n d s , t h e us ual p u b l i c e n t e r t a i n m e n t s a f e t y
s t a n d a r d s such as s e c o n d a r y l i g h t i n g , e x i t s i g n s , a d e q u a t e e x i t s ,
f i r e f i g h t i n g e q u i p m e nt , and t h e fl a me p r o o f i n g of f u r n i s h i n g and
d e c o r a t i o n s , c a n be i n s i s t e d upon under t h e L i c e n s i n g Act o f 1964.

The l e g a l p o s i t i o n of t h e t e r r a c e d s e c t i o n s , sometimes r e f e r r e d t o
as "Spion Kops" and o t h e r open a i r s t a n d i n g s p a c e s , where t h e
s p e c t a t o r s a r e t i g h t l y p ac k e d, i s o b s c u r e b e c a u s e t h e s e p l a c e s
c a n n o t be d e f i n e d as s t r u c t u r e s .     S a f e t y me as ur e i n t h e s e s i t u a t i o n s
a r e t h e r e f o r e l e f t t o t h e i n d i v i d u a l a t t i t u d e s o r common s e n s e of
f o o t b a l l managements, which of c o u r s e v a r i e s a c c o r d i n g t o t h e
q u a l i t y of t h e management, and t o o t h e r p r e v a i l i n g c i r c u m s t a n c e s
which w i l l i n f l u e n c e t h e s t a n d a r d s , no t l e a s t of a l l b ei n g t h e
p r o s p e r i t y and t h e f i n a n c i a l c a p a b i l i t y of t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n .

                                              continued
I t w i l l be obvious t o anyone who t h i n k s ab ou t a s p e c t s of s a f e t y t h a t
c o n d i t i o n s in many f o o t b a l l grounds l e a v e a l o t t o be d e s i r e d and
f u r t h e r l e g i s l a t i o n i s c l e a r l y needed t o r e g u l a r i s e t h e p o s i t i o n .
I t would be r e f r e s h i n g t o hope t h a t l e g i s l a t i o n t o p r o v i d e f o r
r e a s o n a b l e s a f e t y s t a n d a r d s f o r t h e p u b l i c in r e s p e c t of t h e us e of
open a i r t e r r a c i n g on s p o r t s and f o o t b a l l grounds c o u l d be s e c u r e d
b e f o r e a n o t h e r d i s a s t e r o c c u r s , r a t h e r t h a n f o l l o w i n g t h e usual
p r a c t i c e of l o c k i n g t h e l e g i s l a t i v e door a f t e r t h e h o r s e has a l r e a d y
bolted.

P a s t h i s t o r y has i n d i c a t e d t h a t f o l l o w i n g a d i s a s t e r , r emedial
l e g i s l a t i o n has s w i f t l y f o l l o w e d , but t h e e x c e p t i o n t o t h i s r u l e i s
t h e f o o t b a l l i n d u s t r y which a p p e a r s t o be in t h e realm of t h e
untouchable.

The M i n i s t e r of S p o r t has a do p t ed t h e now s t a n d a r d d e l a y i n g t a c t i c
b el o v ed o f a l l p o l i t i c i a n s of a p p o i n t i n g a Committee, b ut a f t e r
s t u d y i n g c o n s t i t u e n t membership and i t s o b j e c t i v e s I ca n n ot e n v i s a g e
any improvements f o r t h e s a f e t y of s p e c t a t o r s in t h e f o r e s e e a b l e
future.

I t i s obvious t h a t d i s a s t e r s can be c a u s ed by f i r e , ; t h e r e i s
a l r e a d y ample e v i d e n c e t h a t f o o t b a l l s t a n d s can be s e t on f i r e y e t
t h e r e a p p e a r s t o be no r e c o g n i s e d f i r e e n g i n e e r on t h e Committee t o
a d v i s e on f i r e d e f e n c e and means of e s c a p e a s p e c t s . C o l l a p s i n g
c r u s h b a r r i e r s and s t r u c t u r a l a s p e c t s a r e a n o t h e r well pr oven c a u s e
o f i n j u r y , bu t a g a i n t h e r e a p p e a r s no s t r u c t u r a l s a f e t y e n g i n e e r on
t h e Committee.

I have some d i f f i c u l t y in r e c o n c i l i n g a Committee so h e a v i l y
w e ig h t e d by r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of t h e s p o r t , o b j e c t i v e l y c o n s i d e r i n g
s a f e t y h a vi ng r e g a r d t o c o ns e q u e n t f i n a n c i a l and o r g a n i s a t i o n a l
impli c a t i o n s .

I t i s not a p l e a s a n t p a s t i m e t o be a p r o p h e t of doom, b u t I
r e i t e r a t e t h a t t h e p o i n t s which I made i n my a r t i c l e n e a r l y a y e a r
ago have been f u l l y j u s t i f i e d by s u b s e q u e n t e v e n t s . Those who
a t t e n d f o o t b a l l mat ches as s p e c t a t o r s must f a c e up t o t h e
p o s s i b i l i t y t h a t t h e y may i n t h e a p p r o p r i a t e c i r c u m s t a n c e s be d i c i n g
w i t h d i s a s t e r . F a r be i t f o r me t o p r e - j u d g e t h e work of t h e
Committee but w h a t e v e r t h e outcome t h e i r e f f o r t s w i l l n e v e r be
e f f e c t i v e w i t h o u t l e g i s l a t i v e b a c k i n g . T h i s i s a p a i n f u l bu t
historical fact.
                             THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF
                               FIRE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

our ref           KER/MAR           your ref                                                       please reply to:
                  29th June 1989                                                                   K. E. ROSE
                  Tel: 021 300 6700                                                                GENERAL MANAGER
                                                                                                   c/o 1 Lancaster Circus
                                                                                                   Queensway
                                                                                                   BIRMINGHAM      B4 7DJ


          Mr. R. M. Whalley
          Secretary to the Inquiry into
            the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
          50 Queen Anne’s Gate
          LONDON
          SW1H 9AT


          Dear Mr. Whalley,


                                       HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


                 In response to your letter of 23rd May, I now enclose six sets of this
          Association’s submission to the Inquiry.


                                                          Yours sincerely




                                                              K. E. ROSE
                                                           General Manager



          5047h




                                                  General Manager: K. E. Rose, IPFA, FRVA
                        Registered Office: Fire Service Headquarters, Lancaster Circus Queensway, B irm ingham B4 7DE
22
• , ^
