NOTES FOR THE EASTWOOD EXAMINATION *

1.   Leppinqs Lane Turnstiles

     How and by whom was the ratio occupancy/number of turnstiles
     in the groups A-G and 1-16 considered in the 1985
     reconstruction?

     (Note: there was considerable confusion amongst the parties
     concerned, as recorded in Eastwood's files. Final cost
     appears to have been the decisive factor).

2.   Radial Fences

     History of installation?
     (See my summary).

3.   Capacity of Pens

     How were the current figures reached?   Are they believe to
     correspond to the Green Guide?

     (Note: See HSE Report, which arrives at lower figures, even
     if the crush barriers are assumed to satisfy the Green
     Guide, which they do not).

4.   Crowd Densities

     See the HSE Report, which, based on counting heads, arrives
     at figures well in excess of the Green Guide.

5.   Tunnel Ramp

     The slope reaches 1/6 at the terrace end. The Eastwood file
     offers a lengthy justification - what actually happened?

6.   Crush Barriers

     This is the most difficult technical area, bedeviled by the
     inadequacies of the Green Guide.

     i.    The heights fall short of the minimum requirement of
           1.02m, but this may not be a major issue.

     ii.   The front-to-back spacing in Pens 3, 4 falls mainly
           within requirements, but the gaps expose certain
           barriers severely (notably the end span of 124A, the
           second row barrier in Pen 3 next to the central fence,
           the front-row barrier passing through the central
           fence, and others in Pen 4). Was this considered?


     Many of these questions relate to joint decisions (Club,
     police, City...) as well as Eastwood and Partners.
     Eastwood's reports have resented the technical results
     openly.
       iii. It has not been possible to establish the procedures
            adopted for strength testing - nor in the Green Guide
            sufficiently definitive.   (The account offered by
            another company, SG5, of their own procedures for
            testing is given in some detail.   It has its own
            peculiarities.) The most important issues in the
            Eastwood tests are:

       (a)   were all spans of each barrier loaded simultaneously or
             at least two at a time, with overlaps    (the most
             reasonable interpretation of the Green Guide)?

       (b)   was the required recovery of deflection under load
             interpreted as applying to a single cycle of loading,
             or all three successive cycles taken together (the
             format could lead to dangerously large deflections
             after three cycles)?

       (c)   Annex C5 of the Green Guide calls for a 'retest' ifthe
              first 'test' yields more than 50% recovery but less
             than the required 75%. Was 124A 'retested', and if so
             did the 'retest' consist of three cycles of loading?

       (d)   where were the deflections measured?

       (e)   what consideration was given to those barriers left
             untested because of difficulties in installing the
             equipment?

       (f)   why was five year interval of testing chosen (the Green
             Guide, para 38, refers to four years)?

       (g)   what consideration was given to the effects of
             corrosion?

7.     Perimeter Gates

       These are narrower than Green Guide dimensions, but in view
       of their total inadequacy for emergency exits, the small
       difference is immaterial. Was consideration given to their
       use as emergency exits?



NOTE         Professor Smith, called in as a consultant by HSE, has
             produced some interesting calculations for theoretical
             collapse loads of the crush barriers (to follow). We
             have also, independently, tried to estimate the loading
             created on a crush-barrier by a given depth of crowd
             (all leaning forwards).




                                                LM
                                                14 June 1989
