                                          DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER



     Kevin Daniel Williams who was also identified as No. 51,     is
     that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q-   Identification was done by Inspector Timms so far as you are
     concerned? - A. That was the initial identification.

Q. But there is no doubt in your mind about the identity? -
A. No.

Q. There were various marks on the body itself to identify it?
A*      Kevin was clearly labelled both by number' and by name.

Q. Dr. Slater, would you be kind enough then to take me through
   the post mortem? - A. My examination of Kevin showed that
   the main finding was that of asphyxia.   This opinion was
   formed through the extensive blueness on the face and upper
   part of the chest.   In addition there were small
   haemorrhages in both the face and internal organs including
   the brain, heart and lurigs.  This asphyxia had clearly
   resulted from compression of the neck and chest and this
   opinion was supported by the presence of three small
   scratches over the left side of the neck and also over the
   front of the voice box.   This had also resulted in four
   fractures to the small bones in the actual voice box.    In
   addition there was evidence of bruising to the lungs, again
   supporting compression of the chest.

           My autopsy showed that Kevin was a normally developed,
     fit, healthy, young male with no evidence of any natural
     disease which could have contributed towards death and it
     was my opinion that Kevin had a normal life expectancy.   In
     terms of the mode of death the compression of the neck or
     chest has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
     rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there is one
     reported case of it occurring apparently instantaneously.
     Following unconsciousness then there is no discomfort and no
     pain.   Death then occurs after approximately three to five
     minutes, sir.

Q- So because when we say asphyxia people think of agony for
   ages and ages.  What you are saying is that the person
   himself would very rapidly not know anything at all about
   what was happening? - A. I should say the word "asphyxia" is
   unfortunate in that scientifically it partly includes simply
   that there is not enough oxygen in the blood.  It doesn't
   imply actual suffocation and prolonged death.

Q. Did you say there were four fractures to the voice box? -
A. Yes, there are two bones in the voice box, as you know, sir,
   and both these showed two fractures each.

Q. Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I want to put
   this to you because I would like to get your view on it, one
   Officer will be dealing with the value of this evidence in a

                             3
                                                                    DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER



                             moment but she says that at a point when this lad was in the
                             gymnasium, in other words he had already been moved across
                             the pitch, she says she helped him into the gym from the
                             pitch, presumably she carr'ied him.        He stopped breathing.
                             She gave him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
                             opened his eyes said a word and died.         Now in the light of
                             your pathological findings, is that in fact a possibility,
                             do you think? - A. Well, sir, I was aware of this statement
                             and therefore I have clearly given this matter considerable
                             thought, sir.         I think there are several comments to make
                    B        but the moderately large number of autopsies I did from this
                             incident, sir, this was certainly the most severe case of
                             traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.         This was
                             both in terms of blueness of the face and also the area of
                             pallor of whiteness around the mouth.         Sir, it was a very
                             very severe form of asphyxia and I do not think that
                             unconsciousness would have been quicker than three or five
                    C        seconds.    I have no reason to alter what I have already said
                             on that a s p e c t .

                                  The other very significant thing about this, and it also
                             supports the severity of this case, is that again of the
                             autopsies I did approximately 15 per cent had some sort of
                             fracture to the voice box, the larynx.  This case was highly
                             unusual in that in fact it had four fractures to the larynx.
                    D        It was by far the most severe case of voice box fractures-.
                             Not only does this indicate the severity of the traumatic
                             asphyxia at the time but it also in fact makes it virtually
                             impossible for the person to have spoken by virtue of the
                             fact that there were fractures to the voice box, sir.   So
                             all I can say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find
                             that inconceivable that the person could have spoken.

                    E   Q. The other thing I notice is that you show in this particular
                           case extensive congestion of the cerebral veins and
                           cereballum and cortical coning and if a person speaks his
                           neurons are working, aren't they? - A. That is right.

                        Q. That evidence would indicate there had been extensive brain
                           damage and he couldn't really communicate.  Would that be
                           right?  I don't want to put words in your mouth but I want
                    F      to be sure about that? - A. The coning indicates the
                           severity of the asphyxia and again that would have resulted
                           in irreversible brain damage which again would totally
                           prohibit any form of communication.

                        Q.   I have thought about this comment as well, of course, and
                             there are several explanations (1) that it didn't occur and
                             that the observer is mistaken but another possibility that
                    G        has occurred to me and I want to put it to you and please
                             disagree if it is not either right or you don't accept it;
                             it is possible, is it not, that if a person having died is
                             moved air or stomach contents might be expelled and might
                             make a sound as it escapes, so to speak?  Is that a


                H                                         4



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                              P.S.   JOHN HILLOCK



                           p o s s i b i 1 ity? - A . It is an interesting c o m m e n t , sir, because
                           it is a possibility I considered also myself and that is
                           certainly an explanation to the noise which could have been
                           made which may have mimicked the word "mum" but it would not
                           explain the opening of the eyes, sir.

                        Q. No.    A. But   it would explain the noise

                                MR - FRASER:      No questions, sir, but thank you very
                           much, Dr. Slater,     for that sympathetic and detailed
                    B      explanat i o n .

                                THE CORONER:   Any other questions for Dr. Slater?
                           Thank you very much, Dr. Slater.  We spent a lot of time
                           thinking about this sentence because it was difficult.   I
                           didn't think it was possible from what I knew of the
                           evidence but, on the other hand, we didn't want you to feel
                           that we weren't telling you what was in the statements.   We
                           felt it was better for you to hear it and have it explained
                           rather than for us to keep it under wraps, so to speak, and
                           you might possibly find out some other time.  I hope I have
                           taken the right decision.  I don't know.  The only person
                           who knows that is you.  We did spend a lot of time thinking
                           about it wondering what to do for the best.

                    D                  POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

                                                     By THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q. Yes. - A. Police Sergeant John Hillock, sir, of the West
                           Midlands Police.  I have previously taken the Oath.

                        Q. Could you then please, if you would, take me through the
                    E      statement?' - A. At 0700 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989,
                           Mr. James Stephen Williams saw his son, Kevin Daniel
                           Williams, leave the family home with the intention of
                           travelling to Sheffield.   He was to travel by train with a
                           number of friends to watch the Semi Final football match at
                           Hillsborough Stadium.   Kevin had a ticket for the match.

                               Andrew Duncan travelled to Sheffield with Kevin, Thomas
                          James Nickson and Gregory Fagen.  They travelled by train,
                          arriving at Sheffield at 1040 hours.  Gregory Fagen left the
                          others at the station.  The other three youths caught a bus
                          from the station to Hillsborough Stadium where Thomas
                          Nickson left them.

                               Andrew Duncan entered the stadium with Kevin at about
                          1330 hours via the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  They initially
                          stood together in Enclosure 4 but shortly after they moved
                          to Enclosure 3.  At about 1445 hours Andrew Duncan saw other
                          friends on the terraces, including Anthony Maxwell Grier and
                          Stuart Thompson.  Stuart, of course, also lost his life at
                          Hillsborough.


                H                                             5



J. L. Harpham Ltd
