                                      rUL*.
                                                        2 0 APR 1989
                                                         as2-/i3\


From:   R R G Watts (2764)               cc   Mr Moriarty
        G1 Division                           ” ” mmond
                                                    rney
        20 April 1989                               ddard >---
                                              Mr Stickley, DOW
                                              Mr Mould
                                              Mr F Smith, F8



Mr Yates




HILLSBOROUGH   -   ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION

At the meeting with Sir Clive Whitmore yesterday he said he would
like to see the notes we had prepared about the line to take with
DOE over implementation of the concept of all seated
accommodation at major football clubs in the context of the
Football Spectators Bill.

2. I attach a copy of the notes. I am due to have a first
meeting with Mr Kinghatli (DOE) about this on Friday morning
(subject to Ministerial developments today).




                                     R R G WATTS
THE CONCEPT OF ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION AT MAJOR FOOTBALL CLUBS


DOE are taking this forward, in the context of the Football
Spectators Bill.   As matters stood at 4.00 pm on Wednesday 19
April Mr Ridley^s intention was said to be to have an early
meeting with the   football authorities to tell them what the
Government intended.   In discussions with DOE in preparation for
that meeting, our first thoughts on the line we should take in
the light of discussions so far are as follows.


All-seated accommodation
2.   What do we mean by all-seated accommodation?               We mean either
individual bucket seats which tip up or bench seats which are
clearly marked and numbered.      From the safety point of view there
                                     We ^also mean covered stands
to avoid the problem of spectators preferring to stand, rather
than sit in the rain.)


3.   Retaining some standing room is not of course compatible with
                               ijicjVXs i   {t*. (juJUfurO
the concept of all-seated accommodation^ but we should keep in
mind the potential social consequences of pricing poorer fans
out of football matches.    In the opening discussion with the
football authorities the Government should say total elimination
of terracing is intended.   But we should be prepared to think
again in the light of the Taylor report.          (There might be a case
for allowing a small amount of terracing (eg in one or two areas;
or all round a ground in front of the seats).                Ibrox Park,
Glasgow Rangers ground, which has been mentioned as a successful
all-seated ground, in fact has terrace room for 8,000.                Only
Aberdeen's ground is all-seated.)


Selection of grounds
4.   DOE seem to have in mind all First Division clubs, perhaps 10
Second Division clubs with large grounds, and maybe one or two
from the Third Division^with total conversion costs of perhaps
£15m.    We think this is an acceptable starting point in DOE
consultations with the football authorities in the immediate
future;    if we were to press DOE at this stage to go for more
grounds we might simply provoke them into pressing us to provide
the money.    We would need to look at this again in the light of
the Taylor report.     (Another possibility would have been to use
the criterion of all football league grounds where the
authorised spectator maximum is, say, 20,000 to 25,000 or more.)


Timing of implementation
5.   Conversion to all-seating accommodation by the start of the
next football season (mid August 1989) is obviously
impracticable.    We would discuss whether completion by mid-August
1990 would be;    it seems unlikely, except for clubs with only one
standing area.    The earliest practicable completion date for the
whole country could well be mid-August 1991.     The clubs with,
say, three standing areas could well ask for a later date.


Phasing and transitional arrangements
6.   We would therefore seek a phased programme of conversion,
with clubs continuing to stage matches while conversion was in
train.    The parts of the ground being converted would of course
be closed during matches.    The building work would have to be
approved by the local authority(ies)    (building regulations;
planning permission;    safety certification).


Costs
7.   We should take the view that within central Government this
is primarily a matter for DOE.    We would expect the costs to be
met by the football clubs, with such help as the Football Trust
and the Football Grounds Improvement Trust were able to make
available. We would expect DOE to resist calls for central
Government grants to the clubs.


8.   During discussion with the football authorities they may ask
whether work on conversion to all seated accommodation should
take priority in terms of timing and financial provision over
other safety improvement work.    We should avoid being drawn into
such questions of priority:     the ground operator will have to
comply with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate
and of the licence under the Football Spectators Bill which will
cover all-seated accommodation.               ~


Enforcement
9.     DOE expect to be able to insert a requirement that a ground
should have all-seated accommodation in the licence to admit
spectators to a football match under the Football Spectators
Bill.     The licensing authority seem$likely to be the Secretary of
State for the Environment rather than someone else appointed by
him.


10.     It is of course odd to have a physical requirement of this
kind in this Bill rather than an amendment to the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975/1987.     We shall have to ensure that DOE
frame the additional clause so that it is not incompatible or
confusing with the duty placed on local authorities to issue
safety certificates.


11.     Since DOE legal advisers are satisfied that the concept of
all-seated accommodation can be taken up in the Bill, we propose
not to raise with DOE, or to consider further at this time, the
ideas discussed informally on 18 April on whether there should
be a national monitoring system, or national inspectorate, to
ensure that local authorities issuing safety certificates are
doing their work well, both in the issue of certificates and
monitoring that football clubs meet the conditions imposed.


12.     We may need to consider this further in the light of the
Taylor report.     We might want then to raise the possibility of
somewhat greater than at present but still modest Home Office
involvement in this field, designed to increase our ability to
devise and issue revised guidance to local authorities and ground
operators from time to time.


 Q i D vjvrv*-''

             \vsl.
