                                          The City of Liverpool
                                          Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                          Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                          Solicitor to the Council
                                          PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                          Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427



                                                       Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                                       Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
REC                                                    Your R e f :
                                                       Our R e f : MFCDA/CM

                                                                      (P^Wce/-
                                                                                                    I l-b p c ^ g
                                                                                                    Q Q o'      ^   C
                                                                                     3rd February, 1998'
                                                        CC (Av H*4.V\c0J

 R t . Hon Jack Straw MP
 Home Secretary                                               fju
 Home Office
 5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
 LONDON                                                       {Av
 SW1H 9AT
                                                              Hv     oufM
 Dear Mr. Straw
                                                              M* 0 w<v>
 H IL L SB O R O U G H   S C R U T IN Y

 I write further to my letter dated 14th..JiQvember, 1997 concerning
 the above matter and your response of 4th December.

Our correspondence was reported to a meeting of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of Liverpool City Council, held last week
at which various Members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
were in attendance. Many of the people present expressed concern
about some of the content of your response and I was therefore
asked to write to you again to place this concern on record prior
to any announcement which may be made about the outcome of the
Scrutiny.

The overwhelming view which emerged from the meeting is that there
is continuing dissatisfaction with the terms of reference of the
investigation and indeed with the disparaging comments about
Liverpool supporters made previoously by the judge. However even
more importantly there was also considerable disquiet expressed
about the inference taken from your letter to me, that the
decision not to extend the timetable of the Scrutiny was taken by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith with reference only to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police. The Working Party support the
contention of the Families that while the Lord Chief Justice may
have been satisfied that the information received from the South
Yorkshire Force was adequate, nonetheless much potentially
valuable documentation which may have aided their submissions was
withheld from them by the Police.




                           Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
                        Administration & Commercial Services; Human Resource Service;
              Information Technology Services; Law & Committee Services; Legal Services Agency;
                                    Public Relations & Information Service.
In conclusion I would ask that as you reach your decision on this
matter you take the above comments into account. Would you also
please note that Liverpool City Council by way of its Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party has re-affirmed its earlier view
that even prior to the Stuart Smith scrutiny, sufficient evidence
had already been fulsomely demonstrated to cast overwhelming doubt
on previous judicial proceedings and to therefore justify the
establishment of a full new Inquiry into the Disaster.



Yours sincerely



(
h iiisjju iu u y n   u iad B L C i   innji.jvj.iiy   jrd rty
