 From: Paul Pugh                                           cc     Vic Clayton
       Room 529                                                   Steve Wells
       Operational Policing Policy Unit                           Maggie Rolfe
       Queen Anne’s Gate                                          Angela Underhill
       0171 273 3141                                              John Usher
                                                                  Mathew Pyne
         2 April 1997




 Clare Pelham. PPDSTI




BRIEFING FOR INCOMING MINISTERS


I attach a first draft of the OPPU briefing. Three sections - firearms, Hillsborough,
and an appointment to the PCA - plus one diary point on private security are ‘first
fortnight’ material. The others are‘main issues up to the recess’. Some may need
amendment when we have seen the party manifestos. There will be one to be added at
a later stage - a public order prognosis which we will receive from ACPO in mid-
April.




                                                         PAUL PUGH




F:\OPPU\HOU\LETTER\PP0139MA.DOC
   Hillsborough



  The Granada television drama ‘Hillsborough’ and the surrounding press coverage in
  December focused attention on calls by the Hillsborough Family Support Group for a
  new public mquiry and inquest into the 1989 disaster. In an adjournment debate in
  December last year the then Home Secretary undertook to consider whether there
  were grounds for re-opening the public inquiry.

  The Hillsborough Family Support Group have submitted material to us in support of
  their case, including copies of video tapes which the Group claims were withheld
  from the inquiry and inquest. We have also received a report from the Chief
  Constable of South Yorkshire responding to the issues raised in the Granada
 programme. The material has also been considered by officials in the Crown
 Prosecution Service and the Attorney General’s Office. We do not consider that there
 ^     /r          t0 Justlfy a fiurther Public inquiry and we understand that this view is
 shared by those considering it in relation to the prosecution of individuals and the re­
 opening of the inquest. We will be providing full advice to Ministers on this within
 the next few weeks.




F:\OPPU\HOU\BRIEF\PPO 137MA. DOC
