47-10.JS                                                   \U




From: J L Goddard                          cc Ms Snow
      F8 Division                             Mrs Chapman
      Ext 3314                                Mr Yates
      12 October 1990                         Mr Burns
                                              HMCIC
                                              Mr Angel
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Moorey
                                              Mr Cogbill
                                              Miss A Edwards, F2
                                              Mr Fulton
                                              Miss Goose
                                              Mr Sandiford
                                              Mr Nagler
                                              Mr Grant
                                              Mr Kinney
                                              Mr Simmonds




Mr Storr


TAYLOR REPORT: NEW OFFENCES


1.   You asked for advice and a draft reply to the Chief
Secretary's letter of 21 September to the Home Secretary
(attached) about the offences proposed by Lord Justice Taylor.


2.   Mr Lamont refers to a letter of 14 August which he wrote to
Mr Chris Patten (copied to the Home Secretary) suggesting ways in
which any new burdens on local authorities might be kept to a
minimum.   In that letter he proposed that new initiatives could be
given priority only if the Department concerned were willing to
give up equivalent spending on a central government programme.
The Home Secretary was not wholly in agreement with this proposal.
(A copy of his letter of 18 September is attached.)


3.   Nevertheless the Home Secretary is required to give an
estimate of those costs arising from the introduction of the four
new offences which would fall to local authorities.   Since the
offences are limited in their application we are not expecting the
number of prosecutions to be high.   Costs to the police and the
magistrates' courts are not likely to be substantial.


4.   I attach a draft reply the terms of which have been agreed
with the Department of the Environment and with Finance Division
2.




                            J L GODDARD
The Rt Hon Norman Lamont MP
Chief Secretary
Treasury Chambers
Parliament Street
London SW1P 3A9




FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY


Thank you for your letter of 21 September in response to mine of
20 August about Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations for new
criminal offences.


You asked for an estimate of the costs which would fall to local
authorities.   For the police the level of activity generated by
the proposed new touting offence is expected to be absorbed within
their existing and planned resources.   The police are already
actively engaged in the control of touts at football grounds: what
Taylor has proposed is a specific offence of touting which will
make the law more adequate to deal with this mischief rather than
impose any significant additional burden on the police or the
courts.


As for the other three proposed new offences, the number of
prosecutions will not be high since the new offences will only
apply at football matches.    It is estimated that the three
offences together are unlikely to produce more than 1,000 cases a
year - there were only 2,734 arrests for all offences in grounds
in the 1989/90 season - and, working on the basis that    each case
will cost the police an average of £180 to process, it is unlikely
to cost in excess of £180,000.


It is expected that these cases will be dealt with summarily.      The
cost to magistrates' courts is therefore unlikely to exceed
£64,000 per annum, based on the estimate that such a case in a
magistrates' court would cost £64.


It is inevitable that the workload figures are somewhat
speculative but our best estimates indicate that the total cost
implications for local authorities will be rather less than
£250,000 a year, of which something over £140,000 would be met
from specific grants.   When the additional costs would begin to be
incurred would depend on when Parliamentary time could be found
for the legislation, but the full year effect would not be felt
before 1992/93 at the earliest.


Chris Patten's officials have now been informed of these proposals
under the new burdens procedure.   They are content that the
additional duties for local government have been properly
identified and that as much as possible has been done to estimate
the costs.   We will of course keep them informed of any further
developments.


Turning to your point that new proposals of this kind should be
accompanied by an equivalent saving in a central government
programme, I do not think that we and colleagues are agreed that
proposals which cannot be accompanied by an equivalent saving
should automatically attract a low priority.   I fully accept that
testing proposals against this criterion is a valuable discipline,
but I think we must accept that there will be some which remain a
high priority even though no immediate offsetting saving can be
made.   I would put Taylor's recommendations for new offences in
this category.   The projected costs are modest and the new
offences are, I am sure, justified in public order terms.
Taylor's proposals have been widely supported across the political
spectrum and we should incur needless criticism if we failed to
legislate on them.


I am copying this letter to members of QL and H Committees, First
Parliamentary Counsel and Sir Robin Butler.
cst.ps/let/3nl20.9                                                          cms.
                                                                             ms     sp &ocqj-
                                                                             *>'- Va-Le-S
                                                                             '»'■       s
                                                                            *1-
                                                                            m* cML,//
                                                                            **Tf«J6or>
                                                                            rr>’~
                                                                            **** G-oose,-^
                                                                                 ^osjes. .


             T reasu ry C h a m b e rs, P arliam ent Street SW1P 3AG
                                                                                    &(S\
                                                                        .    2 ? SfP 199°
    The Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP
    Home Secretary
    Home Office
    50 Queen Anne's Gate                                       6 y'^l/v/ivxr ^oU/cu2. ^
    London                 ^
    SW1H 9AT                          X            September 1990

                                                               (jJiCAaJL.

         U     j   (X J Cu S m/ j

    TAYLOR REPORTS NEW OFFENCES                                     ZL'I-W

    You copied to me your letter of            20 August to Geoffrey Howe.

    2.   I note   that the costs that fall to central government are
    unlikely to be significant. Provided that colleagues can agree to
    absorb whatever costs arise, from these proposals from within
    existing resources I am content.

    3.   As for the costs that fall on local authorities, you will
    have seen the exchange of correspondence between Chris Patten and
    myself about new burdens on local authorities. Following the
    proposals set out in my letter of 14 August, I would be grateful
    if you could let me have an estimate, agreed with Chris, of what
    those costs are likely to be. Could you also confirm that you
    think the proposal is sufficiently important that you would if
    necessary be prepared to give up equivalent spending on a central
    government programme?

    4.   I am      sending          copies   of this letter to members of QL and H
    Committees,and    to            First     Parliamentary     Counsel       and
    Sir Robin Butler.




                                                                 RECEIVED by

                                       NORMAN LAMONT             * 2-5SEP 1990

                                                               pr iv a t e secrftaby            I
                                        Q l ' E E N ANNE S G \ T E   LONDON               SW1H 9 . \ T


                                                         \€    September-*1990
                                                                      e -c -       <vodka. £ac*>
                                                                               m- VaJe-S
                                                                                    8o-^/75 ,
                                                                               fa*- A7^^/o-/ry
                                                                               '»'■U ^ J e m
                                                                                 ~ ^cdaUt/X^~
                                                                                   7Vzv//7
                                                                                                ^£e>>'7
                                                                               /7 7 ZN V = O c i Cl   ** ' ■   '

                                                                                   Z5^ fr
                N E W BURDENS O N LOCAL GOVE RNM EN T                       tff'"'/Woo '•“£*-< .
                                                                           fftr-s              5

Thank you for copying^^to me your letter of 14 August to
Chris Patten suggesting ways in which we might evaluate policy
proposals  which  wou ld pl ac e additional burdens  on  local
authorities.

I agree, of course, that additional ’demands on local authorities
should be kept to the minimum, and I am broadly in agreement with
your suggestions for achi ev in g this.   It is however important to
distinguish be tween reso ur ce burdens which arise from genuinely
new activities and those whi ch result from a transfer of
responsibility from central to local government.      In the case of
the latter there may often be significant savings to central
government and such a transfer may well produce bette r value for
money. A number of the new burdens which result from Home Office
activities fall into this category and have been encouraged by
the Treasury on these grounds'.- I think it might be a mistake if
we were to apply too rigidly your suggestion that any proposal
whi£h could not be offset by a reduction in central government
spending should au to ma tic ally attract a low priority.       This
would, for example, catch o ur proposals for divert in g offenders
 from custody because, alt hou gh there would be longer term savings
on prisons expenditure, these would inevitably take time to
 emerge; in the meant im e we should need to provide aidditional
 probation service resources in order to ensure that the policy
 had any chance of success.           A number of my Department's
 proposals in the law and or d e r field, while imposing additional
 burdens on local authorities,       are de signed to br in g about
 equivalent reductions in ce ntral government expenditure (eg the
 introduction of    direct    charging   for  the  Forensic  Science
 S e r v i c e ).




 %   fir

The Rt Hon Norman Lamont HP
Chief Secretary
Treasury Chambers
Parliament Street
LONDON SW1P 3AG                                   '                                          /over
4 ^




          I think it follows that, if the princ ip le of equivalent savings
          from central go ver nmen t can no t unive rs al ly be applied, nor. can
          your suggestion that ad di tional burdens may not be prayed in aid
          to support increases in AEF or other expenditure within the
          planning total.   I am inclined to agree wi th Chris Patten that
          there may be cases where we judge that in imposing a particular
          new burden on local go ve rn me nt we s ho uld not expect it to be
          financed solely by c om mu ni ty charge payers. ,1 agree, however,
          that in putting forward a proposed new burden, colleagues should
          seek to make it’ clear how it will be. financed.

          Your other sug ge st ion that policy proposa ls submitted to a

      •   Cabinet Committee should identify and cost any burden on local
          authorities clearly has merit. There are inevitably difficulties
          in some instances of forecasting precise costs, but there seems
          a good case for trying to quantify the cost of new burdens more
          accurately than we do at present.

        I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister,          Geoffrey Howe,
      » members of E(LG) and Sir Ro b i n Butler.




                                  0
