                                                               To    '^Socl   3oqp
                                                                                      «*®S   J     |
                                                                                             (P   1‘   »




                                                               t o ©X.
                                                        «^       / ■ gju n: r1         ^

                                                       ^ t V v i ^ ^ v o A ^         ivt


^     ^ ^c.-o»Cto »t                                                    £-&-&&       A^cli^«


^ wi*        ^,1-       ^    V      7 «-v^ /**v         ^ < j j ^ - — e-y ^                *~~r._

✓C e ^ < .   £ c -C l   ( 9 \r * ^ t 4 ~ c _ e & ^ £    + t*             IA— £ m      « -0


 * 6 ^       «~^SU                    e.         C t-e+JlX          Ae-cs^       A
appointed centre on the occasions of designated football matches.
Failure to attend would immediately be detected and would render
the absentee liable to further penalties including imprisonment.


324.          Such a measure would have a number of merits.       A mere
ban on entering grounds may be flouted without detection and in
any event does not ban presence near, the ground.          An attendance
centre order would provide a means not merely to ban a hooligan
from entry to a ground but to keep him physically from going
there.       He would thus be prevented from causing trouble outside
or near the ground as well as inside it.          This would be achieved
without adding to the prison population,         unless he defaulted,     and
without any elaborate scheme impinging on ^spectators generally.
The provision would be the logical counterpart in the domestic
scene to the provisions of Part II of the 1989 Act relating to
foreign matches.


Is it Practicable?

         t
325.          I appreciate that detaining convicted hooligans during
designated matches in the domestic football programme is a bigger
undertaking and would impose a more restrictive penalty than
requiring them merely to report on the occasions of English
matches abroad.       It is necessary,    therefore,   to consider the
present structure of attendance centres, what extension of it
might be necessary,      the resource implications and the fairness of
such a measure.


Attendance Centres


326.          At present section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act          1982
empowers courts to make attendance centre orders for young people
under 21 who:


       (a)    have been convicted of an imprisonable offence;


       (b)    have defaulted on payment of their fines etc;       or


                                    130
       (c)   have failed to comply with the requirements of a
             probation or supervision order.


Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
previously been given a custodial sentence except in special
(undefined) circumstances.     The minimum length of an order is 12
hours,   except for those under 14.      The maximum is 24 hours under
17, and 36 hours for those aged 17 to 20.


327.         At present there are 137 centres:     111 junior centres
for those aged under 17, and 26 senior centres for those aged 17
to 20 (males only).     The senior centres are, for the most part,
in the larger connurbations.     The Home Office has recently
reviewed the use of the junior centres and some with low
attendance figures are being closed.’


328.         Most centres are in school premises.     They are normally
open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
usually, but not invariably,    in the afternoon.     Each centre is
         t
staffed by an officer in charge, normally an off-duty or retired
police officer, assisted by other instructors.        Regimes include
physical education and at least one other activity.


329.         Subject to these factors, attendance centre orders can
be made at present against those convicted of football related
offences.     They cannot however be imposed on anyone over 21, or
anyone who has had a custodial sentence.


330.         Effectively to exclude the offender from football
grounds,     it would be necessary to have the centre open at least
on every Saturday afternoon during the season.        To try to include
week-day evening matches would create difficulties in making
centres available and might be thought too oppressive on the
offender.     If power to make orders were extended to cover those
over 21 and those-who have served a custodial sentence,% the
centre would have to provide for a more challenging type of
offender.      It would probably be thought inappropriate to mix 17
to 20 year old attenders with more hardened hooligans.
                                   131
Resource Implications

33 1   .   Such an extension would probably involve an increase in
the number and calibre of staff.     Presently, as indicated
earlier,   staff include retired and off-duty police officers.
More such personnel would be required.     However,   such increases
might be modest in comparison with the police resources likely to
be required to implement the national membership scheme (see
paragraphs 420 to 423 infra).


Fairness


332.       I would not suggest that the imposition of an
attendance order should be a mandatory accompaniment to an
exclusion order.     It would be a discretionary power available to
the courts to be used in accordance with the same criteria as
apply in Part II of the 1989 Act,    ie no such order could be made
unless the court was satisfied that making it in relation to the
accused would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in
connection with designated football matches (cf section 15(2) of
the 1989 Act).     This would enable the courts to keep the numbers
cf orders within manageable limits and to apply them only in
serious cases where the offender might otherwise be in danger of
a custodial sentence.


 333.       In such situations, if the offender were judged by the
court to be a committed football hooligan,     and were required to
 attend for say two hours each Saturday in the football season,         to
 a maximum of 36 hours (ie nearly half a season) or even 72 hours,
 he could not surely have any just grievance.     The order would be
 less harsh than even the shortest prison sentence and,      from the
 public's point of view, much more effective.


 334.       i recognise the practical difficulties in implementing
 extended attendance centre orders but, if those difficulties can
 be overcome, the scheme would have considerable merits.* I
 accordingly recommend that consideration be given to implementing
 it.
                                   132
                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen An)   Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                L
                                               Sv.



Our reference:
Your reference:




    R M Whalley Esq
    Secretary
    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
    Home Office
    Room 662
    50 Queen Anne's Gate
    London SW1H 9AT                                  10 November 1989




    ATTENDANCE CENTRES

    Enclosed are a draft letter and a draft paper on attendance
    centres.  Have we provided the information Lord Justice Taylor is
    looking for and struck the right note?  I should be grateful for
    any advice and comments on the draft.

     Does this count as formal Home Office evidence to the enquiry?         If
     so, ought I to clear it with Ministers?




                                                     Miss J M Goose
  D R A F T



  R M Whalley Esq
  Secretary
  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
  Room 662
  Home Office
  50 Queen Anne's Gate
  London SW1                                                November 1989




  You told me that Lord Justice Taylor would welcome our views on
   the suitability of attendance centre orders for those convicted of
   football-related offences.    He would also like to know the present
4^p os i t i o n on intermittent custody or weekend imprisonment.


   I attach a paper about attendance centres.      It explains the
   statutory basis on which they operate; describes how they are
   managed and run; and offers some comments on their suitability for
   football hooligans.    Whether an attendance centre order is
   suitable for an individual will depend upon the circumstances and
   his personal characteristics.     Some of those convicted of
   football-related offences can sensibly be given attendance centre
   orders.    However, we doubt whether the disposal is suitable for
   determinedly anti-social offenders.


   We considered a year ago whether attendance centres would be
   suitable reporting places for football hooligans prevented from
   attending matches abroad, under Part II of the Football Spectators
   Bill.     I think it will be clear from the paper why we concluded
   they could not be used for this purpose.


   On intermittent custody,    in 1984 the Government issued a Green
   Paper seeking views on the desirability and practicability of
   introducing a new disposal of this kind.      In the 1986 White Paper
   on Criminal Justice (Cmnd 9658), it announced that it had decided
   not to pursue the idea.     The view among respondents to the Green
Paper was that a new disposal of this kind was not necessary and
there was no agreement about the kind of offender for whom it
would be suitable.      Many felt that it would replace existing
community sentences rather than custody; and there was no
    agreement over the form it should take.   The additional costs were
    a significant factor.   Ministers have considered the issue again
    since 1986 but their view remains the same.   Their approach to
    sentencing is set out in last year's Green Paper on Punishment,
    Custody and the Community.   Custody should be used only for the
    most serious and violent offenders.   When it is not necessary,
    offenders should be dealt with in the community.   Ministers are
    considering what fresh powers courts might need to encourage
    greater use of community disposals and their proposals are likely
    to be published in the New Year.


•
                                                       Miss J M Goose
   ATTENDANCE CENTRES:           FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS


   1.       Under section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982 courts
   have the power to make attendance centre orders for young people
   under 21 who


          (a)    have been convicted of an imprisonable offence; or


           (b)   have defaulted on payment of their fines etc; or


           (c)   have failed to comply with the requirements of a
                 probation or supervision order.


   Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
^^previously been given a custodial sentence except                 in      special
^ P ( u n d e f i n e d ) circumstances.    The minimum length of   an      order is12
   hours, except for those under 14.               The maximum is   24    hours for
   those under 17, and 36 hours for those aged 17 to                20.


   2.       The network of centres is managed centrally by the Home
   Office, which has delegated the management of individual centres
   to local agents.          In most areas, the agent is the Chief Officer of
   Police.       At present there are 137 centres:           111 junior centres
    (some mixed) for those aged under 17; and 26 senior centres for
    those aged 17 to 20 (males only).              A list of the centres is
    attached.      The need for centres is determined by the numbers of
   young people coming before the courts locally, and they are mostly
    in towns.      Some 50 new centres were opened between 1979 and 1984.
   There is a reasonable geographical spread of junior centres in
   England and Wales, but senior centres are, for the most part,                  in
    the larger'conurbations.               With the fall in number of juveniles
    under 17 being dealt with by the courts, the number of attendance
    centre orders has also dropped.               The Home Office has recently
    reviewed the use of the junior centres and a number with low
    attendance figures are being closed.


    3.       Most centres are in school premises.             They are normally
    open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
  usually, but not invariably,       in the afternoon.   A typical order
  might be completed in 9 sessions over an 18 week period.           Each
  centre is staffed by an officer in charge, normally, an off-duty or
  retired police officer,   assisted by other instructors.       Regimes
  include physical education and at least one other activity.            Each
  centre determines its own programme in accordance with general
  guidance from the Home Office.        The range of activities is very
  wide and includes instruction in socially useful skills        (first-
   aid, life-saving) and handicrafts      (woodwork, pottery).   The aim is
   to encourage the young people to make more constructive use of
   their free time during an enforced period of loss of leisure.


   4.     Attendance centre orders are used for those convicted of
   all kinds of offence except the most serious offences of violence.
^ ^ T h e r e is no reason why they should not be used for those convicted
^ ^ o f football-related offences.     However, there would be
   difficulties in their systematic use for determinedly anti-social
   football hooligans.   Attendance centres are not secure.          Although
   they are run in a disciplined environment, the staff have no means
   beyond their own authority of enforcing discipline and some
   centres have no police officers on their staff.        Football
   hooligans are unlikely to be the most assiduous attenders.
   Imposing an attendance centre order on a person who is unlikely to
   attend and will be returned to court with a view to a different
   order being made is counter-productive.       The activities at centres
   are unlikely to* be attractive to many football hooligans.          Those
   who do attend may well be disruptive and undermine the
   constructive work being done with other, more co-operative
   offenders.


   5.     If the intention is to take football hooligans out of
   circulation while matches are in progress, it should be noted that
   attendance centres can only be run on Saturdays, even on Saturdays
   their hours do not necessarily co-incide with the times of
   matches, and local education authorities might not be prepared to
   lease their premises for use as centres, if they thought there was
   a risk of damage to their property.       Some authorities are already
   reluctant - or refuse - to do this.
6.        This is not to say that attendance centre orders should not
be used for some football hooligans.     The orders continue to have
a useful place in the range of sentencing options available to the
courts.     However they should be used for those young people,
whether football hooligans or not, for whom they are suitable and
who are likely to respond to the activities.




Cl Division
Home Office
November 1989
