                                                      ^     5)
INQUIRY IN T O THE HILLSBOROUGH      The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                     SO Queen Anne’s Gate
                                     limdon SW1H 9AT
                                     01-2732577/3602/2370




Mrs Janet Grigg
Private Secretary to
Tim Smith Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON                               Date
SW1A OAA
                                  11 December 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY PART II

Thank you for your letter of 5 December about
correspondence on 24 November from the Sound
and Communications Industries Federation.  I
enclose a copy of our reply of 4 December.


                             Y,

                               R M WHALLEY
                                                   ■“I-
                          Secretary to the Inquiry
INQUIRY INTO Till- I III LSHOROI (,l l       Tilt- Rl lio n L o rd ju stic c Tayloi
STADIUM DISASTER
                                             ^ 0 Q u e e n A n ne 's ( >.H<
                                             I x Midi >n S W I I I 9 A T
                                             01 2 'M 2 5 ~ 7 .V > 0 2 /2 V 0   (b



Mr S P Jones
Sound & Communications
 Industries Federation
4-B High Street
Burnham
Slough
SL1 7JH                                  4 December 1989




Dear Mr Jones

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Thank you for your letter of 24 November with
enclosures to Lord Justice Taylor about the
possibilities for research into the technical
requirements of sound systems for use at sports
grounds.

We would, of course, be pleased to receive a
draft of the Code of Practice which you refer
to in your letter and look forward to receiving
it by the end of the year.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                   fl° R M   WHALLEY
                                S ecretary    to the              Inquiry
                        From: Tim Smith, M l




                        HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                          L O N D O N SW1A0AA


  5 December 1989


  The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,
  50 Queen Anne's Gate,
  London SW1H 9AT



  Your Lordship,

^ | i m Smith MP has received a copy of the reply that his
^ c o n s t i t u e n t Mr. Jones sent to you on 24 November (a copy
    of which I enclose for ease of reference). Accordingly
    Mr. Smith would be most grateful to receive a copy of
    the reply that goes to Mr. Jones.

  Yours sincerely,



  Aj/ G"'<^
  Mrs. Janet Grigg
  Private Secretary to
  Tim Smith MP
SOUND & COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRIES FEDERATION
4-B HIGH STREET BURNHAM SLOUGH SL1 7JH TEL: 0628 667633 FAX: 0628 665882                              ^NOU^STRIESW
                                                                                                                 p£U0E^T?0N



The Rt.Hon Lord Justice Taylor,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,                                                      24th November 1989,
London,
SW1H 9AT.


               Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster


Your Lordship,

Thank you for your reply to Mr.Ken Walker's letter of 24th
October 1989 in respect of the research which the Inter-
Institutional Working Group feels in necessary.

In Mr.Walker's absence, and in my capacity as chairman of the
Working Group, I am pleased to be able to report that
considerable progress has been made in preparing advice to your
Inquiry. Though far from complete, the enclosed should enable
you to see the depth of the problem which the industry perceives
needs to be addressed, and we "hope that it may be of benefit to
your Inquiry.

In trying to prepare a revised Guide or Code of Practice there
have been a large number of issues to be resolved in order to
get it right. The input of the whole industry as well as
operators, authorities and other interested parties has been
started, especially with the debate at the recent IOA Reproduced
Sound Conference at Windermere earlier this month, and the
publication of the Proceedings of that Conference.

Our Working Group anticipate being able to send a draft of this
Code of Practice in the near future, but it is likely not to be
available before the end of the year.

The Working Group would appreciate it if you could indicate if
this would be useful to your Inquiry. Meanwhile, I remain,

yours faithfully




Stephen P Jones
Chairman to the Working Group for
Safety at Sports Grounds (Sound Systems)




SOUND & COMMUNICATIONS MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION                INSTITUTE OF SOUND S COMMUNICATIONS ENGINEERS
SOUND & COMMUNICATIONS DISTRIBUTORS ASSOCIATION                 ASSOCIATION OF PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINMENT HIRE COMPANIES
SOUND & COMMUNICATIONS CONTRACTORS ASSOCIATION                  COMMUNICATIONS MARKETING & SERVICING ASSOCIATION
         CHIEF EXECUTIVE: KEN WALKER MBE   REG. NO. 1033300 ENGLAND   4-B HIGH STREET. BURNHAM. SLOUGH SL1 7JH
                            Working Group

                                 For

                   Safety at Sports Grounds

                        (Sound Systems)



Object of the Group:

To be able to offer to whoever requires it, guidelines and or
specifications for the design and use of Sound Systems for
Safety at Sports Grounds.                    /



Composition of the Group:

Institute of Sound & Communication Engineers - Stephen Jones
                                               (Chairman)

Institute of Safety & Public Protection - Jim Griffiths

Noise Council (Institute of Acoustics appointee) - Ian Flindell

Noise Council (Institute of Environmental Health Officers
Appointee) - T.B.A.

Sound & Communications Industries Federation - Ken Walker
                                               (Secretary)
                           Working Group

                                For

                    Safety at Sports Grounds

                         (Sound Systems)



The working group proposes the following:-


 A) The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds be re-worded



  B) A research programme be commissioned



  C) Commissioning of a Working Party to produce

        (i)   Guide to Sound Systems for Safety at Sports
              Grounds

        (ii) Guide to CCTV    Systems for Safety at Sports
             Grounds


  D) The introduction of a two part licensing system
     specifically for the Communications Systems at Sports
     Grounds to be administered by the Local Authority
     licensing officers

        (i)   A systems license valid for 5 years

        (ii) An event license valid for each event

     with a recommendation that these licenses only be granted
     if the guidelines (see c above) are met in full.




       File: NOV23-1.SPR     Issue: 24/11/89   Page No.: 2
Expansion of the points raised in the foregoing proposals


The Existing Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
To do justice to the subject of sound and communication in
sports grounds would make the current format of the Guide
unwieldy - hence the cross reference to two separate
publications.

Research of Noise Levels
As previously explained, not enough is known about the effects
of crowd packing in the open, under a canopy, or in a corridor
to properly specify objective design parameters for effective
emergency sound systems. Similarly not enough is known about
the psychological & psychoacoustic effects of various warning
tones and emergency messages to be able to determine whether
they would actually help or hinder in any given situation.

Guide to Sound Systems and CCTV Systems
These guides will enable the standards of systems installation,
operation and test to be objectively established and enforced.
They should be written in the style of British Standards so
that they can be offered (via BSI) to CEN for possible
adoption. Members of this working group are a^Lso appreciative
of the facts that

   a) the establishment of a standard is measured in years, and
   b) The European linking may cause unnecessary complications
      and delays to the needs of Britain.

Two Part Licensing;
No system will be effective unless it is designed and installed
correctly, is fully operational, and therefore has undergone
routine tests and maintenance.

No system will be effective unless not only do the audience
know what to expect, but that the system is used correctly.

The design and installation are permanent and therefore a
system license for 5 years is reasonable. The 5 year timescale
should be fast enough for potential changes in legislation, yet
long enough not to overburden the sports ground operators.

The continual operability of the system is something which does
need constant monitoring, and hence falls quite neatly in the
same category as existing licensing practice.

The use of the system is partly definable and is a matter of
education more than legislation, (i.e. intelligibility starts
with the voice of the announcer)

Prior to sports taking place:-
Standard procedure announcement made (as done in aircraft)
advising the public that the emergency arrangements are about
to be demonstrates.


       File: NOV23-1.SPR   Issue: 24/11/89   Page No.: 3
           An exam ple o f the subject matter to be included in a G uide
                or Code o f Practice for Safety at Sports G rounds

Public Access Routes

     Public access control according to site design and in
     consultation with staff and authorities.


CCTV Coverage = Paging Zones

     Zoning of the paging facility to be generally coordinated
     with camera coverage.
     Paging to also cover areas not in the view of cameras.
     Automatic sequenced pre-recorded evacuation messages shall
     be capable of being overridden or muted.
     Local paging inputs for turnstiles.
     Local paging inputs in the case of camera failure.


Sound System Design Parameters

     Calculating the sound pressure level (SPL) required of the
        system.
     Control of the SPL under non-emergency conditions.
     Mains supplies - Uninterruptible or battery back-up.
     Intelligibility - frequency response, distortion,
        dispersion.
     Control panel ergonomics - Microphone performance.
     Installation standards - Cabling, housings, etc.
     Maintenance Programmes.
     Correlation of sound and vision systems where possible.
     Correlation rather than conflict with fire alarm systems.
     Maintaining the integrity of evacuation systems whilst
        being also available for other purposes i.e.
        entertainment.


Note: A fuller version of the first draft was published in the
Proceedings of the Reproduced Sound Conference by the Institute
of Acoustics on November 3rd 1989, being the basis for
discussion at that Conference, and under revision as a result
of those and other discussions.




        File; NOV23-1.SPR         Issue: 24/11/89             Page No.: 4
