                                                                             H   ome   O   f f ic e

                                                                            QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                             LONDON SWIH 9A1
    PARLIAMENTARY UNDER
    SECRETARY OF STATE

      D Stephens Esq                                        Our Ref:   P W /98 5 /2 1 8 0 /1 8
                                                                       PO 5 4 7 9 /9 8


                                                                       01 APR 1998




#
      Thank you for your letter of 6 March about the Home Secretary's decision not to
      hold a fresh inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster.

     I should first state that I remain very concerned and sympathetic to the feelings
     of frustration of all of those who lost relatives and friends at Hillsborough. I
     can fully appreciate that the Home Secretary's decision is a bitter
     disappointment to the families of those who died and for the many who have
     supported the families' campaign. As the Home Secretary explained in the
     House, one of our first concerns on taking office last year was to ensure that
     there should be a thorough and independent investigation of any material which
     cast doubt on earlier findings about the disaster, and it was to this end that
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked to conduct his scrutiny.

      It is clear from your letter that you, like many others, are particularly angered
     by the fact that nobody has ever been punished for w hat happened. This is
     an issue which both the Home Secretary and I also find especially frustrating.
     W hat is clear, and was supported by both the Taylor Inquiry and
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, is that, "...the main reason for the disaster was the
     failure of police control." (Lord Taylor's Interim Report, August 1 9 8 9 , paragraph
     2 7 8 ). In addition to the culpability of the police, the Taylor Inquiry also
     identified that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield City Council
     shared some responsibility, and they have recognised this fact by contributing
     sums of money to the compensation settlements.

     The senior police officer, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, retired on grounds
     of ill health in 1 9 9 0 which meant that disciplinary action could not be taken
     against him since only serving officers can be subject to such procedures.
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had the scope to refer matters for any disciplinary
     action to the appropriate authority, but having examined the original and new
     evidence, he concluded in respect of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield that,
"...as the rules stood (and still stand), such charges cannot be pursued against
a retired police officer." (Chapter 1, paragraph 5 8 , Scrutiny of Evidence,
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith).

This case exemplifies the profound shortcomings in the present police discipline
system which w e intend to address. In January, the Home Affairs Select
Committee published some important recommendations about the police
complaints and discipline procedures. The Home Secretary has recently
announced his response to the Committee's recommendations including his •
intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline
procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy provision which restricts
criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. He has also endorsed the
Committee's recommendation that forces should show greater commitment to
their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate,
to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of
disciplinary proceedings. However, under the terms of the European Convention
on Human Rights, new rules cannot be applied retrospectively, and it would be
wrong for me to suggest that any such action could now be taken against
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

You also raise the question of a full Parliamentary debate to discuss the
Home Secretary's decision more fully. The Home Secretary has said that he
fully understands the strength of feeling that there should be an opportunity to
debate this issue. However, the leader of the House has indicated that, although
she is sympathetic to such a request, it is unlikely that Government time can be
found in the near future.

The Home Secretary, in his statement to the House, emphasised that he is
satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny of
the evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report is
comprehensive and sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the
reasons for his conclusions. He has considered all the material allegations about
missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with
witnesses and witness statements and concerns about the use of the 3:15pm
cut-off time at the Inquest.

For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
know it will be difficult for you to accept the Home Secretary's decision. The
original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the you will accept Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith's scrutiny was equally rigorous. The Home Secretary is, as you
know, ready to talk to the families further to explain his approach. He met a
delegation whilst in Southport on 7 March, and is currently arranging another
meeting in Merseyside.




                              GEORGE HOW ARTH
