                            QUESTION                 SIX

Why did Chief Superintendent Ouckenfieid mislead the Secretary of
the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
he believed correct in a crisis moment.

Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
ground.



OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
control room for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
that's been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans'
account that the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had forced
their way in.

99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
emergency operations.
                                   D.G. DUCKENFIELD


And you are still considering the question of postponement
of kick-off, among other options? - A. It is an option sir,
but when he asked me to open the gate that certainly was
not going through my mind.

Mow when he made that request what was your-immediate
reaction? - A. To be honest I did not want to open the gate

Why not? - A. To open a gate at a football ground it would
have defeated the  objectives ofour Operation Order in
that drunken fans may get in; people who had got drink;
people who had got missiles and people who were without
tickets would get access.

Were you aware by now that there was a problem with a numbe
of people outside without tickets? - A. I was aware that
during the day there had been people without tickets.

But were you aware that there were a considerable number
of fans at the Leppings Lane entrance who did not have
tickets? - A. I was not aware sir.

Because I think a lot of statements, or a lot of evidence
we have heard and certainly a lot of statements that I have
read, refer to considerable numbers of people without
tickets and asking for tickets. Is that something that
had not been drawn to your attention? - A. Mot at that
stage sir.

Because that was rather an important factor, wasn't it,
because if there were a lot of people milling around
without tickets that was something which would have added
to the disorder or the problems rather outside? - A. In
what respect?

Well if you.have a lot of people milling-around in a
smal l area who are without tickets coupled with'people'•
coming a long trying to get i n t o ‘the ground, you add to
the  problems don't you, because you have got more people
there? - A. I would suggest that there are people there,
there are probably people without tickets.

I see. - A. But the crowd difficulties are there whatever.

Anyway you were reluctant to agree to the gate being
opened because of the factors you have identified? - A. Yes
sir.
Were you able to make direct contact with Superintendent
Marshall or not? - A. I remember receiving a radio message
but having received the radio message from him, or it
came into the Control Box to open the gate, I immediately
looked at the monitor for the Leppings Lane turnstiles and
as I did so I would describe it as the gate bbrst open.
I have since found looking at the compilation that might'
                                                     37

                                                                D.G. DUCKENFIELD



                              not be correct, but my perception of the situation when the
                              first request was made and whilst I was considering it,
                              was that "the gates burst open anyway, why am I being askec?”

                         Q. The gate was in fact opened on that occasion, as we now know
                            to eject someone? - A. Yes.
                     B   Q. I can understand how you may have made a mistake, but it
                            was not open then for more than a few seconds, was it? -
                            A. No, it was momentary. The mounted Officer came along
                            and recovered the situation and the gate was closed once
                            more.

                         Q. So it was clear, indeed it was obvious to you that that was
                            nothing to do with you, you. had made no decision? - A. I
                            had made no decision sir.

                         Q. Indeed am I right that no gate would have been opened unless
                            you mace the decision and instructed? - A. Yes sir.

                         Q. Is that something that was in the briefing or is that some­
                            thing which would have been known to all? - A. It would have
                     D      been known to all sir.

                         Q. So if but only if you gave the instruction could a gate be
                            opened? - A. In an emergency situation that is right, sir.

                         Q. And this was of course an emergency situation because as you
                             cuite rightly point out, one of the problems of opening a
                             gate is you let in a whole lot of people unsupervised? -
                            •A. Yes sir.

                         Q. But the gate was opened, as you say for a,few seconds
                            momentarily, and then shut again? - A. Yes sir.

                         Q-. This is 2.48 I think on the timing that we have or thereabouts.
                             You t h e n ' get another:, message from Superintendent Marshall? .
                             - A. Yes sir.                                      ' '

                         Q.    Again he asks for     the gates to be opened, buthegoes does
                              he rather further on that occasion? - A. Yes the situation
                              was different then sir. The first message I would describe
                              as a recruest. The. second message was a rather urgent message .
                              and more of a demand and he asked for the gates to be opened
                              and coupled it with the words similar to the .words: "If you
                              don't open these gates somebody is going to be seriously
                              injured or killed".

                         Q. Now you had had that first message at 2.47.     You had seen
                            the gate open and close again? - A. Yes sir.

                         0. Surely the first thing you would do in thosecircumstances
                            is to try to contact Superintendent Marshall and speak to
                 H          him direct if you could to ask him what actually was the
                            situation? - A. Sir, if I can set the scene, a very tense
                            situation in a Police Control Box. A message came across-         g^
J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                             112
                                                                   D.G. DUCKENFIELD


                                    Cross-Examined by MR. DYSON:

                Q. Mr. Duckenfield,  I would like to take you back, please, to
                   the control room at about 3.15 or thereabouts. Do you
                   remember that amongst the visitors you received at about that
                   time there were Mr. Graham Kelly and Mr. Glen Curtain of the
                   FA. Do you remember them coming? - A. I certainly remember
            g      Mr. Kelly, and if you say there was another gentleman with him
                   I will accept that.

                Q. And together with Mr. Mackrell, the secretary of Sheffield
                   Wednesday Club.  Do you remember him coming as well? - A. I
                   remember Mr. Kelly and Mr. Mackrell.

                Q. And they were anxious to know what was going on, and in
                   particular what you were proposing to do about it and whether
                   you were proposing to abandon the game. Do you remember that?
                   - A. Yes, sir.

                0. And I think you told them, did not you, it was going to be
                   necessary to abandon the game but you did not want that
                   decision to be disseminated just yet for the reasons you have
                   explained this morning? - A. Yes, sir.
            D
                Q. Do you remember also telling those gentlemen that the problem
                   had been created by a gate, the gate being forced open by the
                   fans? - A. I may have said that, sir, referring to the first
                   gate, because I thought there was a gate that had opened at
                   first.

                0.' By the first gate, you mean gate C? - A. Yes.

                Q. Are you referring to the first time gate C opened?       A . Let me
                   take you back to the conversation.

                Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Where is the conversation? - A. In
                     the Police control box.

                G.        MR. DYSON:    In the Police jcontrol room, about 3.15; - A-.
                     Mr. Kelly came- in, and I was asked what had happened. The
                     specific conversation I cannot remember, but I may have been
                     loath to tell him exactly what the situation was at that
                     point.
                Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What aspect of it? What had
                     happened, or causation? - A. What had happened, my Lord. The
                     blunt truth that we had been asked to open a gate and that we
                     had opened a gate.   I was not being deceitful. It was just a
                     case of at that situation we were all still in a state of
                     shock, one might say.

                q        MR. DYSON: So you accept you did not tell him the truth
                     at that stage, that the gate had been opened as a result of
                     your instruction? - A. Yes, sir.
            H   Q. You accept that, and you accept that you may have said that
                   the gate had been forced open by the fans? - A. I may have
                                                                                      82
i   I   I
                                                  113
                                                                        D.G. DUCKENFIELD


                          referred to the first one, sir, yes.

                       Q. When you say ’’the first one” , what do you mean? - A. The first
                          gate I believed at that time had been forced open, gate C.
                          If you look at my statement my interpretation was when the
                          first request for the gates to be opened I said in my said,
                          ’’Why do you want the gate open because it is burst open
               B          already?” .

                       Q. You are referring to the first request? - A. Yes.

                       Q. But that gate was shut very smartly, was not it?     A. Yes,
                          sir.

                       Q[ And you knew perfectly well that it was not the influx of fans
                          as a result of that opening which had caused the problem, did
                          not you? - A. Yes, that was not the major opening.

                       Qi And you knew the real cause of the problem and the casualties
                          was the second opening? - A. yes, sir, that was the
                          possibility.

                       Q. You see, I put these questions to you because Mr. Curtain and
                   D      Mr.   Kelly are quite clear   that they were told.Mr.Curtain is
                          clear that it was you who     said it, and   Mr. Kelly isnor
                          certain whether it was you or one of your colleagues. At all
                          events, they are both quite certain they were told by the
                          Police in the control room that the casualties had been caused
                          by the gate being forced open by the fans? - A. I would go as
                          far   as to say that.  I am   trying to be    helpfulin recalling
                          the   events at a moment of   crisis.

                       Q. Why were you being so coy about telling them what had
                          happened? - A. The reality of the situation is that shortly
                          after the events had occurred many people were in a state of
                          shock, and I thought it correct to collect my thoughts and to
                          assess the situation. .I did not exactly .information ana--1 am
                          not being disrespectful to Mr. Kelly or. the other gentlemans :I ;
                          just ,thought at that stage -that I should not coaimun:icate-:fully:
                          the situation until possibly a senior Officer of mine knew the
                          situation.

                       Q. Did you know that subsequently and as a result of what you had
                          said to Mr. Kelly that Mr. Kelly when he gave interviews to
                          the media, of which he gave a number later that day, he told
                          the media there were in fact two theories circulating as to
                          the cause of the disaster, the fans’ theory and the Policy
                          theory, the fans’ theory having been that the gate was opened
                          by the Police and the Police theory, as Mr. Kelly told the
                          media and the world, the Police theory being that the fans had
                          forced the gate open.  Do you know he had said that? - A. I
                          had no idea, sir.

                       Q. Thank you very much.
               H

                                                                                           83
I   H arnham Ltd
                            24

                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD




     were easing themselves out satisfactorily between half­
     past-2 and a quarter-to-3? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   You realised of course that the Club's control in the
     bowels of the South Stand did not give them any video
     pictures of that stand, didn't you? -     A. Yes sir.

Q. And so if you had been concerned, and I accept that you
   say you were not, but that if you had been concerned the
   Club control would only know of that if you either 'phoned
   them or radioed them? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Did you know that in addition to the radio there was a
     direct land-line telephone between the Police Control Box
     and the Club Box? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And so that any difficulty in getting through on the radio
   could immediately, instantaneously, be solved by picking
   up a telephone with a direct link? - A. Yes sir.

Q. If anybody, any of your Officers, was seriously concerned
   to contact Hr. Locke, or the Police Liaison Officer in the
   Club Box at any time, the most obvious thing to do would
   be to pick the 'phone up wouldn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And would we be right in supposing that the only reason
   why abortive attempts were made to use the Club's radio
   was. because you simply didn't know where xMr. Locke was
   stationed on that day? - A. I didn't know sir.

Q.   Because if you or Superintendent Murray had known that he
     was where he ought to have been, with respect, in the
     Control Room, you would have used the telephone? - A.
     Yes sir.

Q. Finally^ Chief ..Superintendent, may I cotae' to" the;account
   which you gave of this incident after it had occurred,
   because I am concerned with the effect that that has had
   on my clients as well as others.    It is right to say isn't
   it that, when you decided to withhold the information that
   the decision to let people into the grouhed had been a
   Police one, you withheld that information from everybody on
   the afternoon in question.   - A. Yes sir.

Q.    For my part I can accept that the initial embarrassment, if
     you like, to say something to Mr. Kelly may have been done
     on the spur of the moment, you persisted in that deception
     throughout the afternoon.    - a . There was good reason sic
     not to tell the crowd what had occurred.

Q. Was there good reason not to tell    my clients, the officers
   of the Club? - A. I felt so sir      at the time.


                                                                    84
                              27
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q. Well, would you prefer me - and I do not want to be unfair
   and I certainly do not want you to think that I am being
   unfair, Chief Superintendent - would it at least be right
   to say that you decided t o withhold information from my
   clients who were responsible in that ground in the presence
   of the Assistant Chief Constable?    A.   Yes, sir.
Q. Thank you.   I am sure that you appreciate now that the
   unfair publicity which was inevitably directed at the Club's
   officers, among others, in fact resulted from the with­
   holding of that information on that afternoon.   A.   Sir,
   I cannot be specific about the publicity to which you are
   referring but any unfairness from that - but I made a
   decision to withhold information for what I thought was
   good reason.
Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not quite clear, Mr.
     Duckenfield.   I think it was put to you by Mr. Dyson
     yesterday that you had said that the gates had been
     forced open by the fans.   Was that the tenor of what
     you told the Boardroom as well?   I do not know.
     A.   No, my Lord.
Q. Did you say the gate had been forced open or what?
   A.     My recollection, my Lord, is that - and bearing in
   mind yesterday afternoon was the first time that had been
   drawn to my attention, again - I was approached in the
   crisis in       the Control Box by many people and I do recall
   Mr. Kelly      and Mr. Mackrell with others -Fire Service,
   various interested parties - coming in and crowding what
   was already a very crowded box in a very difficult and
   tense time, and I will agree I was probably asked by Mr.
   Kelly what the situation was and I will be categoric,
   I did not s a y , "I have given an order for the gates to
   be opened?" and I think my learned friend over there — -
   I c a n 1ti remember the: words he said bub he. suggested? : -
   that-i ’said; that a gate had been opened’-or a tga±*e trail burst ‘
   open arid:: fans ha<f: entered and if someone-carr refresh me
   of what he said?
Q. I think it was     put that you said that casualties had been
    caused by   the   gate being forced open by the fans.
    A.   I didn't     appreciate that, my Lord.   I would have
    said something    of the order that fans have entered the
  . ground.
          -MR. COLLINS:  I have, in fact, the transcript
     here of the questions.   (Han d e d )
Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.    It was put at
     first: "Do you remember telling them that the problem
     had been created by the gate being forced open by the
     fans?" and then at a later stage it was specifically put --



                                                                     85
                             28
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

          MR. GLASGOW:   Page 113, sir, letter D to E.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   — that casualties
     had been caused by the gate being forced open by the fans.
          MR. GLASGOW:   In fairness to this witness, sir,
     while you have got the paper in front of you - and we
     have great admiration for the way this transcribing
     is being done, let that be said - I think that there
     must be a mistake in the answer there because my
     clear recollection and my note is that Mr. Duckenfield
     said he would not go as far as that.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     That's right.
          MR. GLASGOW:   And unhappily it has been transcribed
     as, "I would" and perhaps we should correct that because
     it is very unfair otherwise.   The correction, with your
     leave, sir, at page 113, letter D, that the transcript
     should read, "I would not go as far as that."
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, thank you.
Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   Perhaps we ought to have that properly
     in evidence.   That is what you said, I think?   A.   Can
     you tell me now what --
Q. Yes* that when you were asked the question that my Lord
   has just put to you: "At all events, they are both quite
   certain they were told by the Police in the control room
   that the casualties had been caused by the gate being
   forced open by the fans?" your reply, I :believe, in fact
   was, "I would not go as far as that."           Do you remember
   that?       A.    Yes, sir.   My opinion i s , 'obviously referring
   to a canversation. some time ago, I am notcdisputing -w-h-at
   Mrs'iKierlly. sa.ysfeail I am-saying is, mynrecdllectien is '■-
   I -said', 'lA gate has been opened and fans have enterdcf" :
   wo'rds :td that e f f eet, but I didn't tell "him the tifrdle
   truth about the Police giving the instruction.           I cannot
   be any fairer than that, my Lord.
Q. I must make it plain, Mr. Duckenfield, I        am not suggesting
   that you went any further than that with        the Directors.
   I am not suggesting that you t o l d ‘them a    lie; what I
   am complaining about is that you did not        tell them the
   truth. A. Sir, you are correct.
Q. Thank you, and the answer that you gave to my learned
   friend, Mr. Dyson, yesterday afternoon that you at that
   stage thought that you should not communicate the situation
   until possibly a Senior Officer knew the situation, that -
   with the greatest respect - cannot have been a very candid
   reply to Mr. Dyson, because the Assistant Chief Constable
   was present when you said it.   A.   I am sorry, sir,
   can you take me through that again, please, slowly?
                                                                         86
r   y(3
                                               29

                                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD

              Q. Yes.   You told Mr. Dyson yesterday afternoon when he
                 asked you why you were being so coy about telling them
                 what had happened, your reply was that you just thought
                 at that stage that you should not communicate fully
                 the situation until possibly a Senior Officer of mine
                 knew the situation.   A.   Yes, sir.
          B
              Q. What I am concerned about is that that conversation
                 to which you are referring had taken place after the
                 Assistant Chief Constable had come into the Police Box.
                 A.   Yes, sir.
              Q.   And you had the opportunity, if necessary, to take him
                   on one side and tell him the truth in one sentence.
                   A.   Yes, sir, but the situation is that at that stage
                   I am not sure that Superintendent Marshall had come in
                   from the outside of the ground.
              Q. How would that affect the positon?   A.   Because Mr.
                 Marshall would say in detail, or tell in detail, what
                 the situation had been as he saw it.
          D   Q. But was not the fair thing to Superintendent Marshall
                 as well as to all the Club stewards who were going to,
                 putting it bluntly, carry the can unless you put the
                 picture straight, was it not fair to say at least to the
                 Assistant Chief Constable, "You ought to know, sir, that
                 I m a d e . the decision, right or wrong, and no-one else is
                 to blame."        Would that not have been an honourable thing
                 to do, as a very Senior Police Officer?        A.   Yes, sir.
          E      I cannot recall at what stage I told him the full -
                   circumstances.

              Q. Let us face i t , you must bitterly regret that*you practised
                    that ^ecepition on anybody, do y o u \ n o t ? t f t . ©Jnp0A    S     ;
                   - respect sir     n^ver. agree.; to.. deception, andi don !.t •teli^   -
                    lies.,but at was my,, view on this occasion* to-save            - >
                    a crisis in the disaster, to withhold the information.

              Q. Well, let us not talk about lies, Chief- Superintendent.
                 I am happy to talk about impressions.    The impression
                 that you gave to the world at large from the Assistant
                 Chief Constable downwards and which you persisted in
                 until yesterday was that the Club had been responsible
                 for the management of this crowd inside their ground
                 and~you knew that to be unfair. A.     I refer, sir,
                 to the Green Guide in terms of the management of crowd
                 control and they were my references.

              Q. I want a straight answer from you on that point for the
                 peace of mind of my clients and the men who have been
                 distressed by it.   At least you now accept, Chief
                 Superintendent, that the impression which you allowed to
                 be created that they were in some way responsible for
          H      failing to manage this crowd was^unfair?   Surely you
                 can accept that now, can you not?     A.  I can accept '                      87
                 that now, sir.
                           46
                                    D. G. DUCKEJ'SFIELD




Q. I think you have seen some video just now of 1988.        -   A.
   Yes sir.

Q. You weren't at the game in 1988?      -   A. No sir.

Q. The state of the terraces according to your recollection
   now at the time that gate C was opened the second time,
   how does that accord with your understanding then of a
   normal state on the terraces?     A. A crowded situation
   sir, but normal.

Q. May I as.< you about this. Did you know that in fact a
   gate wai made open and forced open against the efforts- of
   Police Officers? - A. Quite separately to gate C sir?

Q. Yes.   -   A. No sir.

Q. Did you know that one of the peripheral gates, the
   Leooings Lane perimeter gates, was forced open against the
   bolting of it and against the efforts of Officers? - A.
   No sir.

Q. The conversation that you had in the Control Room with the
   officials that came along to see you, you say you had a
   reason for saying what you did say. - A. Yes sic,

Q. what-was. it?. .   /t. I was. .conGernea ebourt the.vcrowd -- :-
   situation:^ and I. didn* t want the                     via the
   media or by casual conversation, to decs^.>awats1

Q. Aware of' what? . - A. Aware of the opening of tlTe-.gatei
   by Police Officers, and the &isa:ster. g

Q. It is understood from the cross-examiaation of you by Mr.
   Glasgow that it vis not suggested, certaimLy-’by the Club; '
   th.cTt you told any lie, do you follow that? -•■•In sayrng ;what •
   you-did; did you achieve anything in youra view?.. .-^.v
   from what has been said today I did sir. Mv concerns were;
   that 54,000 people could cause massive disorder if- they
   were angry about my, or the Police Service, actions, aad
   Hi 1-1sbo rough Stadium is near, a' pack, a
   private housing.,-and X .needed .not only -itbe,.escape-ro <xte^
   to be opened - I say "escape routes", £or ambulances and
   emergency services, but if the media or anyone told the
   true story initially I could have a major public disorder,
   not so much in the ground but around it.




                                   /Q. Was there fear of




                                                                      88
                                 49

                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q. I see, so you have got to add a certain amount of chances
   together before you might achieve something.    A.   Police
   Officers, sir, try their hardest in the most difficult of
   c i rcumstances.

Q. Of   course, I think one appreciates that.   r certainly,
   do   not wish to suggest anything to the contrary but it
   is   a little hard, is it not, to expect them to do anything
   if   they do not know what the problem is.   A.   It would
   be   better if they had had the best information.
Q.    I shall leave it at that. The only other thing I think I
     ought to just ask you about is this, arising from the
     questions Mr . Woodward was just putting to you. about . . .
     your reasons for not telling the whole story to the Club
     and indeect t^o'anyone else. You^added -a .re^orv which -you
     had not, I think, given earlier which was- that you were
     afraid that if. you -did indicate that the Police had
     opened the gate and thus effectively caused -what had -
     happened, you. were afraid of considerable public disorder.....
     A.    Yes, s i r .
Q.   At whose hands?   Who would cause the disorder in your
     mind?   A.   The fans within the s t a d i u m * a n d I do not;
     wish tolay blame.   It is just — -
Q.   No, no.     I wanted to see what your thinking was, that is
     all.    Which fans?    A.   None in particular, just
Q. Nottingham .or Liverpool?   A.'  No, no.   No suggestion of
   that whatsoever.    It was just a general consideration
   that I have a football crowd and there could be difficulties.
Q. Yes, but I am. just simply trying to test to .see ,why. you .
     thought that to tell the truth would have .created d i fficulties.
     with- ;the fansi .- ; M-ou:rmean they -woUld have hbeen ffastile. tro:. - ,
     the Police.?    JU    .Yes, they coulii. ;     rU'      u     »>     -. ,

Q. Well, they were anyway, were they not, because they knew
   what, had happened - that is the Liverpool fans?       I mean,
   one of the patterns that we have had in all statements by
   the Pali'ce--■ I--expe-ct you know this anyvfay -is -hostiMty^ -
   towards the Police .by a large, number of fans afterwards                       :
   because of the belief that the Police had caused the trouble.
   A.    Can I take you back to the time when I made the
   decision?
Q. Yes.   A.    Bearing in mind I         was not aware of the hostility
   at that time.
Q. No, no.   I follow that but did it not occur to you --
   You see, what you did - it was not so much that you did
   not indicate what had happened - you gave the impression --
   I do not know whether you intended it and I am not
   interested in that, but the fact is you gave the impression
   that it was fans who had broken down the gate. Right?

                                                                                 89
                            50
                                     D. G. PUCKENflELD

   A. Yes, but I did not communicate that to the world at
   large.
Q. But it somehow got to the world at large.   We h^ard it
   this morning and that was what you had — ar that was the
   impression you had given, was it not?   A. - I am sorry,
   would y o u  ?
Q. You heard the video this morning, the BBC commentatoV who
   said he had got the answer or he had got the cause.
   A.   Yfes.    Now, can I say that that just may prove a
   point?     I did not want to disclose the situation because
   it may become public knowledge, especially via\the media and
   my intention       not. to. tell anyone, because-I -didn't kncm
   the individuals-concerned and I am not making a n y .reference'
   to any- individual at.*allr and so it was,,my. belie/f that-,: -
   the information-should be kept closely to nre and no-one
   else and I didn't want anybody telling via the media
   because^’ whilst JLt-was not an immediate, considera-ticm,
   if it got out via the media, then difficulties could
   occur.




                                     /I follow that
                               51
                                          D.G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. I follow that thinking but what I am concerned about is
   that you appear to have conveyed the impression as part
   of not telling v/hat actually had happened, that it was
   the breaking down of a gate by the fans that had actually
   caused the trouble. That is what the media picked up and
   that is what the media broadcast? - A. When I was in that
   Control Room, very difficult, very tense situation, and
   you have seen the size of the Control Room and from the
   pitch you have seen the difficulties that we were facing.

Q. Chief Superintendent, I don’t want to interrupt you but
   that is not an answer to the question? - A. I know, I am
   coming to the point. There were many people asking
   questions of me. There were many people wanting^decisions
   and the opening arid- -the closing of that, door.* Mr. Kelly
   came in with Mr. Mackrell, another person wanting an
   immediate••answer-to a difficulty and I was in the-midst of
   other things1. 1 tried as best I could' to deal with my
   own situation -satisfying my policing needs with-the crowd
   arid i n s o m e ways,-'this may seem unusual, being ,polite to
   Mr. Kelly and sayings        "Look, this is the situation".,., in .
   whatever words I said it and hoping he would leave me
   very quickly so that I could get'^n            ^

Q. The only reason I am asking you this is that:&n:the light
   of your answer to Mr. Woodward, I am wondering why you
   thought it would be less likely to lead to disorder to
   tell the true position than to imply that it was the fault
   of the-'fans'*: Soirie might say or ^might think,.that-that,
   be more- likely to create disorder?
   todays we can aiy- look differently at that situation. I acte<J
   as I believed to be correct in' a crisis moment., .

           MR. COLLINS:   Yes, very well.

            MR. HYTNER: May I just correct something Mr. Collins
   has-   put because it may -not be absolutely accurate?. .- ■

         The-impression I have from the vast number, of. ,state­
   ments that I have read and from the evidence that has been
   given, is that the hostility of the fans after.the match
   towards the Police was in large part, certainly in large
   part and-may have'been in sole part, due' to their perception
   of what the Police were doing on the pitch and .on the track.

         MR. COLLINS: Yes, I am obliged. I think that may
   well be right and although I think it was a combination
   of the two and actually those who listened to that video
   a little later will hear, I think we all heard on the
   television, fans with tickets complaining that the Police
   had opened the gate and let them in to the overcrowded
   pen, so I think it is fair to say it is a combination of
   both.




                                                                         9
                                      52
                                                 D.G. DUCKENFIELD


                               By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;

Q.   Mr. Duckenfield, you were saying           there was a risk if you
     gave the full truth it might get           out to the media and
     cause disorder? - A. Yes.

Q. That prevented you from giving the full truth? - A. Yes, my
   Lord.

Q. There is nothing to stop you telling the Assistant Chief
   Constable what had happened, was there, when he came into
   the Control Room? - A . No sir.

Q.   Did    you tell him? - A.   ITo, I t h i n k h e a s k e d m e q u e s t i o n s sir
     and I related to -the incident on the pitch* .1 aid not give
     him the full picture at that time.

Q. Did you mention that the gate had beenopened; that fans
   had. got in through an open gate? - A. I can‘rb be specific,
   my Lord. I mu¥tJha^'e mentioned about the situation, on the
   pitcfr:''^a^:
               birifef%--1wha4:‘.
                                :had occurred, I mean about the first
   gate opening, but the full details including the.actions
   by Super in tehdent-Marshall and what had fully developed,
   I did not give him the full picture.

Q. You did not tell him that you had given authority for                     the
   gate to be opened? - A. No, my Lord.

Q. Wei 1 why:hot? 'Apart from anything else..it might:have .-.been,
   helpful to have- h'is;advice or discuss with him what it was
   best to say at ^that stage with a view to telling the Club
   and so on? - A. Yes, my Lord, but I didrittv

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, thank you.


             -----•   : ■AS.ST. -CHIEF CONSTABLE' JACKSON Called     .;- :
             -                ' Examined by M R . COLLINS:

Q. Mr. Jackson, you are Walter Jackson, I think? - A. Yes.

Q.       Assistant Chief- Constable (Operations) for-the .South.
     A n d
     Yorkshire Police? - A. I am.

Q. And how long have you been in that post? - A. Since the
   1st May 1985.

Q. Can I ask you please a little about your Police history.
   When did you start in the Police Force? - A. I joined the
   Police Force in October 1961 which was Manchester City,
   and progressed through the ranks in the CID to Detective
   Superintendent; then to Deputy on the Division; then to
   the Police Staff College on the Directing Staff;
   returned to Greater Manchester and headed 1E 1 Division
   at Moss Side, which has Manchester City Football Ground.
   On the 1st May 1985 transferred as A.C.C. (Operations)
   for South Yorkshire Police.                                                       92
                                                         91

                                                                   B.D. MURRAY


                                 matter, told us that he had some spare Serials in the gym­
                                 nasium, I don't know whether he said eight or ten, but they
                                 were 1D ‘ Division Serials.

                         Q. These are the ones that have been in the City Centre bringing
                            the fans from the Midland Station? - A. These are the ones
                            that bring the fans from the Midland Statioa If they arrive
                     B      after quarter-to-3 they go and stand by in the gym. He had
                            eight or ten Serials and I asked for five Sergeants and
                            50 men. These were eight man Serials so Inspector Sewell
                            despatched six Serials, w hich would be sin Sergeants and 48
                            men sir.

                         Q. To where? - A. To the Leppings Lane end.

                         Q. Again to the inside or the outside of the turnstiles? - A.
                            To Inspector Bennett. That is where I was sending them.

                         Q. were these men despatched before the instruction was given
                            to open the gate? - A. Before the instruction was given,
                            yes, but I don't know whether they were despatched before
                            or after the first request came.
                     D   o. How many requests were there then to open the gate, to your
                            recollection? - A. I would think there were three or nay be
                            four.

                         0. All from Superintendent Marshall? - A. Two in quick succession.;
                            fairly quick succession v/ith a break. Shortly after the
                            second request ?.C. Bichard who is the Video Operator said
                            something to the effect of "The gate lias gone1' or "i‘he gate
                            lias burst” and as I looked up at the video screen I cculc
                            see that people were coming through 'C ' gate. Then the
                            situation was recovered and the gate was closed. After
                            that there were two more requests from Mr.Marshall.

                         Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Those Officers that havebeen
                                 despatched from the gymnasium, how would they have gone to
                                 Leppings Lane end, from the inside or round the outside?
                                 - A. From the inside, my Lord.

                         Q.      So when they got there they would have remained on the inside
                                 of the turnstiles? - A. Yes, they would.

                         q   .         MR. PHILLIPS: Would they in fact have been in that
                                 area between the fence and the outer wall that leads to
                                 the North Stand. The gymnasium is at the back of the North
                                 Stand, isn't it? - A. That is the area they would approach.
                                 They would approach along the north Stand concourse and
                                 they would come out this side.

                         Q. On this side of the fence? - A. Yes.

                         Q. Some witnesses speak of there being a line of Officers in
                 H          that area on the approach to the North Stand when Gate A
                            was opened. This would be some of the men who had come
                            from the gymnasium? - A. It is possible. I don't know sir.
J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                                                               93
                             114

                                       B.D. MURRAY


Q.         MR. HYTNER: There were four requests in all by
     Mr. Marshall for the gates to be opened? -A. Yes sir, I
     would say there were four.

Q. And quite a bit of time elapsed between the first and the
   last? - A. Yes sir.

Q. I am not sure whether we can work it out exactly. It was
   well over five minutes, wasn't it? - A. No sir, I would
   say under five minutes, probably about 3, 3**.

Q. What was happening in that 3^ to 4 minutes. Was the
   matter discussed between you and Mr. Duckenfield? - A. The
   first thing that happened was the request came in to open
   the gates. Mr. Marshall was told to stand by presumably
   while the situation was assessed as to what would be the
   effect of it and see if it could be recovered. At the
   same time the request was coming in for other Serials to
   be despatched. Serials were despatched from the gymnasium.
   P.C. Ryan was possibly still passing his Tannoy messages
   over the Tannoy.  In between the first and the last request
   the gates were either opened or burst open or forced open
   or whatever. That is what was happening sir.

Q. I will come to the burst gate in a moment. We weren't
   there, you were.  It is difficult to get the flavour and
   the atmosphere, but the words you actually spoke after
   the fourth request:  "Mr. Duckenfield, are you going to
   open the gates". On one reading of them have a flavour
   of you being concerned that Mr. Duckenfield was dithering,
   that he had not made up his mind, and you we re rather
   urgently trying to get him to do so. Is that a fair
   interpretation? - A. I don't think Mr. Duckenfield was
   dithering.  I think Mr. Duckenfield was weighing all the
   considerations and I turned round to him and said:  "You
   have got to make the decision now" virtually. I used
   the words you use but what it meant was "We have got to
   make that decision now".

Q. Again I don't want to put words in your mouth in this way
   but that is not far from what I was putting to you, that
   you were concerned that he had not made the decision
   after four requests for the same thing to happen? - A.
   I v/as not concerned sir and he was not dithering. He
   was obviously still considering whether we could retrieve
   the situation or not and it was my opinion then that we
   had to open the gates with the final request of Mr. Marshall.

Q. At that particular time everybody's mincfewere really
   adverted to the fans causing trouble, weren’t they? A
   gate opened and it was immediately assumed that the gate
   had been broken open? - A. Ho. The words? that were given
   to me was "The gate has gone" or "The gate has burst"
   and they were given by the Video    Operator.



                                                                94
                              115

                                         B.D.MURRAY


Q.     The impression being that they had gone through crowd
      pressure? - A. That is what it conveyed to me, yes.

Q. And similarly when you saw for the first time the fans
   climbing over the gates, the fence, the perimeter fence,
   it conveyed to you the impression, did it, that there had
   been some sort of pitch invasion? - A. Mo, not pitch
   invasion. When I saw people climbing over the fence, are
   we talking over on to the perimeter track?

Q. Yes? - A. They were getting on to the pitch. They probably
   wanted to see, probably wanted a better vie’,;. There was
   something happening, I don’t know what it was.

0. It was pretty obvious, wasn’t it, in the way in which they
   were climbing over and standing aimlessly around on the
   track that they were out through pressure, not because
   they wanted to spoil the game or anything of that sort?
   - A*. It was not obvious to me and I never considered they
   wanted to spoil the game. I thought they wanted to get
   on to the track to get a better view.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. JACKS Oil:

Q. Mr. Murray, m a y I take up the very last matter.   In the
      briefing you gave before the game was there any particular
      attention paid to crushing? - A. No sir.

Q. Am I right that in every case when we check the briefings,
   we check the notes, we check everything that was said,
   nothing was ever said to any of the Officers cn the ground
   about crushing? - A. I don't know sir, but it was not
   mentioned in my brief.

Q. Because at the end of the day there was a great deal of
   distress, was there not, shown by the Officers and anger
   by the fans on the pitch? - A. Yes, there was.

Q. And if we look at the video we will see, will we not, at
   well after 10-past-3, many many Police Officers standing
   apparently doing nothing? - A. That is what it appears,
   yes sir.

0. And is that    because no one ever briefed    them as to what they
   ought to do    if there was a crush at the    front of any one of
   these pens?    - A. I think it is possibly    because they did
   not realise    the full extent of what v/as   happening.

q    . Is it correct that no one was ever briefed as to the method
       of extracting people from inside these pens if there was a
       crush? - A. i'lo one was briefed on that subject, no.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is there some specific way of
      doing it?


                                                                        95
                                   104


                                             W.C. CRAWFORD

    A
        Q. Do you remember Gate C being opened at about 2.48 when a
           number of fans cane through? - A. That is correct.

        Q. Were you party to the opening of that gate or was that one
           of your other Officers? - A, I don't believe - I was not
           party to it - I don't believe it was an Officer on ray
           Serial. The gate did open when I was standing up near
    B      to Turnstile A and of course as it opened mv attention
           was drawn to it. I ran, with other Officers from my
           serial to try and close the gate, which eventually we did
           do. The only reason we did do this is because I understand
           there was a Police horse there and the Police horse came
           between the fans and Gate C and that assisted us quite a
           bit and we managed to close the gate then.

        O. Can you help us with the number of people who came through
           Gate C when it was opened on that ocasion? - A. I said
           initially in the report I made probably a couple of days
           afterwards, I said approximately 50, but having watched
           it on the video there was nigh on 200 easily.

        Q. We know that Gate C opened again approximately four or
           five minutes later? - A. Yes.
D
        Q. And on that occasion stayed open for some time?   A. That
           is correct. It v/as about five minutes later.

        Q. How close were you to Gate C when it was opened the second
           time? - A. Well I think my position would be between
           Turnstiles A-G, central position, when, the gate suddenly
           opened.

        Q. Did you see who opened it? - A. No, I was not in a position.
           There v/as one or tv/o fans around that area and of course
           that restricted my view. I have no idea who opened it,
           if it was a Police Officer, a Steward or what, I have no
           idea whatsoever.

        Q. Were there any other Police Serials working in the area
           immediately behind that gate apart from your Serial 14?
           - A. I did not see anyone.

           Did you hear any traffic on the radio about the opening
           of the gates? - A. Hone whatsoever.

        Q. Did you not hear an instruction that the gates should be
           ooened? - A. None whatsoever.

        Q. Did you have any warning that the gate would be opened
           and left open for the influx of fans? - A. Kone at all.

        Q. If you had known that it was going to be opened, v/as there
           anything" you'would have done before it v/as opened? - A.
           Well there is a possibility if we had been aware it v/as
H          going to be opened we could have moved further back perhaps
           to the tunnel and diverted, but if there is several fans
                                                    50


                                                                              T. BICHARD

                              - A. I would accept the differences in time, yes.

                         Q. Well, we have got the timing from the video and obviously
                            that is more accurate than your memory.  But when that
                            gate opened just after Mr. Marshall had asked for the
                            gates to be opened what did you think had opened it? - A.
                            There had been some conversation on the radio regarding
                            pushing at the gates and gates bending and buckling and
                 B          when that gate appeared to open- my immediate reaction
                            was that the fans had in fact forced open.that gate.

                         Q. Did you make some comment to that effect? - A. That is
                            right, yes.

                         Q. I think you said something like they have broken down the
                            gate? - A. That is the words I would have used, yes, sir.

                         Q. Yes.  But in fact after about 20 seconds or so it was
                            closed again? - A. That is right, yes.

                         Q. And according to your notes you put it thus, you say
                            after 20 seconds gate closed.  Appears that it had been
                            opened on purpose - sorry - appears that it had been open
                            on purpose? - A. Is that on my original statement or the
                 D          notes?

                         Q. No.  I am reading out from the notes.    You have got a copy.
                            In fact you time it at 2.40 which we know to be slightly
                            inaccurate.   It is page 6 of my copy of the notes.    I have
                            a typed copy.   I do not know.  It may not accord with the
                           ■original. - A. Yes.
                     E   Q.   You have got that? - A. I have got that, yes.

                         Q.    As you see, it says after 20 seconds gate closed.Appears
                              that it had been open on purpose? - A. Yes.  I v/as unsure
                              about actually who had opened it or why it had been opened,

                         0.. I want to see whether this is hindsight or whether this is
                             what you thought at the time.   Your immediate reaction was
                             to think the gate had been broken down?   - A. That is right,

                         Q.   That is what you said? - A. Yes.

                         Q. It was open for a very short time and then closed again?
                            - A. Yes.

                         Q. Did you then appreciate that in fact it had been open on
                            purpose or was this something you were told later on in
                            the afternoon? - A. It is quite possible that that is
                            something that has come out during the events and me
                            actually writing it down.

                         Q.   I follow.  In any event we know that there was again a
                              request from Mr. Marshall?"*- A. Yes, in relation to
                 H
                                                                                             97
J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                          65

                                                                      T. BICHARD


                                              Cross-Examined by MR. GIBSOM-WATT:

                              Q. Officer, one point first which you have touched on but I
                                 want to get it clear. When Gate C first opened, just for
                                 a few seconds, you instinctively said: "The fans have
                                 broker, down the gate" or words to that effect? - A . I did,
                                 yes.
                          B   Q. That is what you thought.  It then closed and soon after
                                 that you were getting very strong requests or commands
                                 fromSuperintendent Marshall that the gates should be opened?
                                 - a . Yes, that is right.

                              Q. So by the time you were getting these commands through it
                                 must have been obvious to you that the Police had at any
                                 rate regained control of Gate C? - A. I believe that, yes.

                              Q. And indeed that the opening of Gate C originally had been
                                 deliberate, not a break in by fans? - A. That may be an
                                 assumption in between the incident happening and me writing
                                 that down.

                              Q. Well what I am suggesting to you is it is an assumption
                          D      between the incident happening when you first blurt out
                                 your thoughts instinctively and realising that Superintendent
                                 Marshall was still asking for the gates to be opened?- A.
                                 I am unclear on what you are actually to gain, sir.

                              Q. Let's take it slowly.   If Superintendent Marshall is asking
                                ,for the gates to be opened, the fans have not broken in
                                : and not broken down the gate, have they? - A. There is more
                          E       than one gate though, sir.  It may well be he was not aware
                                  that that gate opened.

                              Q. Well you are aware when Superintendent Marshall is giving
                                 his orders or making his requests for the gates to be
                                 opened, that fans are no longer coming through Gate C. You
                                 can see that? - A. I can see that, yes.

                              Q. Therefore at the least Gate C is then under Police control
                                 and no fans are coming in? - A. Yes, and I am assuming
                                 that Gate C is the one that everybody is referring to.
                                 That is where my attention is drawn.

                              Q. Precisely   so. So you assume    when Superintendent Marshall
                                 is making   his requests, that   everybody is concentrating
                                 on Gate C   and Superintendent   Marshall is asking for Gate C
                                 to be opened? - A. Yes, that     is right, sir.

                              Q. Which means it must have been opened and closed the first
                                 time and not forced by the fans? - A. It could well have
                                 been forced.  If the gate has been opened or just taken
                                 off lock, the fans could well have forced the gate open and
                                 we managed to close it again, it does not mean to say it
                                 is damaged.
                      H
                                                                                                  98
• I W a r n h a m I trt
                                    68



                          NINETEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
                               MONDAY, 12th OUNE, 1989
                                 (AFTERNOON SESSION)
                   POLICE CONSTABLE TREVOR BICHARD, re-called

B                  Cross-examined by MR. GIBSON-WATT (cont.)
    Q. Officer, can you go back to that Photograph 48 in the bundle
       which you had in front of you.    A.   Yes,  I have that
       photograph now.
    Q. We have just got Mr. Kelly to the door of the Police Control
       Box, I think.   A.   That's right, sir.
          On that photograph   just to the left.   A.    Yess, that's
          right.

    Q. You are there, Mr. Duckenfield is there?           A.   Yes.

    Q.    Assistant Chief Constable Mr. Oackson is there, I think
          in civilian clothes.   A.   That's right, yes.
D
    Q. Did Mr. Kelly ask what had happened?  A.   There was a
       conversation took place between Mr. Duckenfield and Mr.
       Kelly, yes.
    Q.       Speak a bit louder, please.      A.   There was a conversation
         /be t w e e n Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Kelly.
E   Q.      In the course of that conversation did Mr. Duckenfield tell
          Mr. Kelly that a gate had been forced and there had been
          an inrush of Liverpool supporters into the ground?
          A.    Yes, that was said.
    Q. And d d he, in fact, point to one of the TV monitors in the
       course of that conversation?         Can you remember that?
       A.    He could well have done, I don't remember it.
    Q. And I think from your answers this morning if he did so it
       would have been a monitor showing the current situation;
       it would not have been a replay of what had happened earlier,
       A.   That's right, it is the scene that would be showing
       at that time.
                        Cross-examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

    Q. Mr. Bichard, you have got Photograph 48 in front of you
       which shows your position.     A. That's right, sir.

    Q. Primarily, as you told us, controlling the video
       cameras throughout the ground.   A.   Yes, that is my main
       function.                 +
H
                                                                              99
                                                       81

                                                                    T. BICHARD


                           2. You did not hear any conversation specifically from Inspector
                              Murray about a difficulty making contact with the Club? -
                              A. Again I can't, obviously it is a very active time. I
                              have no recollection of any conversation.

                            . Mr. Bichard, is that the position that a number of people
                              were doing different things and not everybody would have
                              known what everybody else was doing? - A. Once we were aware
                       B      about the fullness of this incident each individual took
                              upon themselves their individual tasks, so you would not be
                              fully aware of what v/as happening elsewhere.

                           Q. Mr. Bichard, I am sure we all sympathise with that, but the
                              conversation that I v/as putting to you as to whether you could
                              help was somewhat earlier. Mr. Murray thought that he had
                              tried to get in touch with the Club before the decision to
                              open the gates was made. Again I can only ask you this: if
                              in fact there were difficulties at that stage, something let
                              us say at about a quarter-to-3 .... A. Again it is not
                              in my recollection.

                           Q. And the last matter, and forgive me there is only one question
                              on the question of the opening of the gates. Can I just
                              ask you to clarify this: Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray have
                       D      both told the Inquiry that they had expected all the gates to
                              be opened? - A. I would accept that if that is what they are
                              saying.

                           Q. That is what they expected and you have told us that your
                              expectation was different? - A. That is right, Gate C.

                       E   Q. And I think you have also said that the reason for that you
                              believe, from recollection, is that because your camera
                              happened to be looking at Gate C at that time, you had
                              assumed that v/as the gate about which Superintendent Marshall
                              was speaking? - A. The actual scene is available on that
                              camera.  It shows a clear picture of Gate C. Gate B is out
                              of view. Gate A is out of view.

                           Q. And that is what you were concentrating on personally? - A.
                              That is right.

                           Q. And you were unaware of the fact that Mr. Duckenfield and
                              Mr. Murray wanted all the gates opened? - A. I am unaware
                              of that, yes.

                           Q. It is just this question in the light of that background,
                              Mr. Bichard. After the order to open the gates was given
                              on the first occasion, v/e can see on the video that you
                              zoomed in on Gate C first of all? - A. Yes.

                           Q. Do you remember that? - A. I don't actually, because I have
                              not had an opportunity .... I have seen a compilation tape
                              but I have not seen the tapes I produced.
                                       V*                   ’ v;,



                       H   Q. All I wanted your help with was when you did 200m in on Gate C

                                                                                          100
J. L. H arp h am Ltd
                                                   82
                                                             T. BICHARD


                          you said this morning that you drew that to"his attention"?
                          - A. Yes.

                     Q. Whose attention did you draw to the fact that Gate C was
                        being opened? - A. When I made the comment about it being
                        forced open?

                     Q. Yes? - A. It would be directed at Mr. Duckenfield, but also
                 B      to everybody who was in the Control Box.

                     Q. But are you saying that you have a specific recollection
                        of drawing Mr. Duckenfield's attention to the gate which you
                        were zooming in on at the time when the first entry v/as
                        made? - a . When the gate was, as I believed forced, and I
                        have shouted out the comments that I have put in my statement
                        and it has been directed to Mr. Duckenfield who has been
                        stood just in front of me.

                     Q. And likewise approximately five minutes later when there was
                        conversation specifically about Gate A, and I think we can
                        tell you without fear of contradiction that you zoomed in
                        on Gate A as well? - A. Yes, I have got that recollection
                        now of seeing two lines of Police Officers behind Gate A.
                 D   Q. And zooming in on them? - A. And moving in on that scene, yes,

                     Q. When you zoomed in on Gate A, those minutes later after
                        the initial zoom on Gate C, can you recall whether anythi’-.g
                        was said at all inside the Control Box about v/hy Gate A
                        had not been opened earlier? - A. No, I know v/hy I zoomed
                       ./in on Gate A because of the radio message from Sergeant
                        Higgins, that is v/hy I v/ent there, but I have no idea of
                 E      any conversation after that.

                                MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much.   Thank you sir.


                                        Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

                     Q.   Mr. Bichard, may I ask you about the monitoring at Snig
                          Hill. Until the major incident was declared, was Snig Hill
                          listening in to the communications that v/ere passing?
                          - A. To my knowledge they were listening to Channel 25,
                          personal radio.

                     Q.   During the timethat you were in the Control Room up to the
                          moment that Gate C was opened and caused you to shout out,
                          had you been expecting that gate to open? - A. Certainly
                          not.

                     Q. When you observed v/hat was shown on the television screen,
                        v/as it a matter of surprise to you? - A. Yes.

                     Q. Did you shout it out? - A. Yes.
                                 V


                 H   Q. However, did you make any specific communication to Snig Hill



L H arpham Ltd                                                                         101
                                  7

                                               W. JACKSON


        - A. That is right, but I have a vague recollection that it
        is sometime during all the mel&e and I think you will
        appreciate there was a lot of stress in dealing with the
        problem.  I have a feeling that somebody mentioned something
        about storming the gates.

Q. It may be that we can help you about that. We have heard
   some evidence, or rather it has been put, that you were
   present when Mr. Duckenfield spoke to Mr. Kelly and I think
   a Mr. Kirton from the F.A. and Mr. Mackrell, the Secretary
   of the Club. Do you recall a meeting at which those three
   were present, together with you and Mr. Duckenfield? - A.
   Is that the one in the boardroom?

Q. Well I am hot sure whether it was in the Boardroom or.tlae ,:
   Control Room. I think it was in the Control Room? - A. Yes,
   there were a lot of people came to the Control, Room that
   day and I remember Mr. Mackrell being in there, so probably
   Mr. Kelly was in there as well.

Q. Because it has been suggested, and I think Mr. Duckenfield
   has actually accepted this, that he certainly conveyed the
   impression, whatever precise words he may have used, that
   fans had broken a gate down and that that had led to the .
   trouble? - A'. I don't remember what the actual conversation
   was.  I remember Mr. Mackrell saying something about "what
   was the plan?" Certainly I briefly said we were trying to
   get the people out who had been injured.

Q. But you said that you had some vague recollection that at
   some stage someone said something about "storming the
   gates"? - A. Yes, I do.

q.      Couid that in fact be the occasion which has been spoken tp
        by Mr. Duckenfield? - A. It could have been.

Q. Is your recollection that whoever said something about
   storming the gates was someone who was official, if I may
   put it that way? - A. Oh yes, yes.

Q. So it was not a sort of mere rumour? - A. No, No, I have
   got a feeling it "was somebody in the Box that said that.
   In fact I think it may have been Mr. Duckenfield.

                MR. COLLINS:   I am obliged.

q   .        - LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: But when you said it was only
        about 4.15 that you heard what had actually happened, do
        I understand that is when you had called Mr. Marshall?
        - A. Yes.

q. Was it from him that you heard that the-gate had been
   opened? - A. Yes, my Lord, during that period, as every­
   body appreciates, we were extremely busy and trying to
   make sure that the areas were sterile, that doctors had
   been called and all the necessary things were being done

                                                                 102
                               46
                                                                 W.   JACKSOH




Q. The time, of coarse, is approximate, but the point is
   this: you did not appreciate that there had been a Police
   order to open the gates until you spoke to Hr. Marshall? -
   A. That is correct.

Q.   You have also told us that on a previous occasion - an
     occasion before that - somebody in authority had made a
     reference to storming the gates? - A. Yes, I think that
     was right.

Q. And you believed that that could have been Mr.
   Duckenfield? - A. Yes.

Q. And it could have been on the occasion when Mr. Kelly was
   in the Police control box? - A. Yes.           ^ '     v                     ■

Q. Bo&s •it follow.- from that tbat, until y o u . r t a Mr. t;■ t
   M&r§haH~at about quarter-past four, y^ju?were^under the.
   impression- that fans had somehow forced their wayinto the
   gFgtind? -- A. ,That was my recollection,          .y- .   5 :

Q.   Thank you.   There is one other matter.  Do you have a
     recollection, on any occasion before 4. 15, when you were
     in the Police control box, of some reference being made to
     the television monitoring screens to illustrate what had
     happened? - A. No, I do not.

Q. You do not have any recollection of that at all? - A. Ho,
   I do not.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       What context are you putting
     that?

            -MS, GiBSQN-WATT*      Sir, I am putting if;;:inc.the;
     context of Mr. K e l l y ’s visit,.    I deliberately put; it In
     genera 1. terms;'because- M r .- Jackson had .b-een-. a l ittle vague, -
     It was -not p u t .to. Mr . Ducken.f ield, which iss,why I, raise it
     now, but the recollection of Mr. K e 1ly and M r . Kirt o o ;was
     that they were referred to a picture ore the- monitoring’
     s cr e e n .                                   .....

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Then and there?

          MR. GIBSON-WATT:          On the occasion that they were in
     the Police control box.

        - LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          I see.   Thank you.

          MR. GIBSON-WATT:   It was not thought necessary to
     put it when asking Mr. Duckenfield, but, of course, a good
     deal of evidence has emerged since then.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Thank you.    Yes, Mr.
     Kallipetis?




                                                                         103
