  From        J L Goddard                          cc: HMCIC
              F8 Division                              Miss A M Edwards
              Ext. 3314                                Mr Miles
                                                       Mrs Catto
              15 November 1991                         Miss Harrison




  Mrs Moodv




  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH MP


^^1 am responding to your minute of 14 November covering a draft
  reply for Lord Ferrers' signature to the letter from George
  Howarth MP to the Home Secretary.


  2.   The Taylor Inquiry was set up by G2, not F8.           Lord Justice
  Taylor's terms of reference were:-


         "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
         ground on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about
         the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."


  Although    the Taylor    Inquiry   considered   in great    detail   the
  policing on the day this was in the context of ensuring safety.
  These points are relevant to the penultimate paragraph of the
  proposed draft reply. The third sentence of that paragraph could
  be taken to suggest that Taylor's Inquiry was one where the whole
  conduct of a force in relation to the community it policed was
  in question.   As the next sentence of the draft acknowledges,
  this is not the case.   I think it may be a little misleading,
  therefore, to go on to suggest that the Taylor Inquiry would be
  regarded by the Home Secretary as having already covered "these
  issues" - whatever is meant by this broad formulation.
  3.   The penultimate paragraph of the draft might be re-cast as
  follows:-


       "Your main concern however in writing to me was, if I have
       read your letter right, the feeling that there should be
       some further investigation of policeoperations at
       Hillsborough as a whole.    In the light of   the very wide
       ranging and thorough investigations which have already been
       conducted,   it  is   difficult   to  see   that      another
       investigation at this time could be productive."

   It is for you to consider whether    the third and the first half
   of the fourth sentences of your      draft paragraph need to be
   retained in the draft at all. The    draft should certainly avoid
   any possible implication that the    Taylor Inquiry was concerned
^^^with "the whole conduct of a force   in relation to the community
   it policed".


  4.   On another matter, the last sentence of the second complete
  paragraph of page 3 of the draft says that neither Chief
  Superintendent   Duckenfield nor Superintendent Murray has
  "committed any crime". It might be better to say that neither
  "has been charged with any crime". The sentence, amended as I
  suggest, might fit better at the end of the preceding paragraph,
  the first full paragraph on page 3.


  5.   Incidentally Mr Duckenfield1s name is spelt with an "e" in
  the second syllable throughout the Taylor Report. You may know,
  which I do not, whether this or your version is a mis-spelling.


  6.   In the light of G21s interest in the Taylor Inquiry you may
  wish to show relevant papers to Mr Miles.



                              f. l
                            J L GODDARD
                                                                        S&o



 From:         MRS 6 I MOODY            cc    Miss A M Edwards
               F2 DIVISION
               ® 273 2621
               14 November 1991



 HMCIC
 Mr Godd^T<S*^'V    F8 Division
 Miss Harrison      E Division
 Mrs Catto          F5 Division

 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH MP


 Subsequent to the circulation of my earlier note dated 8 November
  (not to Miss Harrison or Mrs Catto) , Lord Ferrers     called a
 meeting for 13 November to discuss the content of the reply to
 the attached letter from George Howarth MP to the Home Secretary
 on a number of issues arising from the latest developments in the
^aftermath to the Hillsborough tragedy. The subjects covered in
P^r Howarth's letter are:-
          (i)     that   "no  detailed   investigation   around   the
          responsibilities of those concerned has yet been undertaken
          or published" (para 2 and the last paragraph,)
          (ii)    unhappiness as to the coroner's verdict (para    4,
          top of page 2); and these issues are linked with,

o        (iii)    unhappiness as to the medical retirement of Chief
    ^     Superintendent Duck^ifrfield (paragraphs 1 and 5), although
         this seems to be linked to the erroneous notion that
         disciplinary proceedings constituted some kind of further
          investigation.

 2    F2 Division's interest in these three Questions is solely
 in the third, ie into any question of whether any officer might
 have misconducted himself on this occasion. I should be grateful
 if Miss Harrison could confirm that I have made use of the
 material she has provided on inquests in a way acceptable to
 E Division. As to the operational aspects of the policing of the
 event, I believe F8 were the sponsor Division for the Taylor
 Inquiry and I should therefore be grateful if they would confirm
 that the passages in the draft covering their interest, ie those
 refusing a further inquiry, meet their interests. Mrs Catto may




                              MRS 6 I MOODY

 GIM-710,000                        7
     m
           Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home

           Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.



           I should like to emphasize once more, as we have on earlier

           occasions, how deeply we feel for all those who lost relatives

           or friends in this horrific incident.    The whole Government

           was, as you know, deeply saddened to hear of this dreadful
           disaster at the time it happened.    It is because of our

           sympathy with their appalling loss that we have always tried

y*        to ensure that the circumstances which caused it^should be as

/C        fully and as openly ©kpesed* as possible.    I do rust therefore

         ^^think it is being entirely fair to say, as you <o, that "no

           detailed investigation around the responsibilities of those

           concerned has yet been undertaken or published" lwhen in fact
           at least four investigations of the events have been

           undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues ^ e r e / "         ^   p
                                                               ><f       "   /
           properly covered.                                /                    *
                                                              /



           The first of these was of course the formal inquiry by the

           Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor commissioned by the Home Secretary

           on the second day after the disaster.    The investigation

           inaugurated by the Taylor inquiry involved some 440 officers

           from the West Midlands police force, who took some 3,776

           statements as well as taking advantage of video film from 3

           separate sources providing, in all, some 71 hours of further

           evidence.     This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted

           and in my view the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on


           GIM-710.000                      1
m
      the disaster gives a very clear picture of police activity on

      the day.


      The inquest into the death at Hillsborough, which took over

      100 days to examine the material facts, constituted a second

      inquiry into these events.


      The inquest, in fact, served a separate function, in that the

      law states that its purpose is to ascertain the identity of

      the deceased, and how, when and where he came by his death.
      The Coroners Rules provides that neither the coroner nor the

    ^ p u r y shall express any opinion on any other matters.   In

      addition, the rules specifically prohibit the framing of an

      inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any

      question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,

      or civil liability.   Any issue of civil or criminal liability

      is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the

      coroners inquest.



      If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest

      including the verdict (as I believe some relatives are), it is

      open to them, under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, to

      apply with the authority of the Attorney-General, for the High

      Court to quash the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be

      held, either by the same coroner or by a different one from

      the same administrative area.    Coroners inquests may also be

      challenged by way of judicial review but anyone contemplating




      GIM-710.000                      2
such a course of action would be well advised to seek legal

advice at an early stage.


In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for
Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted

a further major investigation with a view to discovering

whether the disaster resulted from or was made worse by

criminal activity on the part of anyone.        This too was a very

large investigation, but the Director of Public Prosecutions

did not conclude that the results indicated that any one

should be made the subject of a criminal p r o s e c u t i o n . ^

►
 Perhaps it would be helpful if I comment on this.        It means

that, so far as anyone can discover - and the evidence amassed

has been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the

result of any criminal activity. Jin particular, neither Chief

Superintendent Duckinfield nor Superintendent Murray nor any ^

other person^hava qowHnwt^gd-any crime.



For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end

of the matter.     For police officers however there remains the

question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,

they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as

police officers.     The fourth investigation of the events of

the day covered complaints which had been made regarding

police behaviour.     This investigation was conducted by a

different police force (the Cumbria Constabulary) to ensure an

independent approach and involved the taking of a further 5341
" statements as well as the scrutiny of all the material
  previously examined.    It was supervised throughout by the
  Police Complaints Authority, who subsequently expressed

  themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and

  thoroughly conducted.   The privacy of people who complain

  against the police is protected by the courts and the results

  of this investigation cannot therefore be published.



  In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police

  Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are

  required to consider whether there are ways in which the

^officer may have failed in his duty and, if so, to arrange for

  a formal hearing of the charges against him.    They did so,

  after receiving the report of the complaint investigation, and

  the PCA decided that Chief Superintendent Duckinfield and

  Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges.



  As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

  were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

  which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

  under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of

  police disciplinary hearings.    Such a hearing is held in

  private and is concerned only with whether or not the officer

  concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

  The hearing would not therefore in any way contribute to

  public knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do

  more than receive and consider evidence already known as to

  the propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.     It is not


  GIM-710.000                     4
  therefore really relevant to the question of a further
  investigation into police operations on the day which is, I

  understand, what you are really seeking.



  Another important issue in relation to police discipline which

  is often ignored is that the most serious punishment which the

  disciplinary tribunal would have been able to impose, had

  Mr Duckinfield been found guilty, would have been dismissal or

  requirement to resign.   This would be the heaviest punishment

  it would be possible to award an officer for the very worst

  offence he could have committed, and would be used in any case

^ w h e r e it was clear that the officer's behaviour was such that

  it was inappropriate for him to remain a police officer.     By

  retiring, Mr Duckinfield has already left the force and thus

  made further action unnecessary.



  It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr

  Duckinfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate
  authority in police disciplinary cases, but I can and should

  say that it needs to be remembered that it is by no means

  certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr

  Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred

  against him.


  If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man it would not be

  right to refuse him retirement on medical grounds in order to

  hear charges which may or may not be proved and whose most

  serious result could only be that he leave the service he has


  GIM-710.000                      5
already asked to leave voluntarily.        This, however, like the
other matters raised in your letter, is a matter for the South

Yorkshire Police Force and its police authority and I suggest

that your concerns might best be discussed with them.




Your main concern however in writing to me was, if I have read

your letter right, the feeling that there should be some

further investigation of police operations at Hillsborough as           -

a whole.      In the light of the very wide ranging/investigations

which have already been conducted, -X-f-ind it/diff icu^.t to see

k'ldaat,another (fAP&C) investigation /could ach.iavo-r /In
*                                      ^
 fact, successive Home Secretaries have only consented to major

inquiries of this nature where they considered that the whole

conduct of a force in relation to the community it policed had

been called in question.      This is not the case with the South

Yorkshire force a ndlPam sur^that the Home Secretary would

regard the inquir^Talready uZiiemcLtia 'ltfy Lurd-iTuoLice Tayl‘ui as

having already ^/ovci'ed



I am sorry I cannot send you a more helpful reply despite the

very deep personal sympathy we feel here for all those

bereaved at this terrible event.




GIM-710.000                        6
                                                          |fo2TS'£ L.


                                                      12 NOV 91
From:      Mrs G I Moody               c:    HMCIC
           F2 Division
           273 2621
           8 November 1991
                                                     Hopu&
                                                             )//;E&n w ,


Mr Go   frd
     rvision

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


jijr pickering copied to you the attached letter from Mr George
Howarth MP on this subject.     Although ostensibly on the
subject of the retirement of Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield - a matter which I have covered in the attached ^
draft - the meat of the letter seems to lie in the request in
  :he last paragraph that the role of the South Lancashire
Police be properly investigated.     I would imagine that the
answer to this must lie in a reference to the Taylor enquiry,
but that was not commissioned by this division and I would
welcome material suitable for inclusion in the letter covering
 tb.se points.




                             MRS G I MOODY




                                                                  'j/tl



 GIM-042.GIM
Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home
Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.



As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of
police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in

private and is concerned only with whether the officer

concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

\t would not therefore in any way contribute to public

knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do more

than receive and consider evidence already known as to the

propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.   Moreover the most

serious punishment which the disciplinary tribunal would have

been able to impose, had Mr Duckinfield been found guilty,

would have been dismissal or requirement to resign.   Mr

Duckinfield's resignation means that this end is already

achieved.



It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr

Duckinfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate

authority in police disciplinary cases,but I can and should

say that it needs too to be remembered that it is by no means

certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr

Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred


GIM-042.GIM
against: him.   If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man

it would not be right to refuse him retirement on medical
grounds in order to hear charges which may or may not be

proved and whose most serious result could only be that he

leave the service he has already asked to leave voluntarily.
This, however, like the other matters raised in your letter,

is a matter for the South Lancashire Police Force and I

suggest that your concerns might best be discussed with the

Chief Constable of that force.


Having said this, I find it difficult to see what further

areas can usefully be explored when the Taylor enquiry...




GIM-042.GIM
                                                             f*           / fa liu f r
                  h o use    of   C O M       j f c ' C l f o t ^
                       L O N D O N SW1A OAA                  > » /_   V
                                                             V«5          kffM^
 5th Noveiriber 1991                                                          ftiffa


 Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.                          ;
 Home Secretary                                 •■///
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SWIH 9AT

 Dear Home Secretary                                         /
                                                   •.« vy * '1
 RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                       ’ 'V
                                                        ■4




I am writing to protest at the way in which South
Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield for his ‘part in the
Hillsborough tragedy.

As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
for certain decisions will never, unless you
intervene, be fully pinned down.

Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
subject of a proper medical examination. However,
if the families of those sadly killed at that event,
or, indeed, any of the survivors, are to be'satisfied
•chat the justice they were promised by the then Prime
Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
seems to me, really matter.


                                                (continued).
                          -   2   -

Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your powers to look
very closely at the inplications of South Lancashire's
Police decision to effectively evade an investigation into
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.\
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of <the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
Whilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.

It is in this part that I seek your intervention in finding
some way of properly investigating in detail the role of
South Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
officers' responsible specifically, in the jiolicing of
that day of that event.

Yours sincerely



            rth M.P.
            rth

c.c. Mr   Peter Joynes
     Mr   P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr   Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr   Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr   Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr   Eob Parry M.P.
     Mr   Bob Wareing M.P.
     Mr   Frank Field M.P.
     Mr   Joe Benton M.P.
     Mr   John Evans M.P.
     Mr   Gerry Bermingham M.P.
