From         J L Goddard                         cc: Mr   Chilcot
             F8 Division                             Mr   Hammond
             Ext. 3313                               Mr   Boys Smith
                                                     Mr   Turney
             30 January 1990                         Mr   Mower
                                                     Mr   Bolton
                                                     Mr   Godfrey

                                                h c c : Mr Rhodes
                                                        Mr F Smith


Mr Walters




OPPOSITION DAY DEBATE


At his meeting this morning the Home Secretary requested for
inclusion in his speech a revised passage covering the
proposed new offences and penalties.


2.     I attach a draft passage for this purpose.         Mr Hammond
content.


3.     I also attach a background note.




                                J. L. GODDARD


                                J L GODDARD
                                                       >




65-1.JS




REPLACE THE LAST PARAGRAPH ON PAGE 13 AND THE TOP OF PAGE 14
WITH THE FOLLOWING:-


     "The House knows that Lord Justice Taylor recommends the
     creation of some new offences specific to behaviour in
     football grounds.   He has in mind throwing a missile,
     chanting obscene or racialist abuse and going on the
     pitch without reasonable excuse.   Lord Justice Taylor
    believes that the existing offences in the Public Order
    Act 1986 do not cover these particular forms of unruly
    behaviour.    I certainly see the attraction of making
    clear to potential troublemakers precisely what behaviour
    is a criminal offence and that they do these things at a
    sports ground at their peril.    In considering these
    recommendations I shall have to take into account the
    enforceability of the proposed new offences.    I shall
    therefore be consulting the police and other interested
    bodies.   For these reasons it would be wrong for me to
    give an instant commitment to propose to Parliament
    changes which do require careful consideration.    But I
    can assure the House that I shall look both carefully and
    quickly at Lord Justice Taylor's suggestions for new
    offences and for the application of attendance centre
    orders and electronic tagging to convicted football
    hooligans."
64-1.JS



PUBLIC ORDER ACT 1986 OFFENCES AND TAYLOR'S PROPOSED NEW
OFFENCES




Background Note


Part I of the Public Order Act 1986 revised the previously
existing public order offences.   The common law offences of
riot, rout, unlawful assembly and affray were abolished and
new statutory offences created in their place.   A new low
level offence of disorderly conduct (section 5 of the 1986
Act) was also introduced.


2.   Annex A describes the comprehensive and graduated range
of offences provided by the 1986 Act.


3.   Annex B provides an explanation of the likely use of
section 5.


4.   Annex C sets out police powers presently available to
deal with hooliganism.


5.   The following paragraphs look at each of Taylor's 3
proposals for a new specific offence.


Throwing a missile


6.   In certain circumstances this may amount to assault or
causing the fear or provocation of violence which would be an
offence under section 4.


7.   Where throwing a missile is not caught by section 4,
Taylor argues [294] that section 5 may not cover the behaviour
because it requires the behaviour to be "within the sight or
hearing of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or
distress thereby".


8.     The recent case of DPP v Orum [[1988] 3. All ER] makes
clear that the "victim" may, in law, be a police officer:         it
is a matter of fact to be decided in each case whether the
officer did or was likely to feel harassed, alarmed or
distressed.


9.     Taylor may well overstate the difficulty of adducing
evidence of the victim element for the section 5 offence.         But
if throwing a missile at a sports ground without anyone being
likely to be harassed, alarmed or distressed is thought to be
behaviour which should attract criminal sanctions there may be
a case for a further look at the law.


Chanting obscene or racialist abuse


10.    Taylor considers [295-298 and Annex C] whether this
behaviour is covered by section 5 or section 18 of the 1986
Act.    He is probably right in concluding [298] that the
chanting at a football match is more likely to cause offence
and embarrassment than to stir up racial hatred.    But the
offence and embarrassment caused may provide the basis to
charge an offence under section 5.    If it does not, then
consideration needs to be given to whether a criminal offence
should be created for conduct which causes no harassment,
alarm or distress.    Enforcement considerations are also
particularly relevant here.


Going on the pitch without reasonable excuse


11.    This behaviour may often be covered by section 5.     If
not, the police may be able to respond to a pitch invasion by
use of their common law power (paragraph 83 of Annex C) to
deal with a breach of the peace or a reasonably apprehended
imminent breach of the peace.
12,   It is difficult to envisage circumstances of the going on
a pitch to which neither s.5 powers nor common law powers are
apt but which nonetheless is without reasonable excuse and
deserves a criminal penalty.


General considerations


13.   It is a commonplace that not all anti-social or
unpleasant behaviour merits criminal sanctions.    Before
proposing new criminal offences we need to be satisfied not
only as to enforceability but also as to the net social
benefit of criminalising the behaviour in point.
                                                                   ANNEX A



 Fart      I

 Three newly-defined offences of r i o t , violent disorder and affrav
 re?-ace tne ole corrinon lav offences of riot, rout, unlawful
 assembly and affray.

in accition tne offence of threatening b e h a v i o u r , at present in
section 5 of the Puclic Order Act, is'revised and extended to
private as well as public Diaces,

Finally a new offence of disorderly conduct is created.                 Anyone
who uses threatening, abusive, insulting or disorderly behaviour
within the hearing or sight of another person likely to be caused
s 1 a j.m , usrassment or distress w i l l b e g u i l t y of an.-offence.  The
maximum penalty for this new low-level offence is a fine of
£400.       The aim of the new offence is to catch hooligan behaviour
which whilst not in itself 'Violent- nonetheless causes unnecessary
misery to others, pa rt ic ul arl y vulnerable members cf societv such
as the elderly and the victims "of'facial harassment.                The police"
will have the power to arrest anyone whb persists in disorderly
conduct having been given a '-Warning to stop.

-®   ■*- of the Act creates a comprehensive and graduated range of
offences as indicated below; ' —

•Ei-£Lx:         Where 12 or more people are using or threaten! nc
                  violence to persons or property for a common purpose
                  in such a way as would cause a person of reasonable
                 firmness if present to fear for his personal safetv,
                 each person using unlawful violence will be guilty*
                 of riot.     Any prosecution will require the consent
                 of the DPP and will be triable on indictment with a
                 maximum pe nal ty of 10 y e a r s 1 imprisonment or a fine
                 or b o t h .

                 This will be the least commonly used public order
                 offence, reserved only for very serious cases.

                 Where three_oj[^mare people are behaving violently
j±l.
   ?-P r °er :   int-such a ^Vft£MaiMOU 1 d cause a person of reasonable
                 firmness if present to f e a r f o r his personal safety,
                 each person using or threatening unlawful violence
                 will be guilty of violent disorder.       The offence
                 will be triable either way with a maximum penaltv on
                 indictment of five years and/or a fine.
                   The p; uDOasi to m a k e violent disorder t r i a 11 ~
                   e i tn e r w ~ y will e n a d 1e less
                   tried ~orf speedily m the ro* c- ^
                                                                          ■<
                   where th-: r:.=.ximur Density w i l i ' b
                       isonn-s--;. a n d / o r £ £.2 , D    C,   f


                      w ^           i wc W ~
                                           ■ i l^l— LuCi p»6 11 pc r z j. c v £ r i v s u i t s ;
                                                     TiiC

                   for d e a l m e V?xi tz n crOuD vio i6 p i
     rav           Where one or more persons uses or threatens
                   violence against another in such/a"wsy~as would
                   Cajse a person of reasonable firmness to fear for
                   his personal safety, they will be guilty of
                   affray.   Tne offence will be triable either way
                   witn a maximum penalty of three years and/or a"
                   fine.   Summary conviction attracts a maximum
                   penalty of six months and/or a v£2,00Q fine.

                   Affray will continue to be the normal charge
                   brougnt m cases of fights outside pubs and clubs.

Tnr^atenina        Using threatening, abusive or insultinc words o ’-
r_e.~ = y’lour :   behaviour which is intended or likely:"
                            (i)   to cause another person to fear violence,
                            ( n ) to provoke the use of violence by
                           another.
                   "Lu     -1— — - “ suj.uiiary offence with a na x imun penalty
                   of six m o n t h s 1 imprisonment a n d / o r a  np
                   £ 2 , 000 .

Disorderly         As above,
conduct:
                                                      ANNEX B




 Disorderly conduct

  5.   Section 5 introduces the new low-level offence of disorderly
  conduct.  This offence is committed where a person uses
  threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour or
  disorderly behaviour, or displays threatening, abusive or
  insulting material within the sight or hearing of another likely
  to be alarmed, harassed or distressed thereby.  It carries a
  maximum penalty of a level 3 fine (currently £400).

  6.   Ministers explained during the Parliamentary passage of the
  then Bill that the new offence is intended £o deal with
  hooliganism which, whilst not in itself violent, nonetheless
  causes misery to others especially the elderly living alone or
  members of the ethnic minorities who are subject to racial
  harassment and abuse.

  7.     Chief officers may wish to note the following points in
  pa r ti cu la r:-

       i)   the offence is committed only if there is a person
       within sight or hearing of the conduct in question.      It will
       not be essential in e v e r y case to produce such a 'victim' in
       court, but the court will need to be satisfied that there
       was such a 'victim';

       ii)  the power of arrest in subsection (4) is exercisable
       only if the person concerned has first been warned to stop
       and then again engages in offensive conduct;
-:.r      V   -   /'   '

       i i i ) the offence is committed only if alarm, harassment or
       distress is likely to be caused.     Mere nuisance or annoyance
       will not be enough.

 8.   Where an officer not in uniform seeks to exercise his power
 of arrest under this section it will be important that wherever
 practicable he clearly identifies himself as a police officer
 when issuing the warning to an accused to stop his offensive
 conduct.
                                                      ANNEX C


Disorder


The offences which football hooligans may commit during
bouts of disorderly activity vary greatly in type and
seriousness.    At one end of the scale, section 5 of the
Public Order Act 1986 makes it an offence for a person to
use threatening,   abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or
disorderly behaviour,    or to display any writing,    sign or
other visible representation which is threatening, abusive
or insulting, within the hearing or sight of a person likely
to be caused harassment,    alarm or distress.   The offence may
be committed in public places and, with a few exceptions,
private places.    A constable may arrest without warrant a
person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to do
so.   On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).


At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in
section 1 of the Act.     This makes it an offence where 12 or
more persons who are present together use or threaten
unlawful violence for a common purpose and their conduct
(taken together)   is such as would cause a person of
reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his
personal safety.    The offence attracts a maximum of 10
years'   imprisonment.


In between these two ends of the scale there are the
offences of violent disorder (section 2), affray (section 3)
and fear or provocation of violence (section 4) which
attract maximum penalties ranging from 5 years'       imprisonment
and a fine to 6 months'    imprisonment and a fine not
exceeding £2 000.   There is a specific offence in the Act to
deal with threatening,   abusive or insulting words or
behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or is
likely to stir it up.    A person reasonably suspected of
committing the offence can be arrested without a warrant and
on conviction can be imprisoned for up to 2 years and fined.


There are many other offences,    outside the scope of the
Public Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during
disorderly activity.     For example, the offences of common
assault and malicious wounding.       These attract maximum
penalties of 1 year and life imprisonment respectively.        The
gravest incidents of hooliganism may involve murder or
attempted murder for which the maximdm penalty is also life
imprisonment.   Criminal damage and possession of an
                                  t
offensive weapon in a public place are other offences which
hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms of
imprisonment.


Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal
for coping with hooligans.     Breaches of the peace may be
dealt with using common law powers.       If a breach of the
peace occurs or if the police reasonably apprehend an
imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable
steps which are necessary to control or prevent it,
including arresting those responsible.       They may bring the
offenders before the courts where they may be bound over to
be of good behaviour for a period.
