From: Paul Pugh                                         cc:    Mr Howarth
      Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit                 Mr Boys Smith
      Room 529                                                 Mr Butler
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                        Mr Bone
      0171 273 3141                                            Mr Granatt
                                                               Mr Edmundson
        11 July 1997                                           Mr Owen



Home Secretary



HILLSBOROUGH: LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


Issue

Disclosure of evidence submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith during the
course of his scrutiny on Hillsborough.


Timing and Recommendation

2.     If you agree with what I propose, I recommend you write to the judge
during the course of next week to confirm your views.


Consideration

3.      You were concerned about comments made by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to Brian Butler, Communications Directorate, that in his view
submissions made to him will not be public and that all he will submit to you
will be his report. That might be seen as variance with your comments in the
House.

4.     When you made your statement on 30 June your comments were as
follows:

        “.... the right hon Gentleman (Brian Mawhinney) asked whether in
        addition to our publishing the advice that I receive from Lord Justice
        Stuart-Smith, I will publish all the evidence that is considered by him.
        My answer to the right hon Gentleman is provisional. I shall do my
        best to ensure that that is the case, but there may be good reasons -
        for example, in respect of criminal or disciplinary proceedings - why
        such evidence cannot be published at the same time as the advice is
        published. However, if evidence is to be unpublished, I shall make that
        clear at the time.”



:ODMA\MERID!0\EDRM#90234# 1
5.     Much of the material which the judge will consider is already in the
public domain: the Taylor Inquiry papers are held at the Public Record Office,
the Coroner’s proceedings were a matter of public record, and most of the
alleged new evidence is in the form of public statements or video material.
The issue therefore, only arises in relation to particular representations which
interested parties make to the judge and records of any meetings with them
which he holds (and which he has asked to be recorded verbatim).

6.      The decision about whether material gathered during the course of the
inquiry should be disclosed, is ultimately a question for you: Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has been appointed by you and on completion of his scrutiny,
the papers will be the property of the Home Office. It is therefore, open to
you to disclose or not as you think fit. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is, however,
right to the extent that it is his task to submit his report to you, and it is not for
him to put into the public domain submissions which are made to him.

7.      I discussed this issue with him this afternoon. His particular concern
relates to the transcripts of any meetings he may hold. As those meetings will
be held in private, with no cross examination of witnesses, he does not
consider that the transcripts should be published. He would expect to include
a summary of relevant oral evidence in his report. The transcripts of
particular meetings will be given to those present - and some witnesses may
themselves want to disclose them to third parties - but he feels that transcripts
of private meetings should not be generally disclosed.

8.      I think his concern is reasonable, and that a clear distinction can be
drawn between transcripts of private meetings and documentary evidence.
On the latter he foresees no difficulty with the disclosure of the great majority
of any relevant material. There may be material which it would not be proper
to disclose because it would have a bearing on any subsequent proceedings;
or because it is of a personal nature about individuals and not relevant to the
public interest; or because it would cause unnecessary distress. If Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith considers that material should not be disclosed, he will
indicate that, with his reasons, when he reports.

9.    It would be helpful to put these matters on the record with the judge. If
you agree, I suggest you should write to him along the following lines:

       i.      You want interested parties to be reassured that no material
               evidence will be concealed from them. The outcome of the
               scrutiny, and the reasons for whatever conclusions are arrived
               at, should be open.

       ii.     For that reason, you would like documentary evidence
               submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith (where it is not already in
               the public domain) to be disclosed, unless there are good
               reasons otherwise.

       iii.    You recognise that transcripts of private meetings should not be
               published.


:ODMA\MERID!0\EDRM#90234# 1
       iv.    When he reports to you, you intend as far as possible to
              disclose the evidence which has been considered during the
              scrutiny (probably by placing a copy in the Library of the
              House).

       v.     Therefore if there is any evidence which, in the view of Lord
              Justice Stuart-Smith, should not be disclosed either because
              of potential impact on any proceedings which might follow or
              for other public interest reasons, you would like Lord Justice
              Stuart-Smith to identify such material and his reasons for
               recommending that it should not be disclosed when he submits
               his report.

10.     If you agree with this approach, I will provide a draft letter next week.


Handling

11.   Once the matter has been settled with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith then it
can be explained publicly in response to any inquiries.


12.    He will be giving a brief photo-call on Monday morning or issuing a
statement: a copy is attached. He will not be giving interviews or fielding
questions.




                                            PAUL PUGH




:ODMA\MERID!0\EDRM#90234# 1
From: Peter Edmundson                                  cc     Mr Michael
      Room 527                                                Mr O’Brien
      Operational Policing Policy Unit                        Mr Howarth
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                       Permanent Secretary
      0171 273 2621                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                              Mr Granatt
         22 July 1997                                         Mr Pugh
                                                              Mr Bone o/r
                                                              Mr Warner
                                                              Mr Owen
Home Secretary



HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH


Issue

How to respond to the letter of 17 July from Lord Justice Stuart Smith.


Timing

2.      Routine, although it would be a courtesy to reply to Lord Justice Stuart Smith
before he goes on leave at the end of this week.


Summary

3.     Following comments made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith that submissions
made to him will not be made public, you wrote to him on 15 July pointing out that
you had given a commitment to publish his report and as far as possible make public
documentary evidence considered by him. His reply to your letter is satisfactory.


Recommendation

4.       That you write to Lord Justice Stuart Smith as in the attached draft.


Consideration

5.      You have given an undertaking that Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report will be
published together with as much as possible of the documentary evidence considered
by him, during the course of his scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart Smith however,
subsequently given the impression that the submissions he received would not be
made public and that all he would submit to you would be his report. In your letter of
15 July to him you agreed that records of meetings which he holds in private with no


:ODMA\MERID!0\EDRM#90226# 1
cross examination of witnesses, should not generally be disclosed and that he would
include relevant oral evidence in summary form in his report. You noted that there
may be some material which would not be right to disclose because of its potential
impact on any proceedings which might follow from the scrutiny, or because it was of
a personal nature, or further reasons of public interest. You asked Lord Justice Stuart
Smith to identify any documentary material which he believes should not be disclosed
and his reasons for recommending it should remain private. Lord Justice Stuart Smith
agrees this approach.


Handling

6.     There are no handling issues.




                                                            PETER EDMUNDSON




:ODMA\MERID!0\EDRM#90226#1
DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY


The Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart Smith
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand
LONDON WC2A 2LL




HILLSBOROUGH



Thank you for your helpful letter of 17 July. I shall seek to publish as much

documentary evidence considered by you during the course of the scrutiny as possible

and I note that you will let me know if there are any documents which you consider it

would not be in the public interest to publish.



I am grateful to you for keeping me informed of the work you have already been able

to carry out on this scrutiny.



May I take this opportunity to wish you a pleasant leave.




:ODMA\MERID!0\EDRM#90226# 1
