J MERVYN JONES MSc                                     FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                              Fumival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                             Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                       Telephone: 0742 727599
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                 Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                               Telephone: 051-709 7190/7231
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025
                                                       Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                          Our Ref:         JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 50A
Telephone: 021-359 3332                                Date:            21 June 1989



         R M Whalley Esq
         Secretary to the Inquiry
         C/0 Town Hall
         Surrey Street
         Sheffield
         S I 2HH




         TELECOMMUNICATIONS

         I forward herewith a report by Mr Thomas Logan, a Civil Servant from the
         Horae Office Directorate of Telecommunications based at Kippax in Leeds.

         It usefully deals with aspects of the South Yorkshire Police radio
         system which I think will be of interest to Lord Justice Taylor's
         Inquiry.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT       Sheffield
“ R0* 1    D    OF   TELS   Hf i O   KIPPPiX                   6 .2 1 .1 9 8 9   9: 49   P.   2




          Name                       Thomas Logan

          Age                        45 yrs

          Occupation                 Civil Servant

          Address                    Home Office,
                                      Directorate of Telecommunications
                                      Northern Area Office
                                      208 Leeds Road
                                      Kippax
                                      Leeds



              am   the   Northern   Area    Manager,   Home   Office,   Directorate    of
          Telecommunications.      My    responsibilities   include   the   installation,
          commissioning and maintenance of radio equipment for the emergency services.
          South Yorkshire Police is one of the forces for which I am responsible.

          I am the holder of a full City and Guilds Technological Certificate in
          Telecommunications. I have 30 years experience of radio communications with
          the Royal Air Force and the Home Office. I have been with the Directorate of
          Telecommunications since 1971 from a position of Technician and have been
          through various grades to my present level of Grade 7 (Principal).

          In connection with the incidents at Hillsborough Football ground on 15th APr*4
          1989 my technical staff were responsible for the initial installation and
          subsequent maintenance of the fixed radio communications equipment at the
          ground. The equipment consists of a Pye Westminster Mobile radio which has
          been adapted as a fixed base station. It is referred to as a W15U. The
          scheme operates off an aerial installation on one of the floodlight gantries
          inside the ground. It is a UHF radio scheme. The radio system is capable of
          being used in either 'talk-thro’ or ’non talk-thro' mode.   When operated in
          the 'talk-thro’ mode the operator’s access to the scheme will be overridden by
          the operation of a personal radio.

           I have been made aware that during the afternoon of 15th April 1989 the radio
           equipment did not appear to operate satisfactorily. My information is that
           messages from the control position were broken. I am also advised that the
           scheme was being operated on 'talk-thro' and that the control position was
           using the 'tulip' microphone for transmissions.

           Following the problems encountered with the permanent installations I am aware
           that a stand-by set of a similar kind was substituted and that this was also
           operated on 'talk-thro' but using a personal radio to gain access to the
           scheme rather than the base station microphone.

           On Friday 5th May 1989 one of my technicians from the Directorate Workshop at
           Sheffield was able to carry’ out tests on both the fixed and stand-by equipment
           at the ground including the aerial installation and some scheme coverage. I
           am aware that the equipment met the technical specification and worked
           satisfactorily.
: R0 ; 1       D   OF   TELS   Nf l O   KIFPflX    6 .2 1 .1 9 3 9   9:50           P.




           I am unable to give any explanation why the difficulties arose with the
           equipment on the 15th April 1989. Using the scheme in 'talk»thro* mode for a
           continuous period should not make the equipment more vulnerable to technical
           failure. It has been suggested that prolonged use of equipment could lead to
           overheating which may relate to the type of problem encountered on the day. I
           consider this to be very unlikely. The equipment can be used in more extreme
           environments than those at the ground, without detriment. In its original
           specification the W15U was designed for use in police vehicle sand is carried
           in the confines of the boot, where it can be subjected to extreme changes of
           temperature throughout the year.

           K
        method of overcoming the disadvantages of 1talk•*thro' on the W15U, when the
      operator loses the control facility by being overridden is to install the type
     of fixed UHF base station which in general use for normal Sub-Divisional
  ^fcolicing.      With this arrangement 'talk-thro' can be permanently on but when
  ^ R x e operator selects the transmit mode        this    automatically   overrides
      'talk-thro' and the controller retains priority. This would allow advantages
      of 'talk-thro' for information flow whilst retaining the command position.

           From enquiries within the Directorate of Telecommunications I am aware that in
           the Greater Manchester Police area this type of fixed base station arrangement
           is in use. However, I am also advised that in other parts of the country,
           including Merseyside Police area, the W15U arrangement is utilised. In both
           police areas mentioned I am also told that permanent 'talk-thro' is not used.

           I am not aware of any Directorate of Telecommunications recommendation
           relating to the number of personal radios to be used on one base station
           scheme. It is clearly a police operational judgement.
