                                                                                                           P A S IS    *
MAR —03-97 17: B* FROM • BHUCE CAMPBELL CO
                                                                                                   (W                 p , cl   ®
                                   The Hillsborough P ilaster: April 1989.


                                                   Opinion


        Introduction

        1      I am naked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
               appropriate legal course to follow in the light o f three areas of fresh evidence that
               have come to tight recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
               Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stadium In Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
               cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, held in April and May 1990,
               und later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts of accidental death
               were recorded on the victims.

    ^   2      A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by tux o f the
               bereaved Cumilies, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest The main
               complaints o f these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
               presented in the Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached ax Annex A. In
               summary form, those main complaints were,

               2.1     The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-off point in time of 3.15, which had the
                       effect o f excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the “Mtyor
                       Disaster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                       emergency services promptly.

               2.2     The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                       of the 95; he failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                       o f the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                       medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to S. 12, and 7)

               2.3     The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages of his
                       summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                       Liverpool supporters were under the influence o f drink. The report by Lord
                       Taylor, which was seveioly critical of the police, had ruled out the
                       consumption of alcohol as a cause of the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

               2.4     The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in bis
                       sclcction of evidence and treatment o f witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

               2.5     The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial tank to perform, in
                       directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                       and unlawful killing.




                                                       i
MAR-03-87 17.B2 FROM. BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                           ID*




       3    The inquest verdicts were not quashed. The judgment of toe Courtis at A n n a b .
            The Court was strongly influenced by tho fact that the lawyers originally instructed
            for the families had acquiesced in many o f the Coroner*! decisions (eg page 7), that
            the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have nude u difference, or had
            been properly excluded (pages 14> 36); that Ac directions o f the Coroner to the jury
            wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
            40).

       4    Since 1993, as f am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
            Family Support Group as a whole, H byc continued to believe with deep conviction
            that the legal system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
            circumstances of death. After the 1993 judicial nview it seemed to me that the
            disaster would probably rccede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
            has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
            professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police officers
            at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
            course o f justice at the inquest. None o f the following matters were made known at
            the inquest.

       5   The evidence of Roaer Houldsworth. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth,
           dated 25°' November 1996, attaching a statement o f May 1989 and supporting
           documents, and commenting on evidence given at the inquest (Annex CV Contrary to
           the evidence presented, no camcras were faulty; die cameras gave clear pictures o f die
           l.eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
           tapes and Mr Mouldsworth's evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
           officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at large in
           Dcccmbur 1996 when Granada Television televised » drama-documentary on the
           d twister, (The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldsworlh is at Anncv n i

      6    The new videotape evidence. Very recently, a member o f the Family Support group
            has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to b« those, or copies of
            those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies am enclosed. 1am
            told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
            South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
            inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
           Group in the presence of Mr Houldsworth, Mr Philip Hammond o f the Family
            Support Group, and Ann Adlington o f my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
           that policc officers were lying, and that the pictures of all relevant areas of the ground
           were dear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
           Mr Houldsworth in bis evidence of November 1996. Events in the relevant area may
           not, foi various reasons, have been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm. but
           they were ctcarly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

      7    1 have also been shown a copy o f what was, I am toid, presented to the jury. It is a
           very badly duplicated and blurred picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
           pens shortly after 3 pm, in which It is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The

                                                   2
MAR-B3-87 17.03 FROM• BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                              ID*                                    PACE   4




                 tape has bad interference in the picture. It appears that this tape is a copy at several
                 generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                 Ihe videotape of which the now evidence is a much better copy, but it presonts only
                 events after 3 pm.

           *    The importance of the new cviden^. The question whether the police could and did
                 notice ihc pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
                 page 125, the Coroner directed the jury (AQOBUS);

                “The assessment o f the terraces" is a “very important factor" and "maybe the single
                most important factor in the whole inquest1’. “The total sum o f ovidence from the
                Control Room, that Is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Biehaid was
                that none of them noticcd any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”.

        9       None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the cote issue In the
                case in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner as the critical time. I
                believe that the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
                the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

       10      The evidence of Dr Ed Walker in February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came lo
                light; see Annex I • • The evidence at the inquest to which it must be enntmyffd
               appear* at AflPfixG- The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
               "sinus rhythm and cardiac output” alter arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
               Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
               criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
               points out in his letter of 7* February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
               Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3"» May 1989 by Dr Wardiope. who was
               closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15* June 19*9 to
               stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
               at the inquest.

       11      It is difficult to exaggerate the significance o f the concealment of Dr Walker's
               evidence. At page 10 o f the Divisional Court’s judgment o f November 1993 the
               Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
               the evidcncc disclosod the same patten, o f rapid unconsciousness leading lo rapid
               death. Or Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
               revealing remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter o f 3* May 1989 “Almost
               immediately the department was flooded with large numbers o f acutely ill patients
               requiring urgent resuscitation”. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
               structured by the Coroner on an utterly different Actual assumption.

       ^       i hc previous invaligatiQB- One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
               in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
               exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
               questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
               Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.


                                                       3
-9? 17 <04 PROM > BRUCE CAMPBELL. CO                       ID>                                     PAOE




  12    Conclusion- In my view these new pieces of evidence c«ll for a full police enquiry or
        public inquiry. Exhibits such as the tape* must be secured and subjected to forensic
        analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
        production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
        th i* opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
        Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a full copy to the Home Secretary,
        who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

  13    1hope that the Director might feci able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
        two or three o f the Family Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this
        advicc.




 3 Raymond Building*
 Cray’s Inn
 London WC1


 3rd March IV97.                                                    Alun Jones QC
