      Ms P Ransford                          cc   Mr Storr
      FI Division                  ___            Mr Yates
      Extn 3241                                   HMCIC
      16 June 1989                                Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Malone-Lee
                                                  Mr Addison
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Sandiford
                                                  Mr Whalley
                                                  Mr Archer
                                                  Mr Durbin
Miss Nicholson


HILLSBOROUGH POLICE INVESTIGATION COSTS


Lord Ferrers asked for an expansion of the draft reply to
Councillor Ablett of West Midlands Police Authority (provided
with Mr Addison's note of 13 June to Ms Adams) to cover the
points which West Midlands raised about how the investigation
came to be set up.

2.   I attach an amended draft reply. This is based on the
account given by Sir Richard Barratt in his note of 12 June (copy
attached). I have kept the account deliberately brief in the
letter as it could otherwise give rise to argument from West
Midlands, whose Chief Constable seems to have built up a
different interpretation of events.
3.   I have also not been specific about the offer we propose to
make South Yorkshire since we have not yet received the Chief
Secretary's view on the special payment and also not yet
disclosed anything to South Yorkshire. I have however indicated
that the point that some of the costs may arise directly from
the Taylor enquiry itself is well taken.

4.   No one has attempted to precisely apportion the different
aspects of the police investigation. I doubt whether West
Midlands could do this in terms of police man hours, even if they
tried. But it is reasonable to suppose that an investigation by
350 officers would not have been required to look into the
factual questions about safety of sports grounds on which Lord
Justice Taylor asked for police advice. The interviewing of
witnesses could be serving a number of purposes: the
investigation into policing, the Taylor enquiry, preparation for
coroners' inquests and dealing with any eventual claims for
compensation or complaints against the police; apart from Taylor,
these are matters for the South Yorkshire Police.

5.   The share of costs which the special payment plus normal
police grant would cover - about 75% if costs reach £4 million as
predicted - should therefore provide more than adequate cover for
the aspects which pertain to the Taylor enquiry.
6.   The draft reply promises West Midlands a further letter
after the meeting with South Yorkshire.




                                         PoJlr / 2 ]a -J!
                                       P RANSFORD
                                                     FILE NUMBER

DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE

 TO                                  ENCLOSURES          COPIES TO BE SENT TO
  Councillor D M Ablett
  Chairman to the West
   Midlands Police Authox ity
  Council House
  Dudley
  DY1 1HF




       (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                        (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                                                         Lord Ferrers
                       LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY
                                                             (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                         Thank you for your letter of 7 June about the cost of the
                         investigation by the West Midlands police into the
                         Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy which we discussed at our
                         meeting on 25 May.

                         I fully appreciate the position of your police authority
                         and can reaffirm that, as I said at our recent meeting,
                         we fully accept that the costs of the police
                         investigation should not fall to your police authority.
                         I also explained that we shall shortly be meeting
                         representatives of South Yorkshire Police Authority, at
                        the request of whose Chief Constable the investigation
                        was instigated, in order to discuss how the costs should
                        be met.


                        As you know, Mr Addison has been in correspondence with
                        Mr Barnfield, the solicitor to your authority, about the
                        issues which you raised at your meeting with me. I




       H.O. EST. 112
stat                                                                        35688 9.85 XNW
enclose for your information a copy of his most recent
letter to Hr Bamfield, which deals with those issues.

I promised at the meeting to come back to you on the
points you raised about how the investigation was
established and whether it was being conducted for the
South Yorkshire Police or the Home Office. The Chief
Inspector of Constabulary has confirmed that, in
approaching Mr Dear about the police investigation, he
was acting on behalf of Mr Wright, the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire. It was from Mr Wright that the
initiative for an independent outside investigation
initially came.


The decision to place the results of the investigation
also at the service of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry
does not change the fact that a substantial part of it
deals with matters which are the concern of the South
Yorkshire police. I appreciate that there is an element
of the investigation which has been directed towards
questions which are the concern of the enquiry. This is
an aspect which I shall have very much in mind in my
forthcoming discussion with South Yorkshire about the
costs.


I am very anxious to resolve the costs issue and hope
that we can do so when I meet members of South Yorkshire
Police Authority on 20 June. I will write to you again
as soon as possible after that meeting has taken place.
