INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt H on Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370

John Carlisle Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON
SW1A OAA

                                                     12 May 1989
                                            Date




o)e_p-r   m C*vU-u
Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
10 M a y . He has noted your request that he hear evidence from a
Company in your constituency who are intending to build a massive
all seater stadium. He would find it convenient if the company
could send him a submission in writing setting out in detail what
their proposals entail. Perhaps you could be kind enough to ask
them whether they would like to do this.     If they can then send
the material to me at this address, I will show it to Lord
Justice Taylor.                           ^
                                           /




                                                   RlMWUOJU^
                                        R M WHALLEY
                                        Secretary to the Inquiry
 »
                                  From John Carlisle, MP
111 MAY 1989




                                H O U SE OF C O M M O N S
                                   L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                                        01- 219 4571



         10 May 1989

         Lord Justice Taylor
         Home Office
         50 Queen Anne's Gate
         London SW1H 9AT




         Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

         As you may know, I am Chairman of the Conservative Backbench Sports
         Committee and have always taken a keen interest in football. I have
         served as Vice-Chairman of the All Party Football Committee in this
         place and am a life-long supporter of Luton Town Football Club. I
         also hope to be closely involved in the Football Spectators Bill
         which has my full support.

         I note that your Inquiry is to be wide-ranging, and write to request
         that you hear evidence from a company in my constituency who are
         intending to build a massive all-seater stadium. You will be aware
         of the Home Secretary's recent remarks and the general welcome given
         to the idea that such stadia be built throughout the country. Messrs
         Brookmount PLC have already submitted application for permission to
         pursue this project which would occupy a 300 acre site in the heart
         of my constituency and provide a 90,000 seat stadium, full hotel and
         conference facilities, as well as substantial retail outlets. The
         site is alongside the Ml motorway and the Bedford-St Pancras railway
         line.

         The company have long experience in the development of such stadia
         and I believe that their project would be of some use to you in the
         evidence that will be brought before you over the next few weeks. I
         would, therefore, be interested to hear as to whether you believe
         such witness could be acceptable and, assuming an affirmative reply,
         could arrange that their representatives make their presentation at a
         mutually convenient date.

         I look forward to hearing from you.

                                     Yours sincerely,

                                        r
                                   H (%h G>\il&te
                                 Dictated by John Carlisle
                                  & signed in his absence
