            THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            Queen Anne’s Chambers
            28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
            Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3109
                        Switchboard 01-210 3000
            Telex 917564       GTN 210
            Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
            DX No. 2318 Victoria

R M Whalley Esq                                             Please quote
F.6 Division                                                 L89/2117/DB
Home Office                                                 Your reference
          W. /
                                                            Date
                                                             9 Mav 1989




SALMON LETTERS TO SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
AND SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


I now enclose for information copies of the th ree "Salmon letters" which have so far
been drafted by Andrew Collins and which I have now served on the relevant parties'
solicitors. As you will be aw are, Lord Justice Taylor announced a t the Preliminary
Meeting on 15 April th a t parties the subject of criticism would be informed in advance
of the allegations against them .

On the basis of the evidence seen so far, Counsel consider th a t these three le tte rs a re
w arranted.

As the evident"??picture builds up, other such le tte rs may follow.
                                                               r\a
The practice of issuing such le tte rs is of course founded on a e ^ a l justice and was
recommended by Lord Justice Salmon in his Report of 1966 on Tribunals of Inquiry.




                                            V******


                                         D BRUMMELL
              THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
              Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
              Telephones  Direct Line  01-210  3109
                          Switchboard 01-210 3000
              Telex 917564       GTN 210
              Fax No. 01 222 6006 - 210-3488
              DX No. 2318 Victoria

 Messrs Hammond Suddards
 Solicitors                                                  Please quote
                                                               L89/2117/DB
 Empire House                                                Your reference
 10 Piccadilly
                                                              PCM/PAB
 BRADFORD BD1 3LR                                            Date
                                                              9 May 1989



                                     BY FAX AND LETTER




 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


 y™ Z l[\ +T Cal1           the pre-inquiry meeting on April 28th Lord Justice Taylor
 indicated th a t any body against whom any allegation was to be made would be informed
 ol it and the substance of the evidence supporting it.

  You will appreciate th a t th e task of assembling the evidence for the Inquiry is a
  formidable one. And s tatem e n ts a re still being taken. However, it seemed right to let
  you have what must be a preliminary indication of criticism s which may be levelled at
   he South Yorksh.re Police as soon as possible before th e commencem ent of the
  Inquiry.  We suspect th a t you a re already aware of the general thrust of criticisms
( which have been made and th a t what is set out in this le tte r will be no surprise to you.

The following a re the main general criticism s which so far appear from the evidence
available to us:-                                                               ■

1 .    Failure to take any adequate steps to control supporters so th a t the crush, which
       built up from about 2.20 to 2.30pm outside the Leppings Lane en tran ce to the
       ground and which led to the decision to open ' C gate because of a perceived
       danger to life, did not occur. In particular, th e re were not proper arrangem ents
       to check supporters a t a far enough distance from the ground and insufficient
       officers were available to control the crowd outside the turnstiles.         Having
       regard to the limited space available, the disposition of mounted police may not
       have been of any use and may have constituted a positive danger. It should
       have been anticipated th a t many supporters would arrive shortly before kick-off
       and th a t some would not have tickets. Steps should have been taken to stop
       non-ticket holders getting near the ground and adding to the congestion
     2   .       Failure by officers outside to liaise adequately with those inside the ground and
                 vice versa. There were in addition problems with radio communications and the
                 noise of the crowd rendered such tannoy or loudspeaker a n n o u n c e m e n t (?f anvl
                as were made ineffective. When it was decided th a t a g a te or gates must be
                opened to relieve pressure outside (and the decision to open gates may weU L v e
                     t th neCGSSary ° ne | n the circumstances), th e re were no s?eps taken to ensure
                th a t there was any police or steward presence to prevent those entering going to
                the tunnel which led onto the already overcrowded Pens 3 and 4. It ought to
                have been realised th a t without such presence all those coming in the gates
                  ere like y to go down the tunnel because of inadequacy of signing and because
                the tunnel was the only visible way to the terracing.                           Because
 3.
                N° u j ef S ^ ere utaken to monitor properly the s ta te of Pens 3 and 4. Officers
                ought to have been stationed in the tunnel and/or a t the rear of the pens and
                should in conjunction with those a t the front have ensured th a t the pens did not
                iteC: r        *ul1/ [t was known th a t th ere was likely to be a full house and th at
                thJ f GSSen         t0 ensure an even distribution of spectato rs in all the pens on
                s m a l l e r e n r ; fX g Urou7d.aS ^                 ^        ^          ‘° giVe U v e rP °°1


               Penesn 33Ptand
               Pens        n d 44 btook     t0 ?e
                                   f o S nftoo longCrU
                                                     toShed
                                                         re a ca"d
                                                                t tot0what
                                                                       loSewas
                                                                           theirhappening.
                                                                                  lives’ the offlcers in fr°"t
                                                                                             They seemed       of m
                                                                                                            to be UaA
                                                                                                                    \
                hinking in term s of prevention of disorder and pitch invasion rath er than safety ' '
               nlpnr e hWwShn° Pr° Pwr guidance §iven to the individual officers because no proper
               plans had been made to deal with overcrowding in the pens. The gates S Z
               f n V ii f       Were n0t ° Pened i n . tim e and’ when they were, officers w e rf / j
               thpv3 h        t0 w>reVie ut people &ettir,g o u t- O fficers seemed not to know what i f /
               they should do and, although many individual officers showed g re a t presence of
               was hann      tl0n t0 duty’ valuable minutes went by before the nature of what
               was happening was appreciated.
5.             There were inadequate contingency plans to deal with the sort of emergency
               w ich arose. In particular, the emergency services may not have been called as
               expeditiously as they should have been and insufficient arrangem ents had been
               made to enable them to ga.n access to the ground. Help for the .njured „ a s „o^
               wh"a°t had
               what   h‘nj happened
                           h      7 orUSe
                                        to Was made assistance.
                                           organise  0f the tannoy                      to “ p|ain « sp ectators

6.
              ablee to h dne r S   h n°^ ChanCe th a t a11 those t r Ving to en ter the ground would be
              k t k off ^           b y . 3pm’ consideration should have been given to deferring the
              kick-off a t a much earlier stage. It seems th a t it was not until about 2.55 th a t
              this step was considered and by then it was thought to be too late because the
              team s were coming out.                  It should have been clear much earlier th a t the
              k ic k - o f f m u st be p o s tp o n e d and t h a t a d e q u a t e s te p s w e re ta k e n to g iv e
              assurance to those trying to get in th a t th ere was a postponement. This might
              h a v e r e lie v e d t h e p r e s s u r e and o b v i a te d th e n e ed to open th e g a t e s .


f S          ^ . i ' S   S   T   o S      i“          „w
                                                       ow cohf s s : resu,t in c r i t ‘cisms                    «




                                                                   &   —   jl La -

                                               DAVID BRUMMELL
                                           Assistant Treasury Solicitor

                                                           2   .
                  THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                 Queen Anne’s Chambers
                 28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
                 Telephones Direct Line 01-210 2109
                             Switchboard 01-210 3000
                 Telex 917564       GTN 210
                 Fax No. 01 222 6006 - 210-3488
                 DX No. 2318 Victoria

    Messrs Keeble Hawsons
    7 St Jam es Row                                              Please quote
                                                                 L89/2117
    Sheffield
                                                                 Your reference
    SI 1XA
                                                                Date
    For the a tte n tio n of Miss Gregory/Miss Ayre             9 May 1989



                                       BY FAX AND LETTER




 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


 You will recall th a t a t th e pre-inquiry meeting on 28th April Lord Justice Taylor
 indicated th a t any body against whom any allegation was to be made would be
 informed of it and the substance of the evidence supporting it

  You will a ppreciate th a t the task of assembling the evidence for the Inquiry is a
  formidable one and s tatem e n ts a re still being taken. However, it seemed right to let
  you have what must be a preliminary indication of criticism s which may be levelled at
  the City Council, as the local authority responsible for the safety c ertific a te s under
  the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, as soon as possible before the commencement
! of the Inquiry.

 The following a re the main criticism s which so far appear from the evidence available:-

 1.      The pens on the te rra c e s a t the Leppings Lane end of the ground constituted a
          potential danger if crowded. The means of egress onto the pitch were
          inadequate and you should have insisted th a t th e re were more gates, th a t they
          were properly signed, th a t there were means of access laterally between the
          pens, again properly marked, and th a t all gangways were properly marked.

2.       The directional signs were inadequate, so th a t those entering were necessarily
          channelled to the tunnel leading to the central two pens.

3.       The crush barriers within the pens were not properly positioned and one a t least
         was of insufficient strength.

4   .    The tunnel giving access to the te rra c e was not of a constant gradient but
         sloped steeply a t the te rra c e end: this was potentially hazardous if a large
         crowd cam e down the tunnel.

                                                  1.
5   .
        grourTd! 11 a t tHe t u m s t il e s was not a d e quate to prevent persons clim bing into the

6.      Access by ambulances or fire engines to the playing area and the surround was
        was Insu fficien t^1”0       Furtherm ore, the provision of first-aid equipment


course ^                                   ° f Critl° Sm ^          ^                We       °f




                                                                _b Cl




                                      DAVID BRUMMELL
                                  Assistant Treasury Solicitor
