                                                                  Cc             £jtus-As~JA?a Offu
                                                     K
                   r &^
                               THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                        Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS
       DX 123242 St James’s Park      Fax: 0207 210 3066     Switchboard 0207 210 3000 (GTN 210)

                               E-mail: dbrummell@treasury-solicitor.gov.uk                    0 7 DEC 1999
                                       Direct Line: 0207 210
D Brummell - Head o f Litigation
                                                                                       C <\ 'V'lrt w   fs\. ^
Miss Juliet Wheldon CB QC                             Please quote:                    ^
Legal Adviser                                                                                      /A ^
Home Office                                          Your reference:                                   b\(~i
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                      Date:                    6 December 1999




         'X j L a M t

HILLSBOROUGH PUBLIC INQUIRY - PRIVATE PROSECUTION OF
DAVID DUCKENFIELD

I refer to my letter of 18 November. I now enclose a copy of the witness statement
dated 3 December, which I have provided to Mr Duckenfield's solicitors. Similar
statements have been provided by Mr Justice Collins and Peter Whitehurst.

Mr Duckenfield's solicitors will be submitting these statements as evidence in
support of their application challenging the admissibility in the criminal trial of the
evidence given by Mr Duckenfield to the Hillsborough Inquiry. This application
is to be heard at Leeds Crown Court on 20 and 21 December. Mr Duckenfield's
solicitors do not propose to call me to give evidence.

However, it is possible that the Hillsborough Family Support Group, who are
bringing the private prosecution, will wish to call me for cross-examination, in
which case I may be required to attend the hearing for this purpose on 21
December. I will let you know if this happens.

A copy of this letter with its enclosure goes to Stephen Parkinson.




DAVID BRUMMELL
                                  W ITNESS STATEMENT


              (CJ ACT 1967, S 9 MC ACT 1980, S 102, MC RULES 1981, R 70)


STATEMENT OF:              DAVID BRUM MELL


AGE:                       O V ER 21


OCCUPATION:                HEAD      OF    LITIGATION         DIVISION      OF    TREASURY

                           SO L IC IT O R ’S DEPARTMENT




This statement (consisting o f [5] pages each signed by me) is true to the best o f my
knowledge and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable
to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not
believe to be true.


Dated the              day of                            1999.


Signature:




1.   I am a Senior Civil Servant and am Head of the Litigation Division o f the Treasury
     Solicitor’s Department.    I have worked in the Treasury Solicitor’s Department since
       1984. This department provides a range of legal advisory and litigation services to a
     number o f Government departments and other public authorities and is currently
     involved in a number o f Public Inquiries.




Signature:

Signature witnessed by:


P:\24332\1\D0059.0
      In April 1989 I was appointed as the solicitor to the Public Inquiry into the Hillsborough
      Disaster. Mr Peter Whitehurst, an Assistant Treasury Solicitor, was appointed to assist
      me. We were a team of about three lawyers and other staff. Mr Andrew Collins QC
      was appointed as Counsel to the Inquiry and was assisted by two junior Counsel, Alan
     Goldsack and Bernard Phillips. The Treasury Solicitors team appointed to assist the
      Inquiry was initially based in London but we later set up an office in Sheffield which is
      where the Inquiry was to be held.


3.   On 28th April 1989 Lord Justice Taylor, the Judge appointed to convene the Inquiry,
     held a preliminary meeting at Sheffield Town Hall at which I was present.             Oral
      applications from any party wishing to be represented at the Inquiry were heard. I recall
     that William Woodward QC requested and was granted representation for South
     Yorkshire Police. I have been shown a copy of the transcript of the meeting on 28th
     April 1989 which confirms this. I do not recall any request for separate representation
      for any individual police officers. It was my understanding at that time, and throughout
      the course of the Inquiry, that Mr Woodward QC, instructed by Hammond Suddards,
     represented the interests of South Yorkshire Police both as a Force and its individual
     officers. I do not recall any consideration being given by the Inquiry team to separate
     representation for individual officers.


4.   Within a few days o f the Hillsborough disaster taking place on 15 April 1989, West
      Midlands Police were appointed to investigate it.       It was their task to collect the
      evidence which would then be made available to us as solicitors to the Inquiry. We
      would then read through all the material produced by them in order to decide what
      material was relevant and should be produced to the Inquiry. There were box loads of
      this material, much of it being witness statements. These statements and other material
      received from the West Midlands Police were delivered to us within a few days of the
      statements being taken from the witnesses. I do not believe that we had received all the
      statements and material by the time that the Inquiry began. I recall further statements
      and material being delivered to us by the West Midlands Police when the Inquiry was


Signature:                 — *-</L



Signature witnessed by:

                                               2
P:\24332\1\D0059.0
     already underway.      Although the initial review of the material produced by West
     Midlands Police was carried out by the Treasury Solicitors team, we then referred
     potentially important statements and material to our leading Counsel and junior Counsel
     for their assessment as to what should be produced to the Inquiry.


5.   All the material submitted to the Inquiry for Lord Justice Taylor and his assessors to see
     would have been copied and distributed to all interested parties for whom representation
     had been granted. A list o f the material which was distributed to interested parties was
     maintained and a note was made confirming such distribution. My recollection is that
     material was distributed regularly from the Inquiry office to interested parties. As it was
     my impression that Hammond Suddards were acting for South Yorkshire Police, not
     only for the Force itself but also for its individual officers, I believed that all statements
     and other material copied and distributed by us to Hammond Suddards would enable
     them to advise individual officers who were to give evidence to the Inquiry, as well as
     to enable them to make these documents available to those officers so that they could
     prepare for giving their evidence to the Inquiry. I would have been surprised if that was
     not the case.


6.   For the purpose of this statement I have been shown a copy o f a letter dated 9th May
      1989 and sent by the Treasury Solicitor’s office to Messrs Hammond Suddards, the
     solicitors acting for South Yorkshire Police.       The letter is signed by me and it was
     drafted under the principles determined by the Salmon Commission of 1966.                 The
     purpose o f this “Salmon letter” was to advise Messrs Hammond Suddards of the
     potential criticisms which might be levelled against the South Yorkshire Police during
     the course of the Inquiry. I recall that the Salmon letter was drafted by Andrew Collins
     QC, Leading Counsel to the Inquiry, and I believe that he and I discussed the content of
      the letter and the level of detail which was to be included in it.


7.    I have also been shown copies of similar Salmon letters, also signed by me and dated 9th
      May 1989, sent to Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper, solicitors for Sheffield Wednesday



Signature:

Signature witnessed by:

                                                 3
P:\24332\1\D0059.0
      Football Club, and to Messrs Keeble Hawsons, the solicitors for Sheffield City Council.
     There was ongoing consideration regarding the issue of further Salmon letters as the
      evidence to the Inquiry unfolded and this is evidenced by the later Salmon letter of 16th
      June 1989 written by my colleague Peter Whitehurst to Messrs Reynolds Porter
      Chamberlain, solicitors for Dr VV Eastwood, the Consultant Engineer retained by

      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.


8.   I do not recall any other Salmon letters being written, and in particular, I do not recall
      any such letters being addressed and sent to individual police officers over and above
      the letter sent to Hammond Suddards to which I have referred above.          I would have
      expected that if Hammond Suddards had felt there was any conflict of interest between
      South Yorkshire Police as a Force and any individual police officers the proper and
      appropriate course would have been to advise those individual police officers to seek
      separate representation.   I would have expected Hammond Suddards to know the
      identity of the principal police officers who would be giving evidence to the Inquiry. I
      would have expected Hammond Suddards to have copies o f the witness statements of
      any police officers who would be giving evidence to the Inquiry. I would therefore have
      expected Hammond Suddards to draw to the attention of those police officers the
      particular criticisms which I, as solicitor to the Inquiry, was raising in the Salmon letter

      of 9th May 1989 sent to them.


9.   I was not aware o f any advice given by Hammond Suddards to any individual police
      officer and I would not expect to have been aware of any such advice, as it would have
      been covered by legal and professional privilege.


10. With regard to Hammond Suddards, representing South Yorkshire Police, my concerns
      as solicitor to the Inquiry were that they were made fully aware o f the criticisms which
      would be raised against South Yorkshire Police during the course of the Inquiry, as set
      out in the Salmon letter, and that they were provided with all relevant material,




Signature:                 M ,—^
Signature witnessed by

                                                 4
 P:\24332\1\D0059.0
        including witness statements, so that they could distribute this as they thought fit to
        individual officers.


  11.   For the purposes of this statement I have been asked whether I have any recollection of
        the question of any potential criminal prosecution being raised by the Inquiry team and
        whether any consideration was given regarding the need to caution any individual
        officers before they gave evidence to the Inquiry. I cannot recall whether these matters
        were considered or not.




Signature:           Ob--- yJ*-
Signature witnessed by:


P:\24332\1\D0059.0
