              THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
              Room 1106
              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
              Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



 Mr M Groomp
                                                                Your reference:

                                                                Our reference:

                                                                Date:             December 1997




     spoke today about the scrutiny of evidence concerning the Hillsborough football stadium
 disaster which is being conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

  1     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been asked to carry out this task by the Home Secretary.
   His objective is to establish whether there is any significant evidence about the disaster
 which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the
 prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant new evidence, he
 intend to see whether it might have affected the outcome of any of the proceedings. He
 hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary early next year, and the Home Secretary
 intends to publish his report.

 3.      You may wish to see his terms of reference, and I attach a copy.

4.      As I said when we spoke, the Judge is looking at the way in which evidence was
collected from the police officers who were involved in the disaster. We have found that
officers at the scene - including of course yourself - were not asked to make witness
statements m the usual way. Instead they were asked to write down their ‘recollections’ of
what had happened. South Yorkshire police later passed these to the West Midlands police
who investigated the disaster on behalf of Lord Taylor.

  ™ Some officers recollections went to the West Midlands police investigators in a
different form from that in which the officers had originally produced them. They had
been vetted’ by people at force headquarters, who made changes to them and asked the
officers who had made them to sign them again in their altered form. We have of course
discussed the background to that with South Yorkshire police management and their legal
advisers.


 u    , ^ nC thCSe altered documents was yours. What we are curious about, as I said on
t e telephone, is the extent to which officers who were asked to sign altered recollections
were reluctant, and/or put under pressure, to do so. I wanted to make contact with you
 ecause the recollections which you produced seem to have undergone particularly extensive

C:\HILLSB0RIM AIN\CR00M E.218
  changes.

    •       attach copies which we have made of your original and amended recollections as
     ey are preserved in the South Yorkshire police archive. I am sorry that they are not *
  particularly easy to read. It may be more helpful for you to look at the enclosed summary
  which we have prepared of what seem to us to be the most important differences between ffa
  two versions of your material.

  8,      The Judge would be grateful for any observations you may want to make to him
 about the extent to which you were reluctant to sign the amended version of your
 recollections or to which you felt police management pressurised you into doing so. He
 would also be grateful for any information you can give him about other officers whom you
 believe to have been similarly placed. You told me over the telephone that you were told
 that your recollections would not be put forward to the West Midlands police unless you
 agreed to sign up to the changes in them. It would be helpful if you could confirm that in
 writing.

W      } do ° f course understand that this is a very unusual request, and that it may put you in
some difficulty (especially since we have unavoidably had to contact you via your police
force). We entirely appreciate that you may wish to seek advice before responding. But I
wonder if I might nevertheless ask you to let us have what you want to say by Friday 9
January. I am of course very willing to talk again over the phone if that would help.

 10.    When we spoke you mentioned another officer who had been reluctant to sign their
 amended material. Having looked up the details we are not sure that this particular case gets
 us very far, and the Judge does not at present propose to make direct contact as I suggested
 we might. I will be happy to tell you more over the telephone if you wish.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GROOME.218
       446 ^ ° OMF ^was at the Spion Kop end of the ground, but went to Leppings Lane
   when trouble broke out and helped carry victims over the pitch). Words in bold are deleted
   Irom the later version of his ‘recollections’.

   Deleted - An officer of Inspector Calvert’s experience of policing would have been far
   better placed at the Leppings Lane end of the ground’ (Inspector Calvert was supervising
   arrangements at the Spion Kop where a small number of Liverpool fans had to be
   accommodated with Nottingham Forest).

  Deleted - The control room seemed to have been hit by some sort of paralysis’ (after the
  balloon went up at 1502).

  Amended - It was noticeable that the only supervisory officers above the rank of
  Inspector on the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and Superintendent
^G reenw ood. Certain supervisory officers were conspicuous by their absence. It was
<^Pfter chaos’. This was changed to ‘On the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner
  and Superintendent Greenwood’. The words in bold were deleted.

  Deleted - Why, during the period 2.00 pm to 2.45 pm when the Leppings Lane end and
  the West Stand were not very full, except for the centre pen, was the kick-off not put
  back and the delay broadcast to the supporters outside. You cannot pass 30-40
  thousand through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end in one hour. At 2 pm I would
  estimate that only 12,000 were in the ground.

  Why was there a 10 per cent reduction in manpower from the previous semi-final in
  1988. 80 more police officers at the Leppings Lane end could have made a difference,
  filtering fans at the Leppings Lane end. Approximately 980 officers were used for the
  semi-final in 1988,1,000 for the semi-final in 1987 and 1,200 for the semi-final between
  Wolves and Spurs.

 The control room staff are not used to working in the pressure of a control room. The
 staff for control room duties should be from weekly leave staff or mornings, as they are
 used to making decisions under pressure.

 .... The policing at Hillsborough has become complacent over the least 2-3 years ....
 various officers working the track and in the ground had warned that things were
 starting to go wrong over this period, yet no action was taken. Manpower levels were
 steadily c u t....

 The decision to replace Chief Superintendent Mole before the semi-final needs to come
 under some scrutiny. This man had many years experience of policing big matches at
 Hillsborough.’.




 G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GROOME.218
