                                                                                                      "■*3


                         A    .     f                                                 CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                    14 !M{ isso
                              ■ r o                      ■■■■Aj *. r f l
                                                                                                             (V\ r "tc\Aes
                                                                                                             t'v\ r m ,




                                                                    lO D O W N IN G STREET
                                        *bi.*-• i              ; ; , -: r L O N p O N SW1A 2AA
    F r o m the P rincipal P riv a te ' S c c e r c n ----------------------- -- —   ■— r'




                                                                                                     23 January 1990


                                  C es^-*—


#                                             FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT: TAYLOR REPORTS

            The Prime Minister discussed with the Home Secretary this
       morning his minute of 22 January about the handling of the final
       report of Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s inquiry into the Hillsborough
       football tragedy.  The Lord President, Lord Privy Seal,
       Secretary of State for the Environment, Chief Whip (Commons), the
       Minister for Sport and Sir Robin Butler were also present.

            I would be grateful if the letter were copied only to those
       directly concerned with handling the subject concerned.


            The Home Secretary said that Lord Justice Taylor had
       concluded that he could not support the implementation of the
       National Membership Scheme under Part I of the Football
       Spectators Act 1989. Lord Justice Taylor had looked at the
       invitation to tender for the National Membership Scheme and had
       expressed grave doubts about the adequacy of the technology
       involved, the feasibility of the scheme, its impact on police
       resources and its implications for crowd control and safety.  He
       doubted whether the scheme would eliminate hooliganism inside or
       outside grounds.

            Lord Justice Taylor had put forward a variety of
      recommendations for improving crowd control and safety, including
      progressive movement towards all-seat accommodation, and the
      establishment of an independent body to supervise the
      responsibilities of local authorities for safety of sports
      grounds.   Preliminary advice was that even if the football
      membership scheme was not set up, the Football Licensing
      Authority could be appointed to exercise this responsibility, at
      least in respect of football grounds.        There were also a number
      of recominendations directed to the criminal law, such as *the
                      .of fences ■cover'ing certain types of behaviour at'
      football matches: ^ - s ^ l e lit was'likely'that these were' already
      caught toy the existingf law, the proposals could be made specific
      offences if that was thought desirable.        Similar considerations
      attached to Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations on ticket sales
      and attendance centre orders.        Together therefore there was the
      basis of a convincing package which could be put forward to
      Parliament.

                                                                                      CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL

                              -   2   -




     As to the handling of the report, the Government had all
along made clear that Part I of the Football Spectators Act was
an enabling measure and he proposed that the Government should
accept Lord Justice Taylor's advice that the National Membership
Scheme under Part I should not be implemented at least at this
stage.  He would make clear in an early statement, however, that
Part I would be left on the Statute Book and could be
implemented, at a later date if necessary.  Meanwhile the
Government would rigorously pursue those of Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations that fell to it, many of which built on action
which the Government already had in hand.

     The Secretary of State for the Environment said that Lord
Justice Taylor's report was flawed in a number o:f respects.
Nevertheless, he accepted the Home Secretary's conclusion that
it would not be possible to proceed with the National Membership
Scheme in the face of Lord Justice Taylor'S findings.
Hooliganism remained a serious problem, however, which the
forthcoming World Cup would emphasise;. A convincing alternative
package would therefore need to be assembled which picked up Lord
Justice Taylor's proposals.  It would also be highly desirable to
implement Part II of the 1989 Act on Restriction Orders before
the end of the current football season, in order that the
provisions were in force before the World Cup.   But it was right
that the enabling powers in Part I of the Act should be kept in
reserve, in case Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations proved
ineffective or advances were made in technology or otherwise
which overcame Lord Justice Taylor's objections.   In this way
pressure would be kept on the football authorities and clubs to
secure continuing improvements.

     In discussion, the following points were made:

a.   Lord Justice Taylor's report contained a number of factual
     inaccuracies and it was doubtful whether some of his
     recommendations would prove effective.   It was right that an
     opportunity should be found to expose these shortcomings,
     although the Home Secretary's statement should not itself
     dwell on them.   One means of doing this might be if an
     Adjournment Debate were mounted on the report shortly after
     its publication.   The points could also be brought out in
     response to questions about the report.

b.   It was unclear whether Lord Justice Taylor would be holding
     a press conference about his report.  There was no doubt
     that if he did so he would be questioned closely by
     journalists about a number of his findings.

c.   None of the arguments advanced by Lord Justice Taylor in
     support of his conclusion on the Football Membership Scheme
     was novel and the Government had provided answers to all of
     them in Parliament.

d.   It was desirable to continue testing of some types of
     membership scheme with individual football clubs to see if
     the criticisms made by Lord Justice Taylor could be
     overcome.  This would have to be done with the consent of
                             CONFIDENTIAL

                                 - 3 -



       the football clubs concerned.  This might be difficult to
       get in the wake of publication of the report and there could
       be demands that the costs were borne by Government.

 e.    The great majority of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
        built on work which the Government had already set in hand.
        This point should be brought out clearly in the Home
        Secretary's statement.  The report also made clear that the
        primary responsibility for improving safety and tackling
        hooligan behaviour lay on the clubs.   Implementation of Lord
        Justice Taylor's recommendations would have substantial cost
        consequences, about which clubs would be bound to protest.
        Although the report had discussed various tax concessions,
        it had made no firm recommendation for Government financial
        assistance to the clubs, and it was right that the onus for
        finding the money should be on the clubs, who were earning
        very substantial sums, for example, from the sale of rights
        to televise matches.                 >

 f.     Lord Justice Taylor had suggested that an independent body
      - should supervise the responsibilities of local authorities
         for the safety of all grounds covered by the Safety of
         Sports Grounds Act.  This recommendation would require
         legislation, however, and it was not clear that there was a
         case for implementing the recommendation immediately in
         respect of sports other than football (where section 13 of
         the 1989 Act provided the necessary powers).

 g.    The Opposition would be bound to seize on the report to try
       to embarrass the Government.    There was a risk that the
       contents of t h e report would leak if publication v/as
       delayed.  Nevertheless, the Government could be criticised
       if it rushed to publish the report without making an
       adequate number of printed versions of the report available
       through HKSO.    On balance it was preferable to hold to the
       plan to publish the report immediately sufficient properly
       printed versions of it were available.

      The Prime Minister, summing up the discussion, said that it
 was clear that Lord Justice Taylor's report was flawed in a
 number of respects.   Its deficiencies could be brought out in
 response to questions following the Home Secretary's statement.
 Nevertheless it was clear that the Government could not proceed
 with the National Membership Scheme in Part I of the Football
 Spectators Act in the face of Lord Justice Taylor's findings.
 Part I was, however, an enabling provision, as the Government had
 made clear all along, and it was right that it should be left on
 the Statute Book for use at a later date should this se6m
 desirable and be shown to be feasible.        The Home Secretary's
 statement should make clear that for the present the Government
 would proceed expeditiously with a package based on Lord Justice
 Taylor’s recommendations, m a n y ..of* which built on action the' ;"'
*So^irnment had already put in hand.        In addition to Lord Justice
 Taylor's own recommendations, the package could embrace further
 testing of membership schemes provided that clubs were willing to
 assist with this.   The Home Secretary's statement should make
 clear that the report identified that the primary responsibility
 for the present situation and for remedying it lay with the

                             CONFIDENTIAL
                          CONFIDENTIAL

                                4



clubs themselves.  The Home Secretary should make his statement
on Monday 29 January and should take advantage of an earlier
Question to acknowledge that he had received the report and to
set out the expected timetable for publishing it. He should
circulate the text of his draft statement in advance to
interested colleagues.

     I am copying this letter to Tim Sutton (Lord President's
Office), Roger Bright (Department of the Environment), Gillian
Kirton .(Lord Privy Seal's Office), Murdo Maclean (Chief Whip's
Office), Philip Stamp (Minister for Sport's Office) and to
Sir Robin Butler and Philip Mawer (Cabinet Office). I am also
copying the letter to Jim Gallagher (Scottish Office) and John
Gieve (HM Treasury).

                                           >




                                    (ANDREW TURNBULL)




Colin Walters, Esq
Home Office.




                          CONFIDENTIAL
