r
                                                                        &
                                                 fu l' /y   tv Atrtu.



    Richard Buxton Esq QC
    Law Commission
    Conquest House
    37/38 John Street
    Theobalds Road
    LONDON
    WC1N 2BQ
                                                 11 January 1990




    OFFENSIVE T-SHIRTS
    I am writing to thank you for your note of today's date and to
    say how grateful I am to you for producing this so quickly. I
    have already passed the information on to Lord Justice Taylor and
    I know that he was greatly appreciative of your efforts in
    getting it to us so speedily.

    Many thanks.




                                            JONATHAN C SWEET
                                            Hillsborough Inquiry
                                                       LAW C O M M I S S I O N
                                                      CONQUEST HOUSE
                                                      37 /3 8 J O H N S T R E E T
                                                      THEOBALDS ROAD

           ■SOMMiSSi-                                 L O N D O N W C 1 N 2B Q

                                                      TEL:   01-242   0861   EXT
Our reference            J   "                        FAX:   01-242   1885

Your r e f e r e n c e



                                                       11 January 1990


Jonathan Sweet Esq
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
The Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




Dear Sweet



                                 Offensive T-shirts

You asked yesterday afternoon for a view from the Commission on
the T-shirts that have been brought to the attention of the
Taylor enquiry.  I am dealing with this because the criminal law
team for which I am responsible has come across related questions
in the course of our (I am afraid still incomplete) work on
binding over. What follows is however only my own opinion, as in
the time available it is not possible to form a Commission view.

1 ) If someone wore at least some versions of the T-shirts in
public, and more particularly at a football match, in England
they might be in danger under section 5 of the Public Order Act
1986 (with liability to arrest under section 5(4) if they did not
cover up the shirt after warning) . Such of the inscriptions as
are merely vulgar might not be thought to be abusive or insulting
as the Act requires.    However, in respect of those inscriptions
that make offensive aspersions or threats against non-present
foreigners, one should bear in mind the view expressed in
Mastersfron v Holden [1986] 1 W.L..R 1017 at p. 1024B that it can
be insulting to a bystander to imply by engaging in certain
conduct that he finds that conduct acceptable. The wearing might
on this view be found to be insulting, by assuming assent on the
part of law-abiding bystanders, and to be likely to cause
distress to such bystanders (including police officers: DPP v
Orum [1989] 1 W.L.R. 88).
(2)   That said, however, it has also to be acknowledged that
Masterson v Holden represents a fairly bold analysis of the
concept of "insult", and it would be hazardous in practice, and
might be thought undesirable in principle, to rely on extensions
from that case in order to secure convictions.


(3)   Sellers of shirts could not be convicted on any basis
related to section 5 because

(i) in respect of liability as a principal, although a displayof
writing within a shop falls within section 5(2) of the Act,it
would be difficult to prove that the shop's customers were people
likely to be caused distress by it;
(ii) the seller could not be convicted of incitement because the
necessary element of solicitation to commit the section 5 offence
referred to in (1) above would only exist in the unlikely event
of positive exhortation to wear the shirts in particular
circumstances giving rise to that offence, and could not be
p^Kred from a mere sale;

(iii) the seller could not be convicted of aiding and abetting
before that crime had itself been committed, and in any event it
would have to be shown that when he supplied the shirt he
intended to assist in the commission of the section 5 offence
(e.g. AG v Able [1984] QB at p. 811C);

(iv) and in any event, the seller would contend that the shirts
were only intended for wear outside England & Wales, which latter
act could not involve any English crime.

(4)   Nor can the national aggressiveness that is a feature of
this case be relied on to obtain help from section 19(1 )(b) of
the 1986 Act, since although some of the shirts are, to put it
mildly, directed at a group of persons defined by nationality
(ibid., section 17), that group has to be in Great Britain, which
the unfortunate Italians who are the object of the T-shirts'
threats are not.


(5) Nor would it be possible for the police to arrest wearers of
the shirts in the UK for conduct likely to provoke a breach of
the peace, since the persons aimed at by the shirts, and thus
potentially likely to react violently (Howe11 [1982] Q.B. 416),
are not going to see them in the UK.
(6)   It is well arguable that the sale of the T-shirts, in the
circumstances described in the press cuttings, is conduct contra
bonos mores in the sense of "being wrong rather than right in the
judgment of the vast majority of comtemporary fellow citizens"
(Hughes v Holley (1986) 86 Cr. App. R. at p. 149), and thus prima
facie susceptible to being the subject of a bind-over.   However,
I would urge against any suggestion that bind-over should be
considered for actual use in this case for at least the following
reasons:
 (i) the case, although falling within the verbal terms of
 previous authorities, would not resemble any other case of which
 I am aware in which bind-overs have actually been imposed;

 (ii) that a bind-over can even be contemplated as available in a
 case where no offence has been committed against the (very wide)
 public order legislation or (so far as we are aware) against any
 statute or regulations controlling the conduct of shopkeepers
 might be thought to indicate the undesirable width of the contra
 bonos mores rule;                                         -----

 (iii) that width is a main reason why the Commission, when it
 reports on binding over, is very likely to recommend that
 binding-over should no longtfbe available at least under the
 contra bonos mores rubric;

    ) interference with the seller's business on the basis of
gpntra— bonos— mores might possibly, because of the vagueness of
the latter concept, give rise to difficulties under Article 1
(peaceful enjoyment of possessions) of the First Protocol to the
European Convention on Human Rights.


(7)   Like others who I understand to have been consulted, I
cannot therefore point to any provisions that can be used to
restrain or criminalise the sale of the T - s h i r t s .   I
instinctively share the view of, e.g., Ministers that it is
deplorable that such conduct should be possible, but before
translating that feeling into support for new legislation the
following considerations should be borne in mind:

(i) Any general provision covering this and similar conduct would
be difficult to draft without infringing the principle of
specificity of criminal legislation that is referred to in (5)
above.

 (ii)  Any ad hoc provision would have to be couched in terms of
sale of items that [?] encouraged/incited to violence.   It might
well be thought that the very recent Parliamentary review of
public order not having produced legislation that extends to this
conduct, it would be premature to introduce now further wide
powers.   In particular, mere possession of material with intent
to use it to commit, or to enable other to commit, the section 5
offence is not itself an offence, nor can it ground a charge of
attempt because the section 5 offence is summary only (Cf section
23 of the 1986 Act). I have not recently studied the White Paper
that preceded the 1 986 Act, but in the absence of any other
reasons it must be inferred that Parliament thought that a
possession offence would extend the reach of the law too far.

(iii)   The proper width of provisions controlling those who
merely provide the instruments of crime is a matter of some
controversy (and is in the early stages of consideration by the
Commission). The position of persons who sell instruments in the
course of trade is one very difficult aspect of this issue; so is
the position of those who supply instruments that could be used
for a range of purposes, many of them non-criminal. This type of
case combines both of those very difficult areas.
(iv)    Some of the problems are caused by the fact that the
offensive conduct to which the shirts relate is to take place
outside the jurisdiction.     Ad hoc legislation to restrain the
encouragement of violence that will or may take place in another
country is likely to give rise to questions about the proper
territorial reach of English criminal law. While this case might
be thought to call in question the sense of some of the present
rules, they are regarded in most quarters as being too important
to be overturned in a particular case without very pressing
^ptson.


I am afraid that none of the foregoing is likely to be of much
help to you, except perhaps to reassure you that our frequent
experience as law reformers is that desirable outcomes in
specific cases are, particularly in the public order field,
inhibited by considerations of drafting and of the proper ambit
of the criminal law. Please let me know however if we can assist
further.




Richard Buxton Q.C.
