   MB Office of H.M. Coroner
   |§ |j |||p      The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                         South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Domes                                                     (0114) 273-8721



                                                                          15 December 1997
Your ref:
Our ref:

Mr C F Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




                 Kevin Williams (deceased)
I enclose a letter addressed to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in response to your letter of 10th
December 1997.
You may recall, when we spoke on the telephone some months ago that I outlined to you
the reasons why I had endeavoured to maintain some distance from Hillsborough, other
than my statutory responsibility for the retention of the paperwork.
This does not seem to have slightest relevance to the present query (which is not in
anyway related to my previous involvement) and I have not therefore complicated the
enclosed letter any further by reference to this issue.
Might I ask that, should it become relevant, you make mention of our earlier conversation
to the Judge. Obviously I would be happy to correspond with him further. I might just add
that Ms Addlington, representing the Hillsborough Family Support Group, is fully aware of
the situation.
Kind Regards




C P Dorries
HM Coroner




                                      Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                   CJA6209A.DOC
   jHk Office of H.M. Coroner
                     The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                           South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                     (0114)273-8 721



                                                                            15 December 1997
Your ref:
Our ref:

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough: Kevin Williams (deceased)
Your letter of the 3rd December 1997 has been passed on to me by Dr Popper and I have
since received your letter of 10th December. The amendment in question was dealt with
in 1995/96, four years after Dr Popper’s retirement.
I do not know if you are familiar with the forms in question and some brief explanation of
the legal situation (as I understand it) may be appropriate.
At the conclusion of an inquest the jury are required to certify their findings by inquisition. I
enclose a copy of the inquisition in this case (marked A). The Coroner must then deliver to
the Registrar a certificate in Form 99 (marked B). You will note that Part I of this form
takes details directly from the inquisition. Parts II and III are not relevant here. The
Coroner’s signature concludes the formal part of the document.
These matters, including the medical cause of death, are the formal findings of the jury
and cannot be altered by the Coroner, then or subsequently.
However, Form 99 goes on to request certain other information. This is for statistical
collection purposes only and does not form any part of the official findings of the inquest.
It is my understanding that the Coroner is under no obligation to complete these further
sections of the form, although most choose to do so. It is in this section that the
requirement for the type of injury and part of the body injured were previously found.
The layout of Form 99 was revised around the end of 1991. The statistical collection
became Part V and, in my respectful submission, the new form made it even clearer that
this information was not part of the findings of the inquest. Further, the request for
information as to the type of injury or part of body injured no longer existed.




                                        Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                      CJA6226I.DOC
Turning now to the facts of this particular case, in May 1995 my office was contacted by
Mrs Ann Williams. This was certainly not the first time Mrs Williams had telephoned, as
before she spoke with my administrative assistant Mrs                      Mrs Williams explained
that she had never registered her son’s death because she felt that certain issues on the
Form 99 handed to her after the inquest were incorrect. She had been in contact with the
pathologist involved, Dr Slater, who had now confirmed to her that in his view the part of
the body injured should have said neck rather than chest and that the type of injury was a
compression rather than a crush. Mrs Williams told Mrs              that if only these alterations
could be made she would feel able to register her son’s death and lay the matter to rest.
Whilst I did not particularly believe this latter point to be wholly accurate, I saw little need to
be inflexible just for the sake of it.
I was therefore prepared to make enquiries about the point in issue, an alteration in purely
statistical information seemed a very small price to pay on the chance that it would give
the mother some peace of mind. I subsequently established that in fact Kevin William’s
death had been registered by this office immediately following the inquest but, it would
seem, Mrs Williams had not been aware of this.
I note from my file that I wrote to Dr Slater in June 1995 and received his written
comments on the 17th July 1995. A copy of this is enclosed (marked C). You will see that
Dr Slater fully supported Mrs William’s contention that neck was more appropriate than
chest. He was more equivocal on the question of crush/compression and I imagine that I
was influenced by the wording “as a result of crush injuries” chosen by the jury.
Accordingly I was inclined to amend chest to neck only.
It is clear from my file that before agreeing to make the amendment I also took advice from
the Registrar General (copy reply attached marked D) and I raised the issue with the Home
Office and the City Solicitor (who had represented this office at the judicial review). There
was agreement that it was in order to change the statistical information.
In writing to the solicitors whom I thought were acting for Mrs Williams in October 1995,1
pointed out that the amendment was of no legal significance and that the details held by
the Registrar in Sheffield would not be changed as they did not relate to the items in
question. Because of a change of solicitor, the amendment was not actually agreed and
made until April 1996.
I note Dr Popper’s comments in his letter to you of the 4th December. I have certainly not
read the full transcript but do still believe neck may be a more appropriate word than chest.
I am not medically qualified and was no doubt somewhat influenced by Dr Slater’s
unequivocal view in his letter of 17th July 1995. I note from the post-mortem report
(attached at e ) that there are several references to surface marks in the area of the
chin/neck and, more importantly, there are fractures at the larynx and thyroid.
I apologise for the complexity of this reply but there were a number of issues that needed
clarification. I would be pleased to assist you further should you so require.
Yours sincerely




C k uorries
HM Coroner




                                         Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                        CJA6226I.DOC
    INQUISITION
    An inquisition taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen

                                          inthe West District                         of
                                                                                           51

                                                                                                     A
    At   Coroners Court                                                                       South Yorkshire
    On the          18th        day of      April         19                               89
    [Andby adjournment on various dates up to and including
    ©mJfcK                                day of       IMa^O-K                        19 91     ]
    [Beforeand by] H me                    STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER
    One ofHer Majesty'scoronersfor             South Yorkshire (West) District

    [and theundermentionedjurors] touching on thedeath of
                                                                 KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS

  The following matters are found
                                                                  KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS
1 Name ofdeceased

2    juryordiseasecausingdeath: f2]
                                             1(a) Traumatic Asphyxia

J Time, placeand circumstances atorinwhich injurywas sustained: [3]
    Q\e_<d On W\e           Rpn\                                                                      result
    o f c m s w i v o j - S <-A^'raiv^\ec\                                             c \\r     l-\U\sbcrot^
                             ^ c o L i o d         (        v S W a f f l e A d .__________________________
4 Conclusion ofthejury/coronerastothedeath: [4]



5 Particularsforthetimebeingrequiredby theRegistration Acts tobe registeredconcerning thedeath
    a Date and placeofbirth                                    e Date and placeofdeath 15.4.89
      ?7 S .1Q7?          JS-Qulhport                            Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffi Id.
    b Name and surname ofdeceased                              f Occupation and usualaddress Schoolboy son of
     KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS                                                           a welder and Anne
                                                                 Elizabeth Williams. S t e p s o n o f
                                                                 James Stephen Williams an Engineer.
    c Sex        Male
    d Maiden surname ofawoman who has married                   Formby,       s-\
                                                                Mersevs ide ./ /
                                                               Signatureofcorone/ i

    Signatureofjurors:




                                                                                                       Please turnover
NOTI
M odify4hisls necessary according to whether the
inquest is held with or without a jury or partly
with and partly without a jury.

In the case of a death from natural causes or from
industrial disease, want of attention at birth, chronic
alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
cause of death and morbid conditions (if any) giving                    Date             19
rise to the immediate cause of death.

Omit this if the cause of death is one to which
Note 2 applies.

a Where the cause of death is one to which Note 2
  applies, it is suggested that one of the following
  forms be adopted:
   C.D. died from naturalcauses.
                                                                        Re
   C.D. died from theindustrialdiseaseof
   C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
   on drugs.
   C.D. died from want ofattentionatbirth.
   (Inany oftheabove cases,butinno other,itis
   suggested thatthefollowingwords may, where
   appropriate,be added:
   "andthecauseofdeathwas aggravatedby lackof                           Cause of death
   care/self-neglect').

b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
  infanticide or stillbirth, it is suggested that one
  of the following forms be adopted:

   C.D. killedhimself/herself(whilstthebalanceof
   his/hermind was disturbed).
   C.D. diedas theresultofan attempted/self­
   inducedabortion.                                                     Verdict
   C.D. diedas theresultofan accident/misadventure.
   C.D. was killedlawfully.

   Open verdict,namely, theevidencedidnotfullyor
   furtherdisclose themeans whereby thecauseofdeath
   arose.
c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
  it is suggested that the following form be adopted.

  C.D. was killedunlawfully.
d In the case of a stillbirth insert 'stillbirth* and do not
  complete the remainder of the form.




Price £4.00 for 25 copies or £14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)

ISBN 011 340764 5
Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                                                                                                      51
                                                                                                     CORONER’S COPY


                                                             CORONER’S CERTIFICATE AFTER INQUEST
                                     furnished under section 23 (1) of th e B irths and Deaths Registration A ct 1953

     *PM


To the registrar of births and^deaths for the sub-district of .................................................................................................................................. ................

I certify that at an inqup^t/lield o r ...................................                                                                  at     .......P.Qr.9I).®X.!.S...QQU.r.lr.......................................

in the .......................................................................................       of      S h e f f i e l d ....................................................   *$the jury found as follow s

PART I DECEASED PERSON (Not still-born - see separate Form 99A)____________________ _______________
1. Date and                               F i f t e e n t h April 1989,
    place of death                                                      r                        ’
                                          H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l Ground, S h e f f i e l d

2. Name and                                                                                                                                                                   3. Sex
   suirvarne                                                                                                                                                                               'Male/PT&rn-ateX
                                                                                                                                                                               4. Maiden surname of
                                           Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS                                                                                                                  woman who has married


       ate and                                                                                            6. occu pa tion          Schoolboy, son of |______________ Welder,
     place of
     birth                Twenty-Seventh May 1973                                                            address3              and Anne E l i z a b e t h W illiams, 's^ p c n n ■
                                                                                                                                    o f -J amC-s "Stofihe ri' Wil-l i 'aiDCt as -a agin sc
                          Southport                                                                                                “St
                                                                                                                                         Foruiby,
                                                                                                                                         Merseyside
     Cause of death

                                           1 (a)            Traumatic Asphyxia.




*PART II. The inquest was adjourned on                                                                                       \ 'under Section 7 of the Visiting Forces Act, 1952.
                                                                                                                             < ‘ and has not been resumed.

    ''ART III. BURIAL/CREMATION

O        e given        *an O rder fo r-l& i& fl/a C ertificate E for Cremation dated                                  .......1 8 tl3 ...A p r.1 .1 ...1 9 8 > L .... to . . i i l r . S . . W i . l . l . i a i i l S .

of (address) ..........                                                                     Formby, Merseyside                                        / / '

    5,     ..........M        1     . . A       ?     : /

H.M. Coroner for                          South Y o rk s h ire (West)
PART IV. ACCIDENT OR MISADVENTURE (including deaths from neglect or from anaesthetics)

1.    Place where accident o c c u rre d :f                                           4. If m otor vehicle accident, deceased w as:f
      0. Home                             5.   Street or highway                            0. Driver of m otor vehicle        5. Rider of anim al;
      1. Farm                             6.   Public building                                 other than m otor cycle            occupant of anim al-
      2. Mine or quarry                   7.   Resident institution                         1. Passenger in m otor                drawn vehicle
         Industrial place or premises     8.   O ther specified place                          vehicle other than              6. Pedal cyclist
        1 Place of recreation o r sport   9.   Place not specified                             m otor cycle                    7. Pedestrian
                                                                                            2. M otor cyclist                  8. O ther specified person
                                                                                            3. Passenger on m otor cycle       9. Unspecified person
2. To be com pleted for all persons aged 16 and over                                        4. O ccupant of tram car
      When injury was received deceased w asf
      1. On way to, o r from work
      2. At work
     (3? Elsewhere
                                                                                      5. Type of injury
3. Details of how accident happened:                                                        Crush
      Sustaine d crus h i n j u r i e s a t f o o t b a l l                            6. Parts of body injured:
      ground,
                                                                                            ChedSt
                                                                                       7. Interval between in ju ry and d e a th f
                                                                                        0     Less than one year                      2.One year o r more


PA... V. MARITAL CONDITION, etc
All persons                                    Single   3 . Widowed                     A ll m arried
                                                                                                               Date of birth
aged 16 and o v e rt                      2.    Married   4. Divorced
                                                                                        persons                of surviving spouse

                                                           FOR COMPLETION BY THE CORONER




 Certificate sent to registrar on                            ....................   *by post/otherwise than by post

                                                             fP lease ring appropriate numbers                                   FORM 99(REV) (COPY)
'Delete as necessary
                                                                                                                                                  LR(T)6B 4/85
                                                                 c
      ROTHERHAM            GENERAL        HOSPIT All,S

                    JSTHS    T R U S T


              Department of Histopathology
           Rotherham District General Hospital
                     Moorgate Road
                  ROTHERHAM S60 2UD U.K.

                            Tel: Rotherham (01709) 820000 Ext 5246
                            Fax: 01709 - 824019


Consultant Histopathologist & Cytopathologist
DR. D.N. SLATER BMedSci MBChB FRCPath

DNS/OK

17th July 1995

Mr. C.P. Dorries,
HM Coroner,
The Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET


Dear Mr. Dorries,

Re:   Kevin WILLIAMS (Deceased)

Many thanks for your recent telephone    call    relating   to   your
letter of the 2nd June 1995.

I note that your letter deals with two queries placed by Mrs.
Ann   Williams  in relation   to the Coroners After Inquest
Certificate.

The queries, in essence, centre around two areas.

1.  Part of the body injured.
I sympathise with your comment that there may be some argument
as to where the chest begins and the neck ends. Certainly,
however, the 'thoracic inlet' is well defined in terms of the
first rib. For this reason, I fully support Mrs. Ann Williams'
comment that the most appropriate designation for the part of
the body injured is 'neck' rather than 'chest'.

2. Type of injury.
You will be appreciative from my autopsy report on Kevin that I
used the word 'compression'. The differences between the word
'crush' and 'compression' are difficult to be definitive   about
and both,    without doubt,   lie on a spectrum depending on the
force involved. Accordingly, accuracy with regard to the type
of injury suffered is clearly more equivocal. For this reason,
I do not regard the word    'crush'  as wholly   inappropriate.
Clearly,  however, if the word 'chest' is being altered, it may
be that there would be leniency to         alter    'crush'  to
'compression' to lessen the distress that Mrs. Williams clearly
experienced in relation to this point.

If I can be of any further help in relation    to   this,   then
pleased do not hesitate to contact me.

Kind regards,
Yours sincerely,




D.N.   SLATER
Consultant Histopathologist
opes
■ H
■ ■ ■
         M
        ■ ■   ■
                  I
                  ■
                      O FFICE O F P O P U L A T IO N
                      C E N S U S E S & SURVEYS
                                                                        Smedley Hydro
                                                                        Trafalgar Road
                                                                        Birkdale
                                                                        Southport PR8 2HH

General Register Office                                                 Direct Dial      0151 - 471
                                                                        Switchboard      0151 -471 4200
                                                                                    or   0 1 7 0 4 -5 6 9 8 2 4
  Mr C P Dorries                                                        GTN              3042
  HM Coroner for the County o f South Yorkshire
                                                                        Fax
  The Medico-Legal Centre
  Watery Street                                                          Our R ef M G 90/3865D
  Sheffield
  S3 7ET                                                                          24 October 1995


 Dear Mr Dorries

 I am replying to your letter o f 1 September concerning the documentation surrounding the
 death o f Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS who died in the Hillsborough disaster. I am sorry you
 have not received an earlier reply.

 As a copy o f the original Form 99(Rev) was supplied to Mrs Williams, this office would have
 no objection, in these exceptional circumstances, to you providing a revised photocopy o f the
 statistical part o f this form. As the format has changed since the death was registered I
 suggest that the "type o f injury" and "parts o f the body injured" could be recorded in the
 section "Details o f how accident happened".

 The statistics for deaths registered in 1991 have already been published, however our
 Statistics Branch would be interested to receive any extra or revised details in case o f any
 future research/enquiries about injuries suffered in these types o f disasters. A covering note
 plus the Form 99(Rev)B should be sent to M r T Devis, Statistician, OPCS, Room 525, St
 Catherine's House, 10 Kingsway, London, W C2B 6JP.

 I hope this is o f help to you but if you have any further queries do not hesitate to contact me.

 Yours Sincerely




A Vaughan
Marriages and General
SOUTH YORKSHIRE    (W EST D IS T R IC T )

HM CORONER   DR.   S.   POPPER

                                            REPORT OF AUTOPSY
                                                Dr. D.N. Slater,
                                                Consultant Histopathologist,
                                                Rotherham District General
                                                    Hospital,
                                                ROTHERHAM S60 2UD

                                                Tel: Rotherham 82 0000 Ext.246

HILLSBOROUGH
IDENTIFICATION No. 51

NAME OF DECEASED             Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS

SEX                          Male

AGE                          15 years

IDENTIFICATION BY            D t .Ins. Timms


PLACE PERFORMED              Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street,
                                     Sheffield

DATE OF EXAMINATION          16th April 1989           p.m.

OBSERVERS PRESENT            D c . D.M.Green

CLOTHING REMOVED             Nil

SPECIMENS TAKEN              5 ml fluoridated blood.
                                 Handed to D c . Green.


EXTERNAL EXAMINATION

The body is that of a young, dark haired, caucasian male

measuring 167 cm in height.           The body weighs 50 Kg.

Both pupils are of a grey-brown colour and are equal measuring

4 mm in diameter.

The mouth is not edentulous.            The teeth appear healthy.

Rigor mortis is established and hypostatic lividity is

predominantly of a posterior distribution.

The general hygiene is good.            Hand/toe nails - good condition.




                                        -   1    -
The body appears ____________

There are no external signs of violence.

The body displays the following marks of injury :

Neck - there is a linear 6 x 1       cm abrasion under the right side

of the chin 2 cm from the most       protuberant part.   It extends

from the midline slightly downwards and laterally.

There is a 2 x 1 cm abrasion under the left side of the chin 6

cm beneath the most protuberant part.

The front of the neck over the larynx displays two transverse

airasions measuring 2 x 1 cm and 6 x 2 cm.

The face displays extensive cyanosis and this extends to the

upper part of the chest.   There is mild central pallor around

the mouth and neck.

The face and neck display numerous petechial and larger

purpuric haemorrhages.

There is cyanosis of the lips.

Left hand - there is a small 2 cm abrasion over the         left middle

finger.

The left side of the forehead displays a 3 x 1 cm post mortem

abrasion 1 cm lateral to the eye.


INTERNAL EXAM INATION

Cranial Cavity:   The scalp displays numerous petechial

haemorrhages over the frontal area.

There are large more purpuric type haemorrhages over the left

temporal area.

The skull is normal with no evidence of fracture.

The meninges are normal.

The brain weighs 1160 g and shows extensive congestion of the



                                 -    2   -
cerebral veins.   There is evidence of cerebellar and Cortical

coning.   The cerebral vessels display no evidence of atheroma.

Thoracic Cavity & Neck:    The thyroid gland and carotid

vessels are normal.

Th.e neck muscles are normal.

Tlie jugular vein appears normal.

The thoracic aorta and oesophagus appear normal.

The diaphragm is normal.

The thymus gland is normal.

The pericardial sac contains 5 ml of clear yellow fluid.

The heart weighs 260 g.    There are numerous petechiall

haemorrhages on the pericardial surface.    The myocardium of the

left ventricle displays intramural bruises.

The aortic, pulmonary, mitral and tricuspid valves are normal.

The right and left coronary vessels display minimal atheroma.

There is no evidence of thrombotic occlusion.

The endocardium of the left ventricle shows numerous petechial

and purpuric haemorrhages.

There is no evidence of congenital heart disease.

The main pulmonary artery is normal.

The mouth is normal with no evidence of vomitus.

The larynx displays bilateral fractures of the hyoid bone

at the junction between the body and both greater cornu.

There is evidence of ante mortem haemorrhage at the site.

The thyroid cartilage shows bilateral ante mortem fractures

of the superior cornu.

The main stem and peripheral bronchi are normal.

The right and left lungs weigh 570 and 630 g respectively.



                                -   3   -
Both are mildly oedematous with areas of interstitial

contusion.    There are numerous petechial and purpuric

haemorrhages on the surface of the lungs.

Abdominal Cavity:       The liver weighs 1240 g and appears

normal.

The spleen weighs 130 g and appears normal.

The aorta and inferior vena cava are normal.

The gall bladder and bile ducts are normal.

The pancreas and adrenals are normal.

The oesophagus, stomach, stomach, duodenum and small and large

intestine are normal.      The stomach contains 70 ml of undigested

food residue.

Both kidneys weigh 105 g and appear normal.             The ureters,

bLadder and genitals are normal.           The bladder contains 60 ml of

d e a r yellow fluid.

Masculo-Skeletal System:      There is no evidence of bony injury

(with the exception of the fractures to the hyoid bone and

thyroid cartilage already listed).             Specifically there is no

damage to the cervical or thoracic spine; nor fractured ribs.


CONCLUSIONS

From the history available to me I am informed that Mr.

WILLIAMS died in the 'Hillsborough incident'.

Autopsy revealed evidence of severe asphyxia in terms of facial

cyanosis with petechial haemorrhages extending to the

clavicular area.

The appearances in my opinion are those of traumatic asphyxia

and I regard this as the stated cause of death.




                                   -   4   -
Autopsy revealed evidence of abrasions to the front of the neck

together with symmetrical antemortem fractures to the larynx

consistent with blunt compression to this area.

Autopsy revealed no evidence to suggest that any second party

was maliciously involved in the death of this individual by

direct purposeful violence.      Specifically finger nail

abrasions were absent on the neck.


Autopsy revealed that     Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS was a normally

developed young male with no evidence of natural disease which

could have contributed towards death.

Autopsy revealed that     Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS could have been

expected to have had a normal life    expectancy.

A specimen of blood for alcohol estimation was handed to D c .

D.M. Green.

Death in my opinion was not due to natural causes and there is

no contraindication to cremation.


CAUSE OF DEATH

I   a)   Traumatic asphyxia.




D.N. SLATER   B.Med.Sci., M.B.Ch.B., M.R.C.Path
Consultant Histopathologist



Police Photograph Index
WILLIAMS  51.1 General view
          51.2 Facial cyanosis with ante mortem
                neck abrasions and midline pallor
          51.3 Left facial post mortem abrasion
              CORONER’S CERTIFICATE AFTER INQUEST
                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                            To be completed by Registrar
                                                                                                            Register No. j
              furnished under section 11(7) o f the C oroner’s A ct 1988
                                                                                                            Entry No.

     To the              Sheffield                                                                      Registrar of Births and Deaths

Inquest held on                            28 March 1991
at                                         Sheffield
Was a post-mortem held?                    yes

P ART I    PARTICULARS OF DECEASED (Not still born - see separate Form 99A)
1 Date and place of death
    Fifteenth March 1989
    Hillsborough Football Ground
2   Name and surname                                                   i! 3 Sex    n/i .
                                                                        l          Male
    Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS                                               j 4 Maiden surname o f woman                         who has married

                                                                     ■11
5     Date and place of birth
      27 P/lay 1 9 7 3
      io u th p o rt                                                                               r
      Occupation and usual address
      Schoolboy
      Son of Alan Howard, Welder
      and Anne Elizabeth Williams, Housewife                          v\ < i      i     ^
      4 W hitehouse Avenue, Formby, Merseyside,
                                                                               v" "'

Cause of death                  I(a)   Traumatic asphyxia

                                (b)

                                (C)




                                Verdict   Accidental death


    ’vRT II    VISITING FORCES                                                           r* under section 7 of the Visiting Forces Act 1952
       inquest was adjor-med on                                                          L* and has not been resumed

PART III BURIAL/CREMATION
1 have issued
           on
           to
                 of

PART IV MARITAL CONDITION etc. All persons aged 16 and over
Insert appropriate number in box. 1 Single 2 Married 3 Widowed 4 Divorced 5 Not known
                                                                    Day        Month I        Year
If married enter date of birth of surviving spouse

I certify that the findings of the inquest were as above.

Sass.              '=><^         28 March 1991                     Signed                                                                      A ’

Name                            Mr C.P.Dorries
Appointment                 (^_H.M. C o ro n e r ^ '■                             • <VS=.\Q 5-XA

Jurisdiction                    S outh Yorkshire (West District)

         ls   " ic c = ssa r.                                                                                                    Form 99QtEY}A
                                                                                           To be completed by Registrar
  ,ne and surname of deceased                                                          District & SD Nos.                 i

                                                                                       Register No.
Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS
                                                                                       Entry No.


PART V ACCIDENT OR MIS ADVENTURE (including deaths from neglect o r from anaesthetics)
  1. Place where accident occured
     0. Home                                             5.   Street or highway
     1. Farm                                             6.   Public building
     2. Mine or quarry                                   7.   Resident institution
     3. Industrial place or premises                     8.   Other specified place                                4 1
     4. Place of recreation or sport                     9.   Place not known                                        1

  2. To be completed for all persons aged 16 and over
     When injury was received deceased was
     1. On way to, or from work
     2. At work
       3. Elsewhere

  V retails o f how accident happened:
   Sustained crush injuries at football ground.
   Type of injury : Crush
   Parts of body injured : Neck




  J-




  4. If motor vehicle incident, deceased was
     0. Driver of motor vehicle other than motor cycle   5. Rider of animal; occupant of
     1. Passenger in motor vehicle other than               animal-drawn vehicle
         motorcycle                                      6. Pedal cyclist
     2. Motorcyclist                                     7. Pedestrian
     3. Passenger on motor cycle                         8. Other specified person
     4. Occupant of tram car                             9. Not known


  5. Interval between injury and death
       1. Less than one year                             2. One year or more
                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                             Form 99(REV)B
