              THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
/ggsfisfe.    Room 1106
IS s lilf    50 ^ Ueen Anne's Gate’ London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007



C P Domes Esq                                                     Your reference:
H M Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre                                               Our reference:
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET                                                 Date:         I £> December 1997

   *3) JL£ks
 I enclose a copy of a letter which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has recently sent to Dr Popper
 concerning the death certificate for Kevin Williams.

 2.       We understand that Dr Popper has already alerted you to our interest in this but it might
 help if I recap by saying that Dr Popper replied to the Judge’s letter in terms that the certificate
 was altered after you had taken over the post of Coroner. He suggested that we redirect the
 Judge’s questions to you.

3.       Can you tell us please whether, when the certificate was altered, Dr Slater had changed
his view that the asphyxia which caused Kevin’s death was due to compression of both his neck
and his chest? I think it would be useful also if - as Dr Popper has suggested to us - we could
have a copy of the post-mortem report on Kevin Williams and (a better copy of) his death
certificate.

4.     I am sorry to be troubling you on these points. On another issue, I have had from Ann
Adhngton at the Family Support Group a copy of your letter to her of 4 December, saying that
you do not have a copy of the transcript of a business meeting which took place on 6 March
1990. You suggest that we might have it here.

5.      We have had from the South Yorkshire police what I understand are your office’s copies
of the full transcript of the Hillsborough inquests - the ‘mini-inquest’ transcripts are kept loosely
in a box and the transcript of the main inquest is in a run of black ring-binders. The earliest
occasion for which we have a transcript is the preliminary proceedings on 18 April 1990. But I
am afraid that we cannot find any material about the ‘business meeting’ on 6 March 1990.

6.      I am not sure how best to progress this. It may be that Mr Greenway will be able to
help.   If he has sent it to us, when and with what?
   (*




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny

G:\HILL SB OR\MA IN\CORONER. 208
