       From: Peter Edmundson                     cc: Mr Michael      Mr Middle^
             Operational Policing                    Mr O’Brien      Mr Pugh
             Policy Unit                             Mr Howarth      Mr Butler
             Room 527                                Lord Williams   Ms Clifford
             Queen Anne’s Gate                       Mr Omand        Mr Warner
             S 0171-273-2621                         Mr Boys Smith   Mr Owen
             16 February 1998                        Ms Wheldon




       Home Secretary


       HILLSBOROUGH: ANNOUNCEMENT ON WEDNESDAY 18 FEBRUARY -
       Q & A MATERIAL


       I attach Q & A material for your statement to the House on Wednesday.

       Also attached by way of background are a chronology of the main events since
       1989; material on the Taylor Inquiry; a copy of the statement you made to the
       House when you announced the establishment of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith s
       scrutiny; and details of the evidence being put in the Library of the House.

       Following the meeting this morning, we have confirmed with the South Yorkshire
       Police that they do not object to the statements made by officers shortly after the
       disaster being made public in a way which identifies who wrote the individual
       statements.




                                                 PETER EDMUNDSON




        f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\pe 1008p4doc


?:u.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: INDEX OF BRIEFING

Chronology o f events

GENERAL ISSUES

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry o f Bloody Sunday
either?

Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
comes to light?


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

What about the video tapes stolen on the day o f the disaster?

What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?


THE AFTERM ATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy
o f the emergency care provided to the victims?

What does the scrutiny say about criticisms o f the Coroner’s conduct o f the inquests?
Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

Inquests and disasters general

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of
the Hillsborough disaster?


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing
statements about the disaster?


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered before
being submitted as evidence?


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

Why haven’t you published appendix 9 o f the scrutiny?

Is the Home Secretary aware o f complaints o f material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?


WIDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t escape
punishment?
Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?


BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to cany out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
Jan u ary 1990: Final Report }

A pril - M ay 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - mini-inquests to identify each of the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 M ay - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174
witnesses at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently
passed to DPP

Septem ber 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - M arch 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating
to the incident as a whole was heard - verdict o f “accidental death” reached

I I July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation o f neglect o f duty could not be heard in the
absence of the more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s
proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard
promised to consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.



c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FOR THE STATEMENT

GENERAL

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Yes. It was important that there should be an independent and thorough examination
of material which the families and others had brought to our attention, so that it could
be determined conclusively whether earlier proceedings should be re-opened.

I hope that everyone, including the families when they have had the chance to read the
report in full, will accept that these matters have been fully investigated and that there
is no further action which it is appropriate to take.


Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

No. LJ Stuart-Smith has carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive
report sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his
conclusions, with which I agree.

It is, of course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish. But there
can be no justification for calling it a whitewash.


Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry of Bloody Sunday
either?

The decision to establish a fresh inquiry into an incident such as Hillsborough or
Bloody Sunday cannot be taken lightly. It is only justified when there are grounds for
believing that the conclusions reached originally may be in doubt.

The Prime Minister made it clear that the weight of material now available about
Bloody Sunday is such that the events require re-examination.


Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

LJ Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference were very wide. They tasked him with
establishing whether any material evidence was overlooked in the consideration of the
causes o f the disaster or the consideration of criminal or other proceedings. He was
also able to recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I am satisfied that he has been able to cany out a thorough scrutiny o f all the evidence
which was submitted by the families and others.



Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?


c :\dos\mp-0462.doc
It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time to
time which has not been aired publicly before.

What the scrutiny had to consider was, not only whether the evidence put forward was
new, but also whether it was credible and o f such significance that it would justify a
new inquiry, or some other action. This is what U Stuart-Smith has now reported on.


Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

That is a matter for the Director and the CPS. It would be inappropriate for me to
speculate.

If pressed

If there is a private prosecution, the CPS could consider whether to intervene. The
options available to the CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it; or to
take it over and discontinue it.

If the CPS decided not to intervene, the prosecution would remain with the private
prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.


What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Following his appointment on 30 June last year, LJ Stuart-Smith examined the
evidence from the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as well as other material from police
records.

He visited Hillsborough Stadium and went to Liverpool to meet many of the families
of the victims.

He received submissions from Counsel for the Family Support Group and others. He
also had meetings with a number of other people who contacted him or who he felt
could help him with his scrutiny.

A list o f those whom LJ Stuart-Smith met or received representations from is set out in
Appendix 1 o f his report.


Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from
the start?

LJ Stuart-Smith said, on the record, that he deeply regretted this remark, which he
made off-the-cuff and without any intention for it to be taken seriously or to offend.


Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?


c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
U Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected judge from the Court of Appeal whose
experience has been invaluable in assessing the evidence presented. He has produced a
very comprehensive and detailed report and I am very grateful to him for looking at
these issues so carefully.


Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further
evidence comes to light?

It is very difficult to imagine what material new evidence could emerge after the
exhaustive inquiries which have already taken place and the length of time which has
elapsed.

I cannot rule out the possibility that new evidence will come to light, in which case I
will consider it, but I am strongly of the view that we have investigated the material
events at Hillsborough as far as it is possible to do so.

LJ Stuart-Smith is clear in his report that there was nothing which he considered which
added anything significant to the evidence already considered by the Taylor Inquiry
and the Inquests.


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

LJ Stuart-Smith has examined all the available video evidence. He has concluded that
there is no new video evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry,
the Coroner or the other authorities investigating the disaster.

He has established that the 'missing’ footage obtained from Yorkshire Television is
taken from copies of the police tapes supplied by the force and that the police tapes
were made available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Coroner and to the legal
representatives at the Inquest.

What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

The theft of two video tapes, stolen from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s Control
Room on the day of the disaster, was investigated by the West Midlands Police. They
are still missing. These were not police tapes but contained pictures from the club’s
CCTV cameras. LJ Stuart-Smith’s view is that the tapes did not contain any
significant material.



What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?




c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
U Stuart Smith has considered the evidence of the technician responsible for the club
and police CCTV systems, and that given by the police officers at the Inquest.

He has concluded that there is no evidence o f the police blaming a faulty camera for
their failure to establish overcrowding.


THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

LJ Stuart-Smith found no reason to criticise the use of the cut-off point. The relevance
of the 3.15pm cut-off point is that all who died had received their fatal injuries by
3.15pm.

As the Judge’s report notes, this issue was thoroughly examined by the Divisional
Court in 1993 when it refused an application to have the Inquest verdicts quashed.

The use of the cut-off point at the Inquest applied to the consideration of how the
victims died, not the other questions before the Inquest. The evidence was that all
those who died had suffered their injuries by 3.15pm. There was no other cause of
death. The use o f the cut-off point in these circumstances was, therefore, considered
reasonable.

It did not mean, however, that all the victims were dead by 3.15pm. LJ Stuart-Smith
points out that it was well known that some of the victims were still alive at 3.15pm.


Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the
adequacy of the emergency care provided to the victims?

The purpose o f an inquest is solely to find out who the deceased was and how, when
and where he or she came to their death. The response o f the emergency services to
the disaster was covered by the Taylor Inquiry and its findings are the set out in that
report.

LJ Stuart-Smith has reported that he found no evidence of lack of care on the part of
the emergency or medical services and that a further investigation of this aspect of the
disaster would be of little purpose.


What does the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the
inquests?

LJ Stuart-Smith highlights the exceptionally difficult task which the Coroner, Dr
Stefan Popper, had in conducting the Inquest into this disaster. He did not find any
substance to criticisms about the conduct of the Inquest or to suggestions o f bias on
the part o f the Coroner.



c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function o f a coroner’s inquest to determine questions o f blame. An
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the
inquest verdict does not deprive any person o f any civil remedy which otherwise might
be available. (As the Taylor report made clear, the main cause o f the disaster was the
failure of control by the South Yorkshire Police.)


Inquests and disasters

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the findings
o f a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role o f the coroner
after a public inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report provided the
fullest possible examination o f the causes o f the Hillsborough disaster.


What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners o f the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends to
pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so.

The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.




INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into
changing statements about the disaster?


c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
LJ Stuart-Smith investigated allegations that investigating officers from West Midlands
Police pressurised certain witnesses into changing their evidence. He interviewed three
witnesses, Derek Bruder, Debra Martin (a former special constable) and Paul Taylor
but concluded in each case that there was no improper attempt to affect their evidence.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A number of statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions of the Director of Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events of 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority of cases, no recommendations were
made on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove
comment, hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of a
similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does
not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he
believes it would have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made,
because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were
implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or
other proceedings.


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada
drama “Hillsborough”?



c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
LJ Stuart-Smith has addressed each of the ten questions in appendix 10 of his report,
either by direct reference to the Taylor report or to the available evidence.

He is satisfied that the answers are quite evident and that they support the main
conclusion of the Taylor Inquiry about the failure of police control.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

I made it clear when I announced the scrutiny that I would publish as much of the
evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as possible.

Much of the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result of
the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. I am placing in the Library copies of material which is
not already publicly available and which it is appropriate to publish.

We are still in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to
material which they supplied being placed in the library.


Why haven’t you published appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

A number of families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent
evidence of the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases in
appendix 9 o f his report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I have decided that
it would be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the families
concerned direct and not include them in the published report. I am sure that the
House will appreciate my reasons for doing so. If the families wish to make public the
material in appendix 9, that is, of course, a matter for them.


Is the Home Secretary aware of complaints of material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?

LJ Stuart-Smith addressed this complaint as part of his scrutiny. He invited any of the
families who felt that material had been withheld from them to contact him so that he
could investigate. Two families did so, but the Judge confirmed in both cases that
nothing of significance had been omitted by the police.

LJ Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he was given unrestricted access to the records
held by South Yorkshire Police.


WIDER ISSUES



c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

As I indicated in my statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police
discipline system.

I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its recommendations
for closely. I hope to respond shortly.


Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

There is the potential for the disciplinary process to be brought into disrepute by the
inappropriate use of medical retirement. I am considering the recommendations of the
Home Affairs Select Committee for tightening the discipline rules and I will respond
shortly.

The existing police pensions regulations provide for retirement to be held over until
discipline proceedings have been concluded, but where there is no prospect of an
officer recovering his health to face discipline proceedings it is right that he be allowed
to go.


Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for
any hurt or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a
decision for the individuals concerned and the courts.




c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
BACKGROUND


The Tavlor Inquiry

• The terms of reference for the Inquiry were:

   To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989
   and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
   sports events.

• 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

• 71 hours of film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  and the BBC.

  Interim Report

• The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
  stadium on the day of the disaster.

• The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match
  arrangements, such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield
  Wednesday’s arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It
  also considered the build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of the
  terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts,
  events in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for
  example tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency
  services.

• A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

  - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
  - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
  - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
  - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
  - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
  - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
  - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

• On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
  reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

• The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.



c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
 In the view o f South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised
 in the Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
 recommendations being made in respect o f eight of them.

 In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he
 considered to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could be
 safely used in the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to be
 carried out with immediate effect.

 Final Report

 The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It
 concentrated on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of
 measures to improve safety at sports grounds.

 The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment of
 all seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect of the
 top divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of spikes
 and overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

 Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number of
 spectators to be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety
 Certificate. There was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should
 be reviewed.

 The report recommended a written statement of intent be agreed between the club
 and the police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control,
 with particular reference to the filling of each pen.

 There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role of the
 police and the responsibilities of senior officers.

 The co-ordination of the emergency services and the provision of first aid, medical
 facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations of the final
 report.

 The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord
 Justice Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or
 towards the pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and
 going on to the pitch without lawful authority or excuse.




t\dos\mp-0462.doc
The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:

1.    Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21
days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.    Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build
up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

3.    Why was the game not delayed, as a number o f police officers thought it should
have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the
Liverpool fans safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.     Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when
eye witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the
problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

5.       Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
full, the procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.       Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order
for it to be opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10
foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the
pitch too small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as
to what was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the
ground to help - until 3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the
pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical help?

10.    Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?




c:\dos\mp-0462.doc
         23                     M ontserrat
                                                              30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                                                                   24
        [Mr. Foulkes]
                                                                                      Hillsborough Disaster
                  andLI do not *ink that even my hon. Friend
        would blame the present Government—or a Conservative            3.47 pm
        Government—for a volcanic eruption.
                                                                           The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                                       aw^: ^ ‘th pennission. Madam Speaker, I
       J ^ ' i I r ni[ B aldiyi Banbuiy): WU1 ** hon- Gentleman         should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
       reconsider his remarks about inactivity by the earlier           stadium disaster.                                   5
       Government, g,ven that that Government paid foTthe
       building of a number o f new schools and a new general             Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the
        ospital in Montserrat, which were destroyed by the             Hillsborough disaster, which happened on 15 April 1989.
      volcano. Can he confirm that Montserrat receives more            Tnat was more than eight years ago, but no one who saw
      aid per head of population than any country in the world’        the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have
                                                                       forgotten those terrible events. For those who lost loved
         TTie House would like to know, if not today perhaos in        members of their family, the pain is ever present
      tomorrows debate, how much money are Her
                                                                       Following Hillsborough, Members of the House were
      Government are prepared to earmark to ensure Sat                 united in their determination to do all in their power to
      Montserrat is viable in future.                                  prevent anything like that ever happening again.
                                                                         After the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries
     G e ^ r w ? * f IiWU1 Ce-rtail^y ^ t0 ensure *•« the hon.        and investigations took place. The most thorough and
     Gentieman s final question is answered in tomoirow’s
                                                                      wide ranging of those was the public inquiry led by the
f^ ^ f o£ r*which
             2 2 It?am directly
                            if tr°ductory V eech-
                                 responsible.        “ the reply      late Lord Taylor. The terms of reference of that inquiry
                                                                      encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster, but
VP     It is not right to compare dependent territories with          making recommendations about crowd control and safety
     other countries. We have a special responsibility for            at sports events.
     S         i f 1? 100^ 35 long “        remain in that role,
     which is why I said that we accept, jointly with the elected     rt,aL° ? 'J ay-0r’S “ quiiy took oral ^ d e n c e from more
                    °, Montserrat’ our responsibility to the          w i2 L WI,3CSSCS.! t public hearinSs during May and
     people of Montserrat; and that continues.                        June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence
       * ° J ° Ubt   the.„h.on- Gentieman catches Madam                1989                  i \that
                                                                       1989, Lord Taylor found    hiS the
                                                                                                       unterim report
                                                                                                          disaster had “a number
                                                                                                                          AuSust
    extend hk      ’            * * '’PP01*1111^ tomonow to           of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a sinele
    extend his contribution and tell us what the previous             cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear
    tovernment did. I do not believe, however, that he will           that, m his view,
           C £ Sayl,   * ey acted with the sense of urgency
    that has been shown in the past eight weeks.                      coiinoT mai” reaS°n f°r ^   disaster was the fai,ure of P°,ice
                                                                         Lord Taylor made 43 recommendations in his interim
   hn!!4rp ^ eW,!V? er (Ellesmere Port and Neston): My                report. His final report in January 1990 made a further
   hon. Friend will be aware that, last year, I saw the
   devastation m Montserrat from a Lynx helicopter flying             76 recommendations. The developments that have tai».n
   from the back of HMS Argyll, the West Indies ^uard S              p ace since then in safety at football grounds and in the
   on station at the tune. In view of the risk to Lvnx               policing of football matches have been based largely on
   helicopters because of the nature of the dust from the            those recommendations. Football in this country h L been
                                                                     transformed since the Taylor report. To a large extent,
   e v e m ^ ft£ > h0n’ “ my£ ° n- Friend satisfied that, in the     that is due to Lord Taylor’s wide-ranging and soundly
   event of there having to be a major evacuation, there is
   sufficient seaborne support to bring that about’                  based conclusions.
                                                                        The death!! that occurred on 15 April 1989 were also
                            As wel1 M Providing the feny             the subject of inquests conducted by the coroner of the
                                                                     western district of South Yorkshire. After examining the
  w k hthp r      Started y“ terday- we have had discussions
  Z    * Govenments o f the other islands in the area, and          evidence, the jury at the coroner’s inquest found in March
  we are satisfied that there is sufficient seaborne capacity        1991 that the cause of death of those who died at
  to cany out an evacuation. I can say, however, that we            Hillsborough was accidental death. A further investigation
  are currently reviewing the evacuation procedures— the            was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
  E X T ? o f wh“ h was Produced earlier this year—in               by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether
           ° HreCent PPenin8s- to ascertain whether any             there were any grounds for criminal proceedings and to
  updating and improvement are necessary.                           consider whether any police officer should be subject to
                                                                    disciplinary proceedings.
                                                                    , J J .at investigation involved the taking of more than
                                                                    5,000 statements and the scrutiny of all the material that
                                                                    had been examined previously by the Taylor inquiry.
                                                                    After that investigation, the evidence was sent to the
                                                                    Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded that no
                                                                    person should be subject to criminal proceedings.
                                                                      The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief
                                                                    superintendent and the superintendent in charge on the
                                                                    day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
                                                                    In the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill
                                                                     ealth in advance of a ruling by a disciplinary tribunal.
     1U C n i l . p A t i l M
              25                   H ittshi/ro uifh Disaster
                                                                              30 JUNE 1W7
                                                                                                                      H illsb orou gh D isaster
                                                                                                                                                                          26
              Under police discipline rules, a disciplinary hearing
              cannot pnxeed when a police officer r e t i r ^ o * th!                         We are appointing Lord Justice Stuan-Stnith a s..!™
                                                                                           i S lterms
                                                                                           nill  £ %of reference
                                                                                                       ' ? * c “ “are°fas^follows:fOT• ^ p ™ p S £
                                                                                           at                 WhuethcCr “ y ^ d e n c e exists relating to the r f i . .. . -
                                                                                           available:       TO         ^          °" 13 April 1989 *»*>
                                                                                                (aJ To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord T aylor or
                                                                                          J     b,J ° the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney G en « ,i
                                                                                                                                                  « ^ s s s
            the inquest Thq,            ap Iied f o ? j „ , ^ ° ^ ™            °f
                                                                                                                                s“ * Y” “ re Poli“ »                  -
                                                                                          P ^U lltT                    ? 5 22“                       ■ »          »
                                                                                          establishment by the Secretary o f State fo rth M ?”            n. “     jusCify


          several occasions. H m S                   7 “ ” ^ ™ °”
          about whether the full facts hive yet e n K rn T l P ™ 001
          rfilstiv^c n f tfiA u*tt u   .         ^cr§cd, I have met                   S S S to iS .- “ r                       “ ,0“ "h k l * » “ x                « £
          s ^ f S S s a L ? 1" who“ ^                           b                     [ * J « P l«* a copy of those tenns of teferaK* In the
r         that should be t o S i S S t a i l s * “ “ «°<ved issues

                                                                                      all A®                         Loid Justice Stuart-Smith to examine
         D irector nf p..w ’ r.            Attorney-General and to the                t         o       m        *         ?      ,    1tbatbasl^ « £ E
                                                                                                    cons'der “ y further material that interested
                                                                                      parties wish to submit to him. He will have two S      The

         ? w £ ® if f i5 r                                                            a ^ lle **T "J                    « * « * n« ^ W o S
                                                                                      available is of such significance to justify a further foil
                                                                                      pubhc inquiry. His advice to me will I ? i l b 2 3 j £
                                                                                      to the House, and will be made public. S^condlv
                                                                                     Justice Stuait-Smith will identify fnr            a**
                                                                                     General, the DPP ^ S            S                T S S
                                                                                     Yorkshire police any evidence that might be relevant to
                                                                                     their decisions that has not previously been considered.
                  enously my predecessor viewed the matter.                                ope that this examination will enable us to establish
                                                                                    conclusively whether material evidence ateut t o 2 2
                                                                                    of the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked I assure
                                                                         *"
                                                                                                       if k ^   1 ^ take whatevCT actira^s
                   e r t t a c e 'r f ^ ° ° SJ MVedrc‘,tKl to P A S S 'S            ^             °we 11 to everyone who has been touched by
                                                                                    * e tragedy, but, above aU, to the families of S       who
                                                                                           o get to the bottom of the matter once and for all.

                                                                                    I t ^ 'k Bt S i MaW? i,,ney ^ ^ W e s t Cambridgeshire):
                                                                                    Itfaankthe Home Secretary for his statement and f o / S
                                                                                    personal courtesy in relation to it.
                                                                                    .iJ S T ! happenC^ I at Hillsborough was a tragedy of
                                                                                    v o X a n T ? , f 'S              Thousands of |»op^e—
                                                                                    return Z d'                                                             “     n0t
                                                                                    blighted the Uv« of J u s S K f
                                                                                            b y and loss t a n whiclTto


    of ^      oL     ^ k68^ 1     acutely conscious that the families
                                                                                » Z S S S Z S ^ S 'r o S T e ^ ^ :
    - -        a                                                     j   :
    and th»renST U“ ‘ ”° maIWr of significance is overlooked                              no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not
    s      ^ ,.-w- ? ° n°ireach * flMi                     w ita Z ;
           ‘"dependent examination of the evidence.                             o ^ e e v iic e "            " Wi‘h° Ut 3 fi,n " d indePendent examination

        The        Attorney-General,     the    Director       of   Public      I agree with the right hon. Gentleman on that I welcome
    P u b t e t a L T t 1 T h , ' lT !f0r'- a*K“ i “» ■ it is in the            s t L T ^ m”pursuing
                                                                               Stuart-Smith    ™1       thatwU1 « w «examination.
                                                                                                             important   ^     S
                             S e t n ” i”de' “nden> “ «tay >»                     1 have four specific questions to ask the Home

        - I CD ] 1-P.\GIv5
                                ^£r,rL3::3!E:                                  Secretary about his statement First, given the urgency
                                                                               involved not leaat fcr t e e most i f c L d
        27
                            H illsb o ro u g h Disaster
                                                                       30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                                         H illsb o ro u g h D isaster              28
        [Dr. Brian Mawhinney]
                                                                                     nmtMrs for Lord Justice Sluart-Smith to decide and he
        S )l l eveuts: Primarily t o families, but also the police
        officers what timetable does the right hon GentWnon                                                       his,o"g                  - ■—
        envisage and can die House have his assurance that the
        process will begin immediately?
                                                                                    With my right hon. Friend the Leader of t o House the
                    S ? HT eSecretary said that he would make                       matter of a debate. Of course I shall do that.
        ord Justice Stuart-Smith’s advice to him available to rtu»
       House and the public. Will he L o pubHs^aU t o
                                                                                    nVhMh!? ^        .(LiveT>001- Garston): I congratulate my
       S S E . T S ? 4 * * • ,wd                          -       «*» £             right hon. Friend on his statement I also congratulate
                                                                                    Granada Television and Jimmy McGovern whose efforts
          Thirdly, t o right hon. Gentleman has said that r nrA
                                                                                    H o il r           • ^ latter back 10 1,16 attention of the
       L  t e S t Sparties
                    ^ e T 1wish
                           *1WhU1toC°nSider   ftmher                                House. Can my right hon. Friend assure t o House that
       interested                    submit Will such materialthat
                                                                be                               "h? have fought for so long will have the
       examinable in public and will those who may be affected                      opportunity o f legal representation to enable them to
       by such material be given t o o p p o m in itT L ^ d T o ^                   present their cases, whether orally or in w r itin g !T t£
       before the lord justice reaches J y V o n c S o ^                   “        Lord Justice. Will they receive some financial assistance
        Finally, given t o sensitivity of this matter and the                       to enable to m to do that?                             ce
      S t o T l h 317 * C?nstructive attitude, which I hope he
      ShK       ' u u® reciprocated, will he undertake to agree                       M r‘ Stn*": 1 am grateful to my hon. Friend for her
c     with his right hon. Friend the Leader of the House th a fto
      fs s a xhasrconcluded hisfartber when ^                      justi“
                                                                                  5 t o £ wh V ^ WelC°me for * * statemenL The costs
                                                                                  °                             10 appear befclB t o scrutiny
      atuart-Smith              investigation?                                    J e S l ^ yf“ y DePartmenL My hon. Friend asks about
                                                                                  legal representation. That issue has not been raised by me
      fo ^ '» « d o r2 X    ^ ' ! ,e        hon- a C T t a “ *>                   during my discussions with t o families. I understand that
      « s +           z s z s , s . r ”"                           * “ we                             l6gal "consider
                                                                                  anses, I snail, of course,  * » “ it.««• If a ^rther issue


                                                                                  c a ? : A' J * Beith Berwick-upon-Tweed): Is t o Home
                                                   ? ? ■ = : fo; ^                Secretary aware that Liberal Democrat Members welcome
                                                                                  this focused re-examination of t o evidence, including
                                                                                  recentiy found evidence, on these terrible events, which
     him for his welcome for these proceedings m T iT n r*
                                                                                 2 T .*?.
                                                                                      to n,television
                                                                                              e f “ to  ^            0f 3,1 W t o S o
                                                                                                      coverage at the time and etched
     s i r ? i ? ■* ? •                 • 'w          S       S     “r ;
     have said, I know how seriously my predecessor the rich#                                        “ of t o people who lost family
                                                                                 members but will he confirm that it is very unlikely—
     Ws i       Ireamed MCmber f°r FoUcestone and Hythe t<Sc
                                                                                      perhaps    impossible—that police discipline
      - Thlf. I?8ht hon- Gentieman asked four questions t o first                £ 7 o ^ ? d te St o “ld *            38 a result of what might
                                                                                       ? A           ,InqUI,y? Does he recognise that t o public
                                                                                 ^ ^ • 1CUl,u,°                         how police discipline
                                                                                                       ? br0Ught 10 a halt when retirement on
                                                                                 health pounds takes place before the hearing has begun?
                                                                                 althou«rfwh*° Taylor’s main recommendation was that
                                                                                 although there were many factors, the main reason for the
                                                                                S r i o W“ ,? C          of P°lice controI. that will leave
    b , the end of “         yeJ                                                questions in t o public mind, which will pass beyond t o
                                                                                W         into what can be done when L c l u s l T L
    s      - r    • • is           X v s is
    Stuart-Smith can make in the light of all rh!
    representations that he receives.
                                                                                w e l^ m ? ^ 1         ^ right hon' Gentleman for his
      .? “ on^Iy’ t o right hon. Gentleman asked whether in                             no? ml s^ ment. He asked me to say that
    addition to publishing the advice that I receive from Lnrrf                 forfter police discipline proceedings would be verv
                           r wj' publish        S K 2 S K                                     IS 10 mticipalc the View t o t Lord JustiS
    considered by him. My answer to t o right hon                              Stuart-Smith may or may not come to and, with great
    Gentieman is provisional. I shall do my best to enswe                      He^aUri        ngh‘ h0n- Gentleman, I shall not do that
S n p f e IS £ C    bU‘ “"f* may 1x5 8°od reasons-for                          He alsoinvites me to make general comments on police
               fespect ° f criminal or disciplinary                            S fS ie 6      f OHS'Jhere may be an occasion to debate
fh^ ! a l S~ why such evidence cannot be published*
the same time as the advice is published. HoweveV if                           ta fT X e ^               regUla“°"S- ^          1 *> “ •
S t a S IS 10 * UnpubIi!ihed. I shall make that cleaP at                          \ “ y °"'y t o t the police discipline regulations exist
                                                                               » d have been approved from time to time by
_9J ! |’rdly’ t o right hon. Gentieman asked whether to re                                         regulations. It is, of co u L , open to
c t a S 5 S S 5 In, PUbIS and whether t o families and                                              311(110 ^ Housc 10 change to m in
                                                                               the light of circumstances.                              •
to t o Tatter                presentations. The answer
ro me latter part of the question is yes. As t o House
would expect, the exact proceedings of the scrutiny are                        th a fto             (Sheffield, Hillsborough): I am sure
     :: ctniHAr.i/d                                                                 “ e Home Secretary realises that to mast tragic
       29                          H illsb orou gh Disaster
                                                                                  30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                                                  H illsb o ro u g h D isaster
                                                                                                                                                            30
      trauma of the event was suffered by the families of rh*
     onICK          Wh° a,tendetl ^ ™«ch, but it was also                                    has available. That is not in any sense to imply anv
                                                                                             cntiasm of the work of the Director o 7 p u S
     Sople * e r S i ! i r a,iCKeVentS in thcir hi«oiy  the                                  Prosecutions or the Crown Prosecution Service.
     E ? #L k Hlllsb?rou«h area of Sheffield—the links
     tha they have made and maintain with families in
     Liverpool bear witness to that Whiu ka          *j  .                                   hJhlir * ndrew M ,Uer (Ellesmere Port and Neston): On
                                                                                             a ffirfL L C0" s,Ituents of mine who were so tragically
                                                                                             w  hettS L       l ent*   may 1 will
                                                                                                                             ask my  ri8htabout
                                                                                                                                           *«>n. Friend
                                                                                             whether   the fresh     inquiry      bring           some
     =1,                                                                                     consideration of the way in which the coroner’s court
                                                                                            aalter
                                                                                              f te Jthe
                                                                                                     S edeaths?
                                                                                                         H h s ^ Does
                                                                                                                 n 1' 5 itduring.the  in£luiries immediately
                                                                                                                           constitute the possibility of fresh
                                                                                            evidence—evidence that should have perhaps come to the
                                                                                            S    K      ““      “ rl“ r- " ow ‘« £ *             —

                                                                                            t h e ^ v ^ J h - 1 116" 5 h“ 1566,1 continuing concern about
                                                                                               e way in which inquests generally are conducted. There
                                                                                            E e Sr r w h i h ^ rCPOrt  ^ IM c a lc disasters and
                                                                                            inquests, which recommended significant changes
   ^rvices and by many other ordinary citizens.                                             3 2 l S ngfa Chanf Whereby if therB were, God forbid, a
                                                                                            disaster of a similar scale and nature in the future there
                                                                                            would be one inquiry similar to that conducted by the late




                                                                                                “ j ue of * e way in which the first inquest was
   j E         z       v   z   z     z   z       z       5       2    S       S         conducted was the subject of great consideration by the
                                                                                        divisional court when there were proceedings for judicial
  sjg                                                                                     view. It is a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, but I
                                                                                        expect that he will not wish to go o v e r X S d bw
                                                                                       mU instead^ as part of his scrutiny, wish to consider with
                                                                                       great care the new allegations of evidence not put before
                                                                                       * e inquest—especially, as the House is well a w S
  matches and on crowd control.                                           football     £ f ” ef abo“|         time of death which, in the view of
                                                                                       the relatives and programme makers, the inquest was not
                                                                                       properly able to take into account.

  j X              E       j s       ^       s       a       s   -   w        s           M r. Nicholas Soames (Mid-Sussex): I waimlv
                                                                                       m esS S        .nght h° n' Gentleman’s statement and the
 s   S    : w S i ,t ' 5 £ s : a :                                                     S                sensltlve way in which he outlined his
                                                                                       plans. I take the point about the issue of police discipline
 « - > s a : S M      s t s s s s ;
                                                                                       L / S F * . of ^ “ quiiy’ but ^
                                                                                       undertake to consider a re-examination—not necessarily
                                                                                      in the light of these events, but more generally—o f the
 Director ofepLSb l ^ ering that Was not available to *e                              PjAoe• Jscphnary code, which provides S t ^ e „
 -                                                                                    Does h ^        ^ “ y matters under investigation lapse’


   M r. Straw: I can confirm exactly what the                               hon

                                                                                       ca^I                    With° Ut reference to this particular
                                                                                       afSlH fh!fP u        many members of the public regard it
                                                                                       d ? j£ r            “ ° fficer retires*     is * e end of all
S ? A to m e y lE " S i" * * ^ ^ ^ a d ^ A                                    e                 rnaiy procesf s’ H°wever, one of the things on
                                                                                                  “ .cmM fly taking advice is the fact tha? as I
 , " * » » <?** '■ clear thal, as I « n d c „ M d i,J S , 1
                                                             sr„Tyirs                                * regulations expect chief officers not to
                                                                                                               of officers on grounds of ill health
than shal which*486*1                j"dgn)ent on information other                   therefoiSCiP aiy proceedinSs « sti11 Pending. There is,
                                                                                      therefore, an issue not only of whether disciplinary
            J Z f c s S * ^ **                                       p -p —          r^uladons should be changed, but of whether chief
m ! L h u £ 1 Bt T n a t asking a « * » and highly                                   e £ f™                 " I properly              the terms of
frfff ii J g of ^ Court of Appeal to look at all the                                 S     f  8   ugUlatI0ns- Both
                                                                                     that I wish to investigate.    of  these  matters are subjects
                                                                                                                                              J
fr«h R a tio n s and the fresh e v i d C t t e ta » S r come
^ S S S has
prosecutions T so
                ^T     *** W
                  far come tohich
                               on *the
                                    * Dtector
                                       evidenceof
                                                that she                             the^     r f            (LiverP°°l' Riverside): I welcome
                                                                                            Home Secretary s statement in that it opens up the
  3 CD ]I.PA G 1/7
          31                H illsb orou gh D isaster
                                                                     30 JUNE 1997
                                                                                                 H illsb o ro u g h D isaster
                                                                                                                                          32
          (Ms Louise EllmanJ
                                                                             Those of us from Merseyside know that, to this dav
       possibility Of justice for the families whose lives hav*             H H khTeS T SUn, raW 3,1(1**“ painis sti11 tangible when
       been so cruelly devastated. Is my right hon FrienH                   2 2 S 2 W ^ U *p u * l3ne « menlioned. I should
       to assure the House that white L ineviubte l ^ l .                   bTmv h n n C 3?S?CIa1te myself with the remarks made
       considerations take place, he will keen      !? £    8               fMc Pii \ u             Member for Liverpool, Riverside
                                                                            (Ms Ellman) that, in the previous inquiry, the feelings of
                                                                            Hillsborough families were shamefully neglected
       information was not brought forward at          *
       time?                   8 rorward at the appropriate                 J t & ' l S l * ? * 2 * " ? 3Sk ^ ri«ht hon. Friend
                                                                            whether Lord Justice Stuart-SmithY terms of reference
                                                                            will extend to consideration of past and possible fiitnn.
                                                                            sfron^lmental SUpp0rt for those families? Although very
                                                                            strong support was provided—particularly locallv h!it
      s - § S i? S s E K                                                    also nationally to L s e families i n l e i r ^ e f ’ fce
                                                                            S e ’ss terms
                                                                                    t S T r fof
                                                                                              " ®reference
                                                                                                   ? SUPPOrtextend
                                                                                                             W3S Pitifil1- Wi"examining
                                                                                                                                to L o rd
                                                                            justice                                also to
                                                                           b S o ! er f f apeiSk diSgI3Cefil1 accusations about thf
      p             s        s          m               m                  behaviour of fans who were killed, at a time when their
                                                                           families were feeling such pain?

                                                                             M r. Straw: I understand entirely the feelings of mv
c                                                                          hon. Friend expressed on behalf of his constituents He
                                                                                   me whether the tom s of r e fe r e e S S S T t a S
                                                                           Government support to the families. They do not. With
                                                                           E ? f f l V " J on*I Ricnd. 1 make no apologies for
                                                                           that. TTje scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is to
                                                                           ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the
                                                                          Asaster at the Hillsborough stadium that was not available
                                                                          P r o ^ i2       -inqUliy’ the m^uest- the Director of Public
                                                                          Prosecutions in respect of criminal prosecutions or X
     2 H a " ? # 3 S r S =                                                chief officer of the South Yorkshire Jo ifc?
                                                                          said, it is a focused scrutiny, led by someone who is senior
     hooliganism is beginning to increasT T L           r

    SSSSS^ss&ststi                                                        to d T                         * the famiUes h»™ asked us


                                                                             M r. Ronnie Fearn (Southport)- I welcomo
                                                                          statement as a Merseyside Member, at the end of a liSe
    crowd control and policing at fy J b S matdhet? ISSUCS ° f            From w haTf m° St f“pporters of Liverpool football club
                                                                         From what I remember— I was in the House at the time—                         F
                                                                                                                                                       t.
                                                                         SSU Sm ? ,          ^    ^     had recollections of what
    « ■ « 2 T 3 i 2 l i : z f i ‘s s r a . 1 r                           haPPpned, but never came forward because they were                           b
                                                                         temfied to give evidence. Can we make an appeal—from                         k
    S d l S t a ? " eh' “        lbu’ sin“ 'rnplementation of            the House or through the lord justice—to ordinary people                     h
                                                                         and ask them to stretch their memories o n i n S E f t
    S s £ a = w = 5 i f a s a                                           now with ^ n? tened t0 ? S° 31 ‘b® time’ t0 come forward
                                                                                                                                                      t>
                                                                                                                                                      ir
                                                                                                                                                      ir
                                                                                         new         nce? 11131 is 3 cmcial P ^ of                 c
                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                ,Stra7 ! If * ere “ * any individuals who have
 experience. I have receive ™                      . a ^ te n in g
                                                                                                                                                  c-
                                                                                                                                                  te
                                                                                                                                                  be
 such ^ M o n s t o S g U f S ' ^ ' " ' 1 C0" S“le, “ y                                                                                           re
                                                                          I did not properly answer the second part of the                        al
■iS 2 S ff * .5 5 r S i t              p, ^ r               * - ■                                                                                 e\
evidence that has become avaiteble o n T ^ n ^ ^                        S o u th ^(Mr.
                                                                                   M r”1O
                                                                                        O ’Hara)
                                                                                          H ara) ^ in relation
                                                                                                        ^ Membcr   f° r ^ s l e yhv,
                                                                                                               to allegations                     in
                                                                                                                                                 Pi
w              - c m E S S S                                           th- ,iT *                           80 im°dismissed entirelv
                                                                                            Lord Taylor’s report
                                                                       ^ a lle g a tio n s made by certain newspapers and c l 2
                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                 b\
                                                                       ST the f t d l ^ f hat|the prinCipal reason for to disast«                pi
                                                                               /        0f P°hce c°ntrol. I hope that remains a                  ur
P a rt« .w ” on                                                        matter of reassurance for the families.                                   be
                                                                                                                                               I rif
  Mr. Edward O ’H ara (Knowsley, South)- Mav I strain                                                                                            th
                                                                       dirKtorJr f 5 5 ? M (5 f ! f tlaW): 1 declare “ interest as a
express my condolences to the Hillsborough famihes?                    w E s s in th        Wednesday football club and an eye
                                                                       witness to the event who was no more than 50 yd away
    24n>ti.PAr.i«                                                                                                                              lo f
       33                 H illsb orou gh D isaster
                                                                 30 JUNE IW7                   H illsb orou gh D isaster
                                                                                                                                       34
       before and after the game. The only other hon. Member
       who was an eye witness was Eddie Lovden wh» h»c ^                   disaster and a number of people who were severely
       leH the House. Sheffield Wednesday football club has the            injured there. I am sure that the Hillsborough families
       deepest sympathy with the victims and will be happy to             support group will welcome the independent review of the
       co-operate in any way with the inquiry.                            evidence. Will that review look at the events that took
         I have two questions for my right hon. Friend. First             place between 3.15 and 5.30 pm? The issue is very
       will the evidence be given on oath? There is a sreat               important for many of my constituents. I hope that what
                                                                          my right hon. Friend has announced today will lead to a
                                                                          full public inquiry.
       5 *                                             ,h~
       E V   S S r r r                      m       s                        M r. Straw: The answer to my hon. Friend’s first
              i                                                                                     yes- 0ne of t o major issues
     to reopen the matter of compensation? Can he give us                 raised by the Granada Television programme and by the
     some information about that?
                                                                          ^ 3C15SK n r P                     ° f death—whether it
                                                                          was 3.15 for all foose who died or whether it was later
        M r. Straw: I am very grateful to my hon Friend                   criticaHssue            Stuart-Smith will examine that

                                                                                            Points of Order
       . Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers that he has                 4.26 pm
   inadequate powers to conduct the scrutiny, I shall actively
                                                                            M r. Michael Ancram (Devizes): On a point of order
   s     p      M                                 L       S                       Speak°r ^ 'f h reference to the point of order
                                                                         raised by my hon. Fnend the Member for Ribble Valley
 'S      S      S 5 S T           ““ “                in respect of      (Mr. Evans) on Friday, have you had time to complete
                                                                                              ° l t o letter to t he sent you about
  t h ^ h,°n‘ f riunC? “ ked whether * e Government will pay             the behaviour of the Secretary of State for Wales and its
         2 °f * ? “ qUiry- We sha11 “ «ainly p S y T rfce                implications for the rights of Members of this House?
           .* mqmry ItSClf m d wiU refiuid the travelling and
  incidental expenses of those who appear before it to L -               cJ^L PartlCfla£’ 88 the f^**3- public utterances of the
  representations. I dealt with T e E T 0f 2 5                                                ^    thC h°n- Member for Blaenau
  representadon. which is a much wider issue. So £ , I have                                   316 80 contradictory that they cannot
  had no calls for legal aid. That would involve some large             both be telling the truth and given the Prime Minister’s
  decisions to which I cannot commit myself. With respect               categorical assurances to the House last Wednesday is it
                                                                        r i f r 0Unt f° r 11,0 reputation of the House and the
                      * e iSSUC 0f comPensation £ S S                              .members that the Secretary of State for Wales
  suffered does not anse as a result of this scrutiny.
                                                                        should make a personal statement to the House at the
    M r. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover): Does mv rieht hnn                   earliest opportunity?
 Friend recall that, a short time before the general election
 E       K        r     ^ aw ard ed £ S S u Z £                         me^Jw^TP              i har® n0W Seen to letter written to
 Decause they had witnessed the horrific events? It is well             I f .£ U         Member for Ribble Valley (Mr. Evans).
                      ““ U « P « »           » f the 4 S                As the House will understand, I do not divulge details of
                               I take it, from his answ«                correspondence between myself and individual Members
 today, that compensation will not be dealt with bv the                                   10      t0day‘ 1 have no comment about
 * q m ,. Will he 6i»e a           ^                  of
                                                                                             * * to right hon. Gentleman has
 inquiry lean in the direction that many of us hope for                    ^rinrin?Ch facts are not available to me. As a matter
                                                                       of principle however, I say clearly that freedom of speech
                                                                       'S         11,0 most cherished privileges of parliamentary
                                                                       democracy I expect Members to exercise thS
     M r. Straw: The issue of some police officers receiving           fundamental nght at all times to the fullest extent.
“2 T T
terraces   " not is
         have    !e not
                    some  °f
                        a matter for this scrutiny—not
                                                                       R      , Si“ 0“ Hughes (Southwark, North and
^ a S t o ' t h e S T T ’ bUt bCCaUSe il is not Meetly                 Bermondsey): On a point of order. Madam Speaker Is it
              nCed fOT * * scrutiny- which is to examine               o fB H riT n ,? aSkuy° U’ ? ° ut hsUf 311 hour before the end
evf c f ne" ““ tep31 evidence. If that new material                    wJ      1      ? 111   8 Kong* to express on behalf of the
evidence is found to exist, it should trigger a new public             House two thoughts that are probably strongly in the
K   S E '& S S by ““                                          »f       minds of all Members of Parliament—those who have
I fi,n   j         or   *he chief officer of the police               been privileged to go to Hong Kong and those who have
by honU\te m S l? the1“ "Cerns ‘h31 have been expressed                            .ve!7 s™ply’ will you pay tribute to all those
2 v n ,,„ r f ^   0n b0th Sldes of ^ House about the                  who served the Crown and the people of Hong Kong
payment of compensation to police officers and its                    dimng the past century and a half, including those in the
b* Traised
       i 3 Kin the
               ^ toddebate
                     3 S “ that
                            hwh?I promised
                                  were there-
                                           to The  issue
                                              discuss    could
                                                      with my         if        n c.ouncil? Secondly, will you express the hope
                                                                      of this Parliament that the democracy that has been
                                                                      cultivated in Hong Kong will be able to continue from
                                                                      midnight tonight throughout the years ahead?

o f tm        i M . (! ? e' Vale): 1 rePres“ t a number                  M adam Speaker: I know that the hon. Gentleman
                who ,ost loved ones in the Hillsborough
                                                                      recognises that that was not a point of order. But it is a
  S C D JI.P A G M
           DOCUMENTS AND OTHER EVIDENCE CONSIDERED BY SCRUTINY




Documents which are already pubic


1.        Taylor Inquiry: interim and final reports.

2.         Transcripts and other documentation from the Taylor Inquiry (to be returned
           to the Public Record Office).

3.        Transcripts of the inquest proceedings.

4.        Judgement of the Divisional Court on the judicial review application,
           November 1993.

5.        Guide to the safety of sports ground, 1986 edition.

6.        Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group, Home Office, 1997.

7.        Various published books about the Hillsborough disaster.

8.        Video tapes of broadcast television programmes about the disaster.

Documents originated by the Family Support Group

1.        Legal Opinion by Alun Jones, QC for the Support Group March 1997, with
          Annexes.

2.        Memorial to the Attorney General on behalf of the families of six of the
          deceased seeking a fresh inquest, April 1992.

3.        Skeleton argument on behalf of those families to the Divisional Court, 1993.

Documents and other evidence not otherwise publicly available which we will
placing in the Library

1.        Transcripts of interviews with those who gave oral evidence to Lord Justice
           Stuart-Smith.

2.        Other records of the discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
          transcripts were not made.

3.        Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses.

4.        Other written statements consulted at the request of the families (with the
          exception of those provided by Dr Bums and Dr West).



f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0591pd. doc
5.        Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by Counsel
          and others on behalf of the Family Support Group.

6.        South Yorkshire Police operational orders for the 1998 and 1989 FA Cup
           Semi-Finals at Hillsborough.

7.        Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority in relation to
          complaints against officers of the South Yorkshire Police.

8.        A report produced by David Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of Devon
          and Cornwall, for South Yorkshire Police in August 1990.

9.        Report prepared by Mr Noel Bume on the state of the ground for South
          Yorkshire Police in 1990.

10.       Police tapes TB1, TB2, TB3 and TB4 which contain the records of all material
          recorded by police CCTV cameras on the day of the disaster.

11.       Transcript of the open meeting involving Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
          families on 6 October 1997.

12.       Transcript of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s meeting on 30 September 1997 with
          Counsel for the Support Group.

Documents and other evidence which will not be placed in the Library

1.        Advice of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birts QC to the Director of Public
          Prosecutions, August 1990. (The Home Secretary has agreed with the
          Attorney General that this legal advice should not be made public because it
          attracts legal professional privilege and it is the firm policy of the DPP not to
          publish such detailed documentation relating to the merits of individual cases
          which have not been before the courts.)

2.        Report of a review of the evidence by the CPS, May 1997.         (Same reason
          applies).

3.        West Midlands Police reports to the DPP (23 volumes) (the same reason
          applies).

4.        Appendix 9 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. (This contains details of
          individual cases, and the relevant sections are being sent to the families
          concerned).

5.        Written statements made by Dr James Bums and Dr Ian West.                 (They
          concern the case of Kevin Williams only).




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp059 lp&doc
6.        Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s private meetings with families and
           submissions made by individual families to him. (Each person has the
           transcript of his/her private meeting.)

7.        “Body files” containing the detailed history of each individual victim. (Each
           family has, or request, been provided with the body file of their relative.)

8.        Police tape VRM2. (This is a video of the mortuary.)

9.        Photographic, documentary, video and other material held in the archive of
           the disaster held by South Yorkshire Police. (This consists of an entire room
           full of material. Much of it is held by the police on behalf of the coroner, and
           access to it is therefore governed by the Coroners’ Rules - that is, copies of
           relevant material is provided on request to those with a legitimate interest,
           including relatives of victims. Other sections of the archive contain copies of
          the material listed in other categories above. The remainder is miscellaneous
           material from many sources. Copies are provided on request by South
           Yorkshire Police, subject to them securing the agreement of the third party if
          the originator of the material is different from the person requesting a copy.)

Documents whose position has yet to be resolved

1.        Copies of all the original statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers
          following the disaster. (We are discussing this with South Yorkshire Police.
          They are concerned that because the statements are personal the
           recollections made immediately after the disaster contain emotive, abusive or
          other material which, if made public, would cause offence to the families - for
          example, abusive remarks about the behaviour of supporters. I have asked
          South Yorkshire Police to consider the possibility of making them available in
          anonymised form, so that individual officers would not be identified by name.)

2.        A report on the state of the ground prepared for Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Club by consulting engineers, Sir William Halcrow and Partners,
          August 1990. (This report was originally commissioned by solicitors for the
           Club in anticipation of contribution proceedings to determine the respective
           liabilities for compensation payments of the club, the council and the police.
          The solicitors acting for the club have indicated that in principle they do not
          see much difficulty in making this available, but they will not give firm
          agreement until they have seen the published report by Lord Justice Stuart-
           Smith.)

3.        Nine video tapes containing everything recorded by BBC tv cameras on the
          day of the disaster. (These tapes have been made available to all the official
           proceedings, including the Taylor Inquiry, the inquest and Lord Justice Stuart-
           Smith’s scrutiny, but the BBC are not prepared for them to be made generally
           available because much of it is an horrific record of the deaths of the victims.
           I have asked for their agreement that the tapes could, if requested, be viewed
           by legal representatives of the families.)


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0591pd. doc
