NORFELL LIMITED                                          Trading as:
25 Waterloo Road
Wolv^fflampton, West Midlands WV1 4DJ                    STADIASAF
Our Ref:      JRB/RNW/Inq                               Registered in England: No 2372805
Your Ref:

Date:         9th May 1989
                                                        Patent Pending
                                                        Telephone:         0902/20746
                                                                           0902/340252
                                                                           0703/619633
                                                                                                   ©
                                                        Facsimile:         0703/642177



        R M Whalley, Secretary
        Room 662
                                                                  ie t-v .         <A.
        The Home Office                                                      t/1            Rwvj
        50 Queen Annes Gate
        London SW1 H9A


        Dear Sir,
    »   Subject;    Crowd safety on the terraces.


        This company is formed to market a solution to the type of traqedies that have
        occured at Ibrox and Hillsborough. Our associates are engineers who have been
        involved in ground improvements at 1st and 2nd division clubs, and have a proven
        reputation.

        We believe we have a simple and realistic solution to the control of unpredictable
        forces generated at football matches. It is economic, some may say not pretty, but
        it should ensure that current capacities can be safely retained, as opposed to
        this factor with an all seater solution.

        After discussion with; The football authorities, fans associations, and police,
        we take this opportunity of presenting what we see to be the benefits of our
        proposals;

        A:   We believe that the safety aspect of our solution cannot be refuted, and
              insofar as is possible with a problem of this nature, is one which suits
              all interested parties.

        B:   The cost per spectator, based upon current legal ground capacities, is
             between £20 - £25. Subject to a survey in each particular case. Such
             survey would be free of charge.

        C:   If required this solution could be installed, certainly in the more obvious
             cases, by the start of next season, subject to the engineering approval
             being as rapid as it could be with our proposals.


                                                                               continued...



   Directors:   RN Williams, LLB, JR Bigford, Mech E, JC Thompson, B Sc, M Sc, C Eng, FICE, FI, Struct E u
                SA Brassington. Company Secretary. Associates: Thompson Barnfather & Partners,
                Consulting Civil and Structural Engineers, Eastleigh, Hampshire, S 0 5 4DS, A Chandler,
page two;


D:    It will improve policing access, and possibly reduce policing costs by
      reducing the number of officers necessary.

E:     It must be an aid to hooligan control, allied to numbered ticketing, the
      greater ease with which the police could spot the start of trouble, and
      easier marshalling.

F:    To a degree it would justify the removal of perimeter fencing, but is
      still safe in an emergency. Equally as safe as seating in all normal
      circumstances.

G:    It is a patented solution to avoid the risks of lower standard copying,
      the installations meet current load limits, and are capable of meeting
      higher load requirements should these be implemented.

H:    It should aviod the need for further reducing capacities, with the
      consequent loss of revenue to clubs.

I:    It is simple and obvious, and to a degree a variation on some existing
      themes, but goes much further, we have modulated components for ease
      of implementation and cost control.

We feel it would assist the police, satisfy the fans [ genuine element ] and
the clubs, it would require the change of certain attitudes, but in the
circumstances this ought not to be an obstacle.

We would welcome the opportunity to present our proposals more fully, and
trust that the foregoing is of interest.
