                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS

Name     Age       Robin HEROLD


Occupation         Retired Police Officer

Home or business address




Telephone number

This statement, consisting of 7 page(s) each *signed by me, is true to the best of
my knowledge and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence,
I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I
know to be false or do not believe to be true.

Dated the           day of^July 1989.


Signed                                  Signature witnessed b

                                        Officers Name           __

                                         Rank                   No




                                                         I was a Chief superintendent

with that Force.    Primarily my career has been C.I.D. orientated, apart from a few

short spells in uniform.    I was promoted to the rank I held on my retirement -

Chief Superintendent - in October 1979 and transferred from C.I.D. duties to 'F*

Division at Hammerton Road Police Station, Sheffield.      Prior to that time I had

little or no command experience of public order situations whatsoever.



During the winter and early spring of 1979/1980 the Steelworkers strike took place

in the Sheffield area and I became heavily committed to the provision of that

public order situation.    Additionally, I was involved in the policing of League

 football matches at the Sheffield Wednesday football ground at Hillsborough.      At

 that^-rtriSe SheftT&id Wednesday were in the second division and although there were

/some crowd protjj^ms, nothing of a very serious nature occurred.


',£cnriu.'A
 Signed
                           ______

                                            Signature Witnessed by
We learned some weeks prior to the date of the 1980 FA Cup Semi final that that

match was to be staged at Hillsborough.     As a result, I examined all our previous

documentation concerning the policing of major football matches with capacity

crowds at that stadiumn and, in the light of my experience of the public order

situations of the Steel strike and the general situation in a public order sense,

I was not satisfied that the policing arrangements which had appertained hitherto

at Hillsborough were adequate to deal with the occasion that we were confronted

with in 1980.    I therefore gave instructions that we should completely re-think

the situation and draw up a policing policy and contingency plan to adequately

police the 1980 semi-final cup tie with an anticipated crowd in excess of 50,000.

That was carried out and the Police Operational Order which came into being for

the policing of that match is still the backbone of that which appertains to this

day to the best of my knowledge, although of course, with the passing year;, it

has been honed and refined to take account of changing circumstances at the ground

and with local road systems.    The policing arrangements for the 1980 semi-final

proved to be a superb success, no doubt as a result of good crowd behaviour, good

weather, and teams travelling from totally opposite directions, north and south,

which obviated the need of traffic congestion on the motorway systems and that

type of thing.



The following year in 1981 we learned, again, that Hillsborough was to host an FA

Semi-Final Cup match.    The teams in that match were Tottenham Hotspur and

Wolverhampton Wanderers and the date of the match being Saturday 11 April 1981.

To the best of my recollection we again had adequate time to pre-plan that match.




Signed                                    Signature Witnessed by
There are occasions after drawn matches when police forces have to plan such

matches at very short notice, but I believe in 1981 we had more than adequate time

to prepare our planning.      Based on the success of the previous year in 1980 we

followed the 'mixture as before'.      The only difference being that, on this

occasion, both teams were approaching the City from the south - that is travelling

north on the Ml.      Tottenham fans travelling either by the A1 or Ml and the

Wolverhampton Wanderers supporters coming from the Midlands travelled by a number

of routes, mostly using the A38 and joining the Ml so that both teams were

approaching the City from the same direction.       In the event that caused problems.

There were traffic accidents and other matters which resulted in the late arrival

of fans at the stadium.



I have been given the opportunity of having sight of the minutes of a debriefing

for the F.A.Cup Semi-Final between Tottenham Hotspur FC and Wolverhampton

Wanderers FC   bppa   at Hillsborough, Sheffield on 11 April 1981, with the Police

Policy File No. f l l / O l / O S and can confirm that the bundle of the documents under

that reference number accurately reflect the events of the day and the inquiry

which resulted from the slight crushing in the Leppings Lane end resulting from

the late arrival of fans at the last few minutes before the kick off.



I remained as Divisional Commander for ’F ’ Division until November 1982 when I

transferred back to C.I.D. duties as head of the Force C.I.D.         During my time in

officere there the sub divisional Commanders of FI Division changed on several

occasions.     Initially, Superintendent Stark was a Sub-Divisional Commander,

followed by Superintendent David Chapman, who was then succeeded by Superintendent




Signed                                       Signature Witnessed by
Douglas Lock (now retired).   Each of those officers was aware, and dealt

personally with many of the routine league matches staged at the Hillsborough

Stadium and it was only on the occasion of a major match such as a semi final cup

tie, or one in which intelligence dictated was potentially troublesome, that I

would personally take command and attend at the ground in uniform to do so.



During my time at 'F' Division we experienced difficulties in our relationships

with the Hillsborough Club, insofar as the activities of their official stewards

were concerned.   The respective duties of police officers and the club stewards at

football matches are quite clearly defined.   There were many occasions, however,

when I felt the stewards totally abrogated their responsibility and blatently

ignored incidents to which they should have responded.   Such was my concern that

on 18 August 1981 I dictated a memorandum to Acting Superintendent Walter Smith

and Inspector Calvert on FI Sub-Division regarding that concern and giving them

precise instructions as to the briefing of stewards for the future.   I have been

allowed      it of a photostat copy of that memorandum, dated 18.8.81, under

Policy      . !201 instructing those officers to formally brief the stewards as to

their precise terms of reference and duties and their relationship with the police

officers who were detailed to duty inside and outside the ground in the immediate

vicinity of the entrance and exit gates.



I have been allowed by Chief Inspector Ross of the West Midlands Investigation

Team to have sight of a transcipt of evidence given by ex Police Superintendent

Douglas Lock to the Inquiry, being conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, into the

Hillsborough Disaster.   At one point in his evidence Mr Lock makes reference to




                                      Signature Witnessed by
                                        -    5   -




succeeding Mr Chapman at FI Sub-Division and attending the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Ground with myself and probably Mr Chapman.               He also makes reference to

the fact that thereafter there was a formal agreement that the police would assume

many of the duties of the stewards.          I absolutely, and quite unequivocally, refute

that suggestion.       I cannot say that I did not visit the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Ground with Superintendent Lock, for I very probably did on a number of

occasions in connection with perfectly routine negotiations.                  However, it is

certainly not the case that there has ever been any agreement, oral or in writing,

(formal or informal), which in any way alters the duties of the steward and those

of the police officers in acting as agents of the club.                 The only manner in

which police officers have acted as agents of the club is in practising their

authority, under Regulation 15 of the Ground Regulations, to eject persons from

the ground.     Regulation 15 was introduced during the era of my responsibility for

policing arrangements at the club.          The rule change and the negotiations leading

up to it had no relevance, whatsoever, to the relationship between stewards and

the police in any other respect .




Having said that I would also wish to state for the record that being aware of the

inadequacies, the age and often the imcompetence of the stewards, in the interests

of public safety I, as ground commander, always felt it necessary to ensure that

we had a police officer(s) available to assume the duties of the stewards should

trouble arise.       In essence, I suppose one could say that we were acting as a

longstop, but by no means did we ever seek to assume the responsibilities of the

stewards, nor should we do so.




Signed   ''f—    I         r   f    .                Signature Witnessed by
I have been asked to comment on the question of the radial fences erected on the

Leppings Lane terracing.     I have been given sight of documentation under Policy

File P22/02/08 (referred to earlier).    I have been asked to comment on the

question of the gates at the rear of the radial fences beneath the West Stand on

the Leppings Lane terrace.    During the negotiations prior to the erection of those

fences, the Fire Brigade were anxious to satisfy themselves that the gates when

closed and locked would be "under the control of the Police".       Clearly, the

purpose behind their concern being to ensure an adequacy of safety precautions in

the public interest in an emergency.    In interpreting that requirement, I

understood that to mean that police officers should be in possession of keys and

in a position to open those gates to ensure adequate evacuation in an emergency.

To the best of my knowledge that took place on each and every match for which I

was ultimately responsible and to the best of my knowledge it has been so ever

since I left 'F' Division.    I never understood that requirement to mean that a

police officer would be physically and personally stationed by each of those gates

before, during and after, any particular match.    We have certainly, as police

officers, been in a position to open those gates in plenty of time for an

emergency evacuation, for example, if a terrorist bomb alert was to arise.

However, where the gates were to be locked back in the fully open position, as at

a semi-final tie where all the supporters at the Leppings Lane End followed the

same   team, police 'control' of the gates was a redundant concept.



 I would comment that on Page 46 of the transcript of evidence given by Mr Lock to

Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, he makes reference to a meeting that he had at the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground with Superintendent Chapman, myself and




                                           Signature Witnessed by
‘ /
                                             7


      "somebody from the Club", who he identifies as Mr Chester.     I completely refute

      that suggestion and accept that later in his evidence Mr Lock agreed that was a

      mistake and that he intended to refer to Mr England.   However, for the record it

      should be noted that during my tenure of office the Secretary of the Sheffield

      Wednesday Football Club was Eric England and he was the only Secretary whom I ever

      personally dealt with in a professional way.   Although I know Mr Chester he was

      not in post at the time and I have had no dealings with him.




      Signed                                 Signature Witnessed by




                                        7
