           edge hill
U N I V E R S I T Y COLLEGE




            Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice


            Direct Line:              01695 584305

            Our Ref:                  PS/BH

            8 September 1997

            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
            The Hillsborough Scrutiny
            Room 528
            The Home Office
            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
            LONDON
            SW1H 9AT

            Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

            Ref: The Independent Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

            Over the last eight years, along with colleagues at the Centre for Studies in
            Crime and Social Justice, I have been engaged in researching the
            Hillsborough Disaster and its aftermath. While the work has been complex
            and wide-ranging, the Hillsborough Project has examined in depth the Home
            Office Inquiry and the Coroner’s Inquests. Members of the team attended the
            hearings and we are in possession of the transcripts and related
            documentation, including witness statements. We have interviewed many of
            the senior professionals involved in the disaster and its immediate aftermath,
            most of the bereaved families, a considerable cross-section of survivors and
            others, such as legal representatives.

            While we have published a range of findings and related work on the
            Hillsborough Disaster, our most substantial publication is No Last Rights, a
            copy of which is enclosed with this preliminary submission to your scrutiny.
            Chapters 2, 3 and 4 focus entirely on the legal process from the ‘mini-inquests’
            through to the judicial review. These are the key evaluative chapters regarding
            the conduct and appropriateness of the Hillsborough inquests. Also in these
            chapters are the responses of the bereaved at each stage of the process and
            the accounts of those survivors who gave evidence. While the chapters reveal
            the structural inadequacies of the inquests in handling such high profile and
            controversial cases, they also demonstrate the anomalies and concerns
            relating to the Hillsborough inquests.

                                                                                                                  continued...




           D r Jo h n C ater Chief Executive   St Helens Road, O rm skirk,   Telephone: 01695 575171
                                               Lancashire L39 4Q P           Facsim ile: 01695 579997
                                                                             Internet: http://w ww .ehche.ac.uk
8 September 1997

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

No Last Rights opens with an executive summary followed by
recommendations. The key issues concerning the inquests are raised in the
sections starting on page iv and ending on page xiii. These are expanded
further in the three chapters indicated above. Apart from those presented in
No Last Rights there are several other issues which have emerged since its
publication in 1995. At the time of writing it was clear to me that the bereaved
families had received inconsistent and, occasionally, inaccurate information
regarding the circumstances of the deaths of their loved ones. Yet they had
been denied the opportunity to pursue specific matters because the relevant
evidence had been presented to the inquests in summary form by investigating
officers. On closer inspection of the documentation received by families,
however, it was clear that statements and summaries were occasionally
inaccurate. We provided details of one case as an example (see pp209-216).

Since the decision to hold an independent scrutiny was taken, the bereaved
families have received a mass of material. Much of this they are reading or, in
the case of photographs, seeing for the first time. Eight years on it is clear that
evidence new to them is appearing and often it does not correspond to the
accounts given at the inquests. More than this, it is apparent that, for
whatever reason, significant evidence had been previously withheld.

My concerns over the quality and reliability of evidence have been exacerbated
by recent interviews conducted by me in Sheffield. I am particularly concerned
about the procedures used to arrive at signed police statements. What I have
seen indicates the adoption of unusual and irregular practices through which
police officers’ statements came to be finalised. Given that there exist quite
separate and different concerns over the exertion of pressure on witnesses by
investigating officers I am of the opinion that these matters should form part of
a major public inquiry into how evidence was gathered, how statements were
constructed and how witnesses to the Home Office Inquiry and the Coroner’s
Inquests were selected.

My more recent research has also consolidated other serious matters raised
by the earlier work. As a preliminary submission I have attempted to indicate
the full range of these matters and to illustrate, more specifically, the focus of
each. The problem is that new material arrives almost daily and there is
clearly more to be released. I trust, therefore, that if I gain access to further
relevant material you will allow me the opportunity to submit it to you.

                                                                       continued.
3

8 September 1997

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

Because of the sensitivity of some of the above I have not committed it in
detail to paper. I am able to supply you with detail on each of the specific
matters raised in this preliminary submission. I would like the opportunity to
meet with you, specifically to discuss the matters concerning the gathering of
evidence and the construction of statements.

Yours sincerely




Professor Phil Scraton PhD, MA, Adv Dip Ed, BA
Centre Director

Encs
