                                                                             (3?                                               2 0 APR 1989 * ■ * * ! ,s I
The Littiewoods O
                                                                                                                   iV c iJ tfs -L /^ c U a is CA>
JM Centre Old Hall Street Liverpool X L70 1AB
Switchboard: 051-235 2222 Telex: 628501 Direct Line
                                                                                                                       A ^ r             f1 '




GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE
D. H. PITCHER                                                                                    ' t o 1* ? * ' ’ * ,


 STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                                        'tuJW fr'
                                                                                                 A/V
                                                                                                17thi A pr i l , 1989.


 The Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd, C.B.E., M.P.,
 Secretary of State for the Home Department,
 House of Commons,
 London SW1.




 It is some time since you visited us in Liverpool.  Today,
 regretfully, I write this letter under the most unfortunate
 circumstances following the greatest tragedy to be inflicted on
 Liverpool since the war.

 I know you are aware that our Company has a unique position in
 the Football World and this tragedy further confirms our
 determination to assist in any way possible*

 As the Company's Chief Executive and a Director of Everton, I
 have a first hand experience of the football scene and would be
 pleased to extend assistance from the company or, if you thought
 fit, offer my own services in any temporary capacity.

  It is my own personal view that the attitudes and ambitions of
  leading members of the Football Authorities have led to a
  serious lack of realism as to what can be done to make the game
  a safe, popular and enjoyable pastime.

 Reforms need to be far reaching and they have to be seriously
 pursued by people inside the sport.  I hope your enquiry will
 show the way forward and remove the current vacuum in
 leadership.

  I was born and brought up in Liverpool and never have I known
  such sorrow and despair since my boyhood experiences of the war.




  D. H. Pitcher




 The Uttlewoods Organisation PIC Registered Number: 2621S2 London Registered Office: JM Centre Old Hall Street UverpooIX L701AB
