From: M JPyne
      Operational Policing
      Policy Unit
      Room 528, QAG
      S 273 - 2433
      25 November, 1997



Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


Further to Mr Edmundson’s submission of 24 November, we have received a further
letter from a relative of one of the Hillsborough victims about Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s recent off-the-cuff comments in Liverpool, and to what they perceive to be
the limitations of the Judge’s terms of reference.

2.     A draft reply is attached.




                                            M JPyne




 f:\oppu\comp lnts\shortsub\mp-0396.doc
Mrs Rose Robinson




Thank you for your letter of 9 October about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s reported
comment during his recent visit to Liverpool.


I am sorry that you were upset by the Judge’s comment to Mr Phil Hammond. The
Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this remark, which he made off-
the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it to be taken seriously. He has
made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not the subject of the Scrutiny.


The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the Scrutiny
will allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence was
overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the consideration of
criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to recommend any other
action which should be taken in the public interest. His terms of reference are,
therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they will allow him to carry out a
full scrutiny of the evidence which has been submitted by the families and others.


As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of those
who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these meetings
fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report.


 I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in which
the families and the public can have confidence.




 f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\mp-0396.doc
                                                                                                   o
                                                     L&$r-



Dear Mr Straw,                                                                         C<SVVl p U c I ^
I am writing to you firstly to e x ^ ^ m ^ c o n c e m s over Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s |A /V X l IA 1
remarks about Liverpool Fans. I w aS^^^ftJie/am ilies meeting him that day.                           i Vfy^
How asupposedly unbiased person of siici£% li standing, appointed by yourself, to conduct                  A;-
an already sensitive issue, could say such a Ming almost beggars belief. I reluctantly           ("A, l\$ P
accepted his apology with reservations.                                        "------ —            ^
Secondly, I must also set down my concerns about your terms of reference. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith himself, said he was very restricted by them, as only fresh evidence was going
to be considered. My concern is about suppressed evidence, which apparently cannot be
considered, as it was available to the coroner. The fact that he did not call this, was his own
choice, and we had no right to insist that he called key witnesses. At this point I would like
to refer to a letter I received from you. It has no reference number, but I believe it was sent
to all of the families dated 30th June 1997.1 quote one paragraph. "I have decided, in all
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no m atter of
significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken". I take this at face value, and I
have many significant matters that concern me, but they do not fit into the terms of
reference. I feel as though I have been put into bat, with not one, but both hands tied behind
my back.

I would like to further state that I feel the inquest was invalid and should be declared as
such. The how, when and where were not adhered to. The how is in dispute, and the 3.15
p.m. cut off point is certainly not appropriate. In my mind, you cannot have an inquest
ending 3.15 p.m. when people are still alive, and could possibly have stayed alive if given
medical treatment by paramedics nearby, who’s access was forbidden by the police.

In my opinion I have not had an inquest on my son Steven, and I am entitled to one, which
allows me to ask questions.

I quote the following "Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing, by an
independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his (sic) rights and obligations."
(Article 10 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.

I would appreciate your remarks, as one who helped vote your Government into power.



Yours sincerely


Rose Robinson (Mrs)                J 2 .&
