   Liverpool         Cathedral




YOU’LL NEVER
WALK ALONE


   The Hillsborough
   Memorial Service


 S aturday, 29th April 1989, 11.00 a.m.
              WINDSOR     CASTLE




The Right Reverend David Sheppard,
  Bishop of Liverpool.

                                              i


    My thoughts and prayers are with you and
with your fellow Church leaders in Liverpool
today,   and with all those who mourn the
victims of the Hillsborough tragedy.




                                   ELIZABETH R.




29th April,   1989.




                      2
f rom the Archbishop o f Canterbury

M y prayers and thoughts are first with the victims         and their
families - but so many are caught up in the tragedy.

I am thankful that the churches together are playing their part in
counselling and healing.

As one born and brought up in Liverpool I know that a tragedy like
this will bring out the best in my home City and the best of that
C ity’s spirit is incomparable.




From the Vatican

Deeply saddened by the Sheffield Stadium tragedy which has caused
such loss of life and brought about suffering to the injured and to
numerous families whose beloved set out for a day of relaxation and
pleasure, the Holy Father prays for the souls of the deceased and
invokes G od’s comfort and strength on the nation and on all who
have been affected personally.




From the M oderator o f the Free Church Federal Council

The members of the Free Churches join with fellow-Christians, and
all men and women of goodwill, in expressing their solidarity in grief
with all who have suffered through the Hillsborough disaster.

W e pray for all whose lives have been devastated by this tragedy.
We mourn the loss of so many innocent people, young and old. May
we resolve, by G od’s grace, to do all in our power to prevent such an
unspeakable horror ever happening again.



                                      3
From the East:
                 T H E C A T H E D R A L PR O C E SSIO N

                            The Choir Cross

                               The Choir

                         The Choral Conductor

                   Cathedral Readers and Chaplains

                         The Canon Precentor
                      The Revd. Canon Ken Riley                         f

            The Chancellor           The Canon Treasurer
 The Revd. Canon David Hutton          The     Revd. Canon Huw Thomas

                        The Dean of Liverpool
                    The Very Revd. Derrick Walters

From the West:
                 T H E E C U M E N IC A L P R O C E SSIO N

The Revd. Nicholas Frayling              Rt. Revd. Mgr. Vincent Malone
   Rector of Liverpool                   Administrator, Metropolitan
                                                        Cathedral

                      The Rt. Revd. A J Farquhar
                  Auxiliary Bishop of Down & Connor


                                CHESTER

  The Rt. Revd. Michael Baughen             The Rt. Revd. Joseph Gray
      The Bishop of Chester                 Bishop of Shrewsbury


                             NOTTINGHAM

   M ajor Mervyn Woodman             The Revd. Geoffrey Clark
 Salvation Army Divisional Commander Methodist District Chairman

    The Rt. Revd. James McGuiness        The Rt. Revd. Patrick H am s
       Bishop of Nottingham              The Bishop of Southwell


                                     4
                     The Ven. Graeme Spiers
                     Archdeacon of Liverpool


                          SHEFFIELD

    The Revd. Gordon Wilson          The Revd. Ronald Waine
         Official Chaplain to          Methodist Church
        Sheffield Wednesday

   Lt. Col. Bramwell James            The Revd. Donald Hilton
   Salvation Army                     United Reformed Church
   Divisional Commander

   The Rt. Revd. Gerald Moverley      The Rt. Revd. D.R. Lunn
     Bishop of Hallam                The Bishop of Sheffield


                      Cardinal Basil Hume
               Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster


                          LIVERPOOL

The Revd. Canon Michael Wolfe       The Rt. Revd. John Rawsthome
Ecumenical Officer                       Auxiliary Bishop

The Revd. John Fairweather Tall     The Revd. Eric Allen
  Baptist Church        Moderator of the URC Mersey Province

The Rt. Revd. Kevin O ’Connor       Major Alan Bennett
Auxiliary Bishop                    Salvation Army

                 The Rt. Revd. Michael Henshall
                   The Bishop of Warrington

The Most Revd. Derek Worlock      The Revd. Dr. John Newton
Archbishop of Liverpool    Merseyside Free Church Moderator

                  The Rt. Revd. David Sheppard
                    The Bishop of Liverpool



            The Most Rev. & Rt. Hon. John Habgood
                   The Archbishop of York


                                5
ri/ nll stand at the entry o f the Lord Lieutenant o f Merseyside, Wing
c o l d e r Sir Kennlih Sioddan K.C.V.O., who r e p r e s s Her
Majesty the Queen at this service.
We then sit until the entry o f the Choir, when we stand to sing:

HYMN

Abide with me, fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens, Lord with me abide:
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.


Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
Change and decay in all around I see,
O thou who changest not, abide with me.


I need thy presence every passing hour;
What but thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.


 I fear no foe with thee at hand to bless;
 Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
 Where is death’s sting? Where, grave, thy victory?
 I triumph still, if thou abide with me.


 Hold thou thy Cross before my closing eyes;
 Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
 Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
 In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.


 THE WELCOM E


  We sit and the Bishop o f Liverpool,
  the Rt. Revd. David Sheppard, welcomes
  the people and introduces the service.



                                     6
LIGHT IN OUR DARKNESS

Now candles are lit, one fo r each life lost at Hillsborough,
as the Choir sings:

Thou knowest, Lord, the secrets of our hearts: shut not thy merciful
ears unto our prayers. But spare us, Lord, spare us, Lord most holy:
O God, most mighty. O holy and most merciful Saviour, thou most
worthy Judge eternal: Suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of
death to fall from thee. Amen.
                                            Music: Henry Purcell

We kneel, or remain seated,
Hp Canon Ken Riley says

Let us pray

Almighty God to whom all hearts are open, all desires known and
from whom no secrets are hidden, look on us today in your mercy:

       on those who have lost loved ones and whose lives seem
       empty of meaning;

       on those who were badly injured and for whom life will never
       be the same again;

       on those who cannot forgive themselves;

       on those who blame everyone except themselves;

       on those overwhelmed by the scale of the disaster;

       on those who escaped with their lives and today give thanks.

       Lord, when we are down,

All:          lift us up.

       Lord, when we do not understand,

All:          lighten our darkness.

       Lord, when we draw near to you,

All:          draw near to us. Amen.



                                      7
Bound together as a family in common sorrow, we pray in the words
which Jesus taught us:


Our Father who art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name,
Thv kingdom come, thy will be done,
On earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread,
And forgive us our trespasses,
A s w e forgive those who trespass against us;

And lead us not into temptation,
T?nt deliver us from evil.                                          a
For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory,                  {
for ever and ever. Amen.



Now we stand to sing



 HYMN


 God is Love: and he enfoldeth
       all the world in one embrace;
 With unfailing grasp he holdeth
       every child of every race.
 And when human hearts are breaking
       under sorrow’s iron rod,
 Then they find that selfsame aching
       deep within the heart of God.


  God is Love: and though with blindness
        sin afflicts the souls of men,
  God’s eternal loving-kindness
        holds and guides them even then.
  Sin and death and hell shall never
        o’er us final triumph gain;
  God is Love, so Love for ever
        o’er the universe must reign.




                                   8
 We sit fo r

 THE FIRST READING

 read by a Liverpool Football Club Supporter

 The Book of Wisdom Chapter 3 verses 1-9

 But the souls of the just are in G od’s hand, and torment shall not
 touch them. In the eyes of foolish men they seemed to be dead; their
 departure was reckoned as defeat, and their going from us as disaster.
 But they are at peace, for though in the sight of men they may be
 ounished, they have a sure hope of immortality; and after a little
« ia s tis e m e n t they will receive great blessings, because God has tested
 mem and found them worthy to be his. Like gold in a crucible he
 put them to the proof, and found them acceptable like an offering
 burnt whole upon the altar. In the moment of G od’s coming to them
 they will kindle into flame, like sparks that sweep through stubble;
 they will be judges and rulers over the nations of the world, and the
 Lord shall be their king for ever and ever. Those who have put their
 trust in him shall understand that he is true, and the faithful sbali
 attend upon him in love; they are his chosen, and grace and mercy
 shall be theirs.


 We remain seated


 THE BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE

 containing the names and ages o f those who lost their lives at
 Hillsborough is placed upon the High Altar.


 Meanwhile, the Choristers sing

 Pie Jesu, qui tollis peccata mundi, dona eis requiem sempitemam.

 O Holy Jesus, who takes away the sins of the world, grant them rest
 eternal.

                                    Music: Andrew Lloyd Webber




                                      9
THE SECOND READING

read by M r K enny Dalglish, M anager o f Liverpool Football Club

from the Epistle to the R om ans, Chapter 8

W hat are w e to say?

If G od is on our side, w ho is against us? He did not spare his own
Son, but surrendered him for us all; and with this gift how can he
fail to lavish upon us all he has to give?

Then w hat can separate us from the love o f Christ? Can affliction or
hardship? Can persecution, hunger, nakedness, peril or the sword? I n ^
spite o f all, overw helm ing victory is ours through him w ho loved us.
F or I am convinced that there is nothing in death or life, in the realm
of spirits or superhum an powers, in the world as it is or the w orld as
it shall be, in the forces of the universe, in heights or depths -
nothing in all creation that can separate us from the love o f G od in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

We stand to sing

HYMN

Guide me, O thou great Redeemer,
Pilgrim, through this barren land;
I am weak, but thou art mighty;
Hold me with thy powerful hand:
Bread of heaven,
Feed me now and evermore.

Open now the crystal fountain
Whence the healing stream doth flow;
Let the fiery cloudy pillar
Lead me all my journey through:
Strong deliverer,
Be thou still my strength and shield.

When I tread the verge of Jordan,
Bid my anxious fears subside;
Death of death, and hell’s destruction,
Land me safe on Canaan’s side:
Songs and praises
I will ever give to thee.



                                    10
W e sit fo r


T H E AD DRESS


The Revd. Dr. John Newton,
Moderator of the Free Church Federal Council


We remain seated as the

SY M B O LS O F SY M PA TH Y

iire carried to the High Altar. These Books o f Condolence are but
tokens o f the thousands o f messages and expressions o f sympathy
received in Liverpool in recent days.


There will be a further opportunity to sign a Book o f Condolence in
the Cathedral after this Service.


Meanwhile the Choir sings these words o f consolation


And I saw a new heaven and a new earth : for the first heaven and
the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. And I,
John, saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out
of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard
a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people,
and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain: for the former things are passed away.


               Revelation Chapter 21 verses 1-4

               Music: E. Bainton




                                    11
Now we kneel or si, as Archbishop Derek Worlock leads

THE PRAYERS
Heavenly Father, God of all mercy receive into your loving and
Heavemy r a i      ,                brothers and sisters who have died
eternal                             We loved them very much in their
v e ^ a m o n g us Now we entrust them to your fatherly care that they
       live wfth you for ever in the happiness of life in your kingdom
Father the sudden unexpectedness of their death has left us sorrowfu
anil bereft We turn to you for comfort and new strength. Grant
S a c e of mind and consolation to their families and friends. Fill the
emptiness in our lives with faith and new hope in the power of your*
risen Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


God our Father, life of the faithful, glory of the humble, happiness of
the just hear our prayers for those who have been injured in body or
in mind Grant relief to their pain and give them new confidence and
strength Restore them to good health and turn our anxiety for them
into joy at their recovery. Father of power and mercy, bless the
people of Sheffield who have shared our sorrow, and bless all those
who have cared for our people in hospital with such devotion and
skill. Lord, you know what really happened on that fateful afternoon.
As we praise you for the heroism and dedication of so many, heal the
 wounds of any remaining fear and misunderstanding. Amen.


 Almighty and merciful God you make all things new in your Son,
 Jesus Christ, our Universal King. Bless the spirit of reconciliation
 that is amongst us and heal the wounds of past division. Open our
 hearts to new purpose and mutual concern. Grant prosperity to our
 City, to Merseyside and to the Nation. Free all the world to rejoice
 in the peace of your Son, to glory in his justice, to live in his love.
 Bind us all together as one family, united in the service of our
 Saviour, Jesus Christ, whose kingdom is with you and the Holy
 Spirit, one God for ever and ever. Amen.

        Lord, we your servants speak this prayer:

 All:   Be it your care. Amen.




                                    12
We stand to sing:

HYM N


Ye holy angels bright,
W ho wait at God’s right hand,
Or through the realms of light
Fly at your Lord’s command,
Assist our song,
For else the theme
Too high doth seem

♦
For mortal tongue.


Ye blessed souls at rest,
W ho ran this earthly race,
And now, from sin released,
Behold the Saviour’s face,
His praises sound,
As in his light
With sweet delight
Ye do abound.


Ye saints who toil below,
Adore your heavenly King,
And onward as ye go
Some joyful anthem sing;
Take what he gives
And praise him still,
Through good and ill,
W ho ever lives.


My soul, bear thou thy part,
Triumph in God above,
And with a well-tuned heart
Sing thou the songs of love.
Let all thy days
Till life shall end,
W hate’er he send,
Be filled with praise.




                                 13
We kneel or sit and Cardinal Basil Hume says

God grant to the living, grace; to the departed, rest;
to the Church, the Nation and the Commonwealth unity, peace and
concord, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Now the Archbishop        o f York,   the   Most Revd. John      Habgood
pronounces

THE BLESSING
Go forth into the world in peace; be of good courage; hold fast to
that which is good; render to no one evil for evil; strengthen t h ^ .
fainthearted; support the weak; help the afflicted; honour all p e o p l e ^ '
love and serve the Lord, rejoicing in the power of the Spirit. And
the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit, be upon you and remain with you always. Amen.


There is a profound silence.


The silence is broken by a chorister singing "You’ll never walk
alone" as the Cross o f Liverpool, the youngest choristers and
Crossguild lead the Ecumenical Procession, distinguished guests and
representatives o f Liverpool Football Club to the Hillsborough
Memorial on the steps o f the Rankin Porch.


As the Choir comes to the end o f the words below, THE WHOLE
CONGREGATION rises to its fe e t and sings

When you walk through a storm
Hold your head up high
And don’t be afraid of the dark.
At the end of the road there’s a golden sky
And the sweet silver song of a lark.
Walk on through the wind,
Walk on through the rain,
Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
And you’ll never walk alone,
You’ll never walk alone.

Once the Procession has left the Cathedral, ALL SIT.



                                      14
^ T H E H A L L O W IN G O F T H E H IL L S B O R O U G H M E M O R IA L

  When the Processions have descended the Rankin Steps, the Dean o f
  Liverpool, the Very Revd. Derrick Walters, hallows the Hillsborough
  Memorial in these words:

         IN THE FAITH OF JESUS CHRIST,
         WHO DIED AND ROSE AGAIN,
         WE HALLOW THIS STONE
         AS A PERPETUAL MEMORIAL
         TO THOSE W HO DIED AT HILLSBOROUGH.

  ^      REST ETERNAL GRANT THEM, O LORD.

  All:   L E T L IG H T P E R P E T U A L SH IN E U PO N T H E M .


  T H E B L ESSIN G O F T H E CITY

  N ow the Merseyside Church Leaders say:

  God bless Liverpool
        and make her people
        strong in faith,
        steadfast in hope,
        and generous in their charity,
  through Jesus Christ our Lord. Am en.

  Flowers are now laid at the Memorial.

  The inscription reads

                             HILLSBOROUGH

                               15 APRIL 1989

                          You’ll never walk alone




  Please remain seated until asked to leave by the Stewards.

  There will be an opportunity to contribute to the Hillsborough Appeal
  Fund as you leave the Cathedral.
                                        We remember

John A lfred A nderson              Philip H am m ond                Alan M cG loo n
C olin A shcroft                    E ric H ankin                    K eith M cG rath
Jam es G ary A spinall              G ary H arrison                  D avid W illiam M ather
K ester R og er M arcus Ball        P ete r A n drew Harrison        B rian M atthew s
G erard B aron                      Stephen Francis Harrison         Paul M urray
Sim on Bell                         D avid H aw ley                  L ee N icol
                                                                     Stephen Francis O ’Neill
B arry B ennet                      Jam es H ennessey                Jo hn O w en s
D avid John B enson                 Carl Darren H ewitt              W illiam R oy P e m b e ^ n
D avid W illiam Birtle              N icholas M ichael H ewitt       Carl W illiam R i m r r ^ ®
T racy B ox                         Paul A ntho ny H ew itson        D avid R im m er
Paul D avid B rady                  Sarah L ouise Hicks              G raham John R oberts
A ndrew B rookes                    V ictoria Jane Hicks             Stephen Joseph R obinson
Carl Brow n                         G ordo n Horn                    H enry C harles Rogers
D avid Stephen B row n              A rthur H orrocks                C olin A ndrew Sefton
H enry T h o m as B urke            T ho m as A nthony H oward       In g a Sham sides
Peter B urkett                      T ho m as H ow ard               P aula Smith
Paul Carlisle                       E ric H ughes                    A d am Spearritt
R ay m o n d C h apm an             Alan Johnstone                   Philip John Steele
G ary C hurch                       Christine A nne Jones            D avid L eonard T h o m as
Joseph Clark                        G ary Philip Jones               Patrick John T ho m p so n
Paul C larke                        R ichard Jones                   P eter R ueb en T hom pson
G ary C ollins                      N icholas Joynes                 S tuart P aul W illiam s
Stephen P aul C opoc                A nthony Peter K elly            P ete r T ootle
Jam es Philip D elaney              M ichael K elly                  C hristopher Jam es T raynor
C hristopher E dw ards              Carl Jam es Lewis                M artin K evin T rayn or
V incent M ichael F itzS im m ons
                                    Ian Lover                        K evin Tyrell
T ho m as Steven Fox                Francis M cA llister             Colin W afer
John Paul G ilhooley                John M cB rien                   Ian W helan
B arry Glover                       M arie M cC abe                  M artin K enneth W ild
D errick G odw in                   Joseph D aniel M cC arthy        K evin D aniel W illiam s
R oy H am ilton                     Pete M cD onnell                 G raham Sh aw n W right


                                    and also those w ho w ere injured.
