                         MIDLAND REGIONAL CRIME SQUAD
   Regional          Co-ordinator                                     Headquarters
   DET CH SUPT MJ FOSTER                                              341 Bourn ville Lane
                                                                      Birmingham B30 1QX
   Your reference:                                                    Telephone: 0121 626 4052

   Our Reference:     MJF/MH(regcol 1/hills.bne)                      Fax: 0121 626 4160




                                                                      16 December 1997


  Mr C F Bone
  The Hillsborough Scrutiny
  Room 1106
  50 Queen Anne's Gate

♦
^ London. SW1H9AT




                       Interviews with Sergeant Appleton, Sergeant McCombie and
                                      D/Chief Superintendent Foster

  Thank you for the transcripts and each of us has considered the content and I would wish to make
  the following comments:

   1.       Sergeant Appleton

           Julie is happy with the content and there is nothing she wishes to add.

  2.       D/Chief Superintendent Foster

           I would ask that the term "West Midlands RCS" is changed to "Midland RCS". This
           Squad serves six forces in the Region and is staffed by officers from those forces.

  3.       Sergeant McCombie

           Graham feels he has not properly addressed the main issues raised in his interview with
           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and would like the enclosed statement he has made to be
           referred to as well.




                                                                                                 Cont./..
                                                 2

 May I comment on the content o f the statement submitted to you by Graham, and specifically on
 procedure. In relation to major incident room procedures, it is acceptable to reply to an original
 message for action with a message. In this instance M586 from the Social Worker being replied
 to by M l395 from the officer.

 Incident room procedures automatically link the messages to the nominal (Mr Taylor here) and
 any later search will produce ALL documentation linked to Mr Taylor.

 In addition, the actions requested by Graham in Message M 1395 and replied to by           on
 Action A5206 are automatically linked and always retrievable against the nominal of Mr Taylor.

I am satisfied Sergeant McCombie acted correctly based upon the text in the message. I would
not have expected a statement of retraction unless the matters retracted were already in statement
format. As it happens here, the information on the Message from the Social Worker is not
specific and quite correctly and importantly, Graham has ensured the main issues raised and
retracted by Mr Taylor were recorded and entered for any later reference. Despite the 'retraction'
and no doubt because of the medication and confusion on the part o f Mr Taylor, the officer still
raised three actions to try and confirm or otherwise the issues raised and retracted.

I am sure you appreciate what I am about to say, but I feel it is important to emphasise some
things about this aspect of the Hillsborough Investigation on behalf o f all of the West Midlands
Officers and the 'deceased team'.

For many weeks and months they dealt with the victims' families and spent many many hours
listening and talking to help the bereaved come to terms with this disaster. Some officers
returned at night to their hotel only to display their own emotions and often shed tears openly in
an effort to cope and carry on the next day.

Those officers had to try to be professional, to separate emotions in order to progress the
investigation and had to ensure the most factual and best evidence was presented for Lord Justice
Taylor, the Coroner and the Director of Public Prosecutions.

Despite all of this and many other factors, to my knowledge, until now, from over 10,000 people
interviewed, the only complaints made are those you have referred to me during this Scrutiny and
they have all come very late, even to the Cook report.

Mistakes are always possible; misunderstandings likely and to please all is impossible, but I do
believe West Midlands Police Officers gave everything to ensure every possible aspect was
covered to enable the respective authorities to examine and determine why Hillsborough
happened. I find it very sad now that some of those same officers actions are now called into
question in this way.




                                                                                          Cont./..
                                               3

After the Cook report when Julie Appleton telephoned me she was quite shocked and upset at
the content. I considered long and hard whether to respond because I knew the theme o f the
programme was wrong and assumptions incorrect. I decided not to do so, not for Julie's sake, not
to protect West Midlands Police, not to avoid being defensive, but because I believed it wrong
to continue and to raise the issues for the sake of many o f the families that lost loved ones at
Hillsborough.

In a roundabout way I guess I am saying Hillsborough affected a great many people in different
ways and I hope Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will understand my reasons for wanting to share this
with the Hillsborough Scrutiny team.

Yours sincerely




  J Foster
D/Chief Superintendent
Regional Co-ordinator
                                            West Midlands Police

                                              Witness Statem ent

                    (CJ Act 1967, s.9 MC Act 1980, s. 102, MC Rules 1981, r.70)


Statem ent of: Graham John McCOMBIE

Age if under 18: Over 18

Occupation: Detective Sergeant 8792


This statement (consisting of %page(s) each signed by me) is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I
make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it
anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

 •ated   S)(A                       W W •

Signature:
                            ■A
On the 2nd December 1997 I gave evidence to the 'Hillsborough Scrutiny" before Lord Justice

STUART-SMITH mainly concerning my dealings with Paul TAYLOR and Mr and Mrs HICKS.

Having read the transcript of my evidence I would like to add the following:

For 17 months I was resident in Sheffield completing follow-up enquiries on behalf o f Lord

Justice TAYLOR and then the Coroner. I spoke to literally hundreds of people, all of whom had

a story to tell about Hillsborough. To this date I can still put names to body numbers. I can still

remember some experiences as if it were yesterday.

Without doubt I did speak to Paul TAYLOR, I remember him and I also remember Trevor and

Jenny HICKS being very upset by what he told them in his initial contact.

When I went to see Paul TAYLOR I was in possession of his original statement, his own

recollection and the questionnaire that was completed.

I would have gone through the contents of these chronologically to make sure that everything had

been recorded properly. I then would have asked him in detail about what he had said to Mrs




                                                       Signature Witnessed by:
                                                  2

 HICKS. I believe I would then obviously have asked the question "Why didn't you put this in

 your original statement/recollection". I met several people at Hillsborough who wanted to tell

 you what they wish they had done, rather than what they did do. Paul TAYLOR clearly retracted

 what he had told Mrs HICKS as I have recorded it on the "Result o f Action" which I completed

 on 31 May 1989 and put back into the Incident Room. Even though he had nothing of evidential

value to add to his original statement, I still asked for the following to be done:

 1.     Identify TAYLOR in the crowd.

2.      Assess his involvement.

3.      Can we establish any continuity re Victoria HICKS.

If on the 31 May 1989 Paul TAYLOR had stood by the story of what he had told Mrs HICKS I

would simply have recorded it in statement form and submitted it through the Incident Room.

I have reflected on the suggestion I used the term perjury in talking to Mr TAYLOR but I do not

believe I would have had cause to do so. It is quite common for Police Officers, when explaining

the caption at the start of a statement, to have to explain it to witnesses. The simple way is to use

the term perjury because everyone understands it. Mr TAYLOR may have had that explained

to him by the officers taking his written statement or in going through his own recollection and

statement again he may have asked me what it meant. I would have used the term in explanation

but I can see no reason why I would have initiated this.

Finally, can I emphasise that there was no reason to take a statement because it was clear to me

he retracted what he said. I would add that the written message I put back to the incident room

did include the key points Mr TAYLOR raised and retracted during my interview with him, eg:

"I got Victoria out of the pens, I was giving her the kiss o f life and then a Policeman said 'leave

her alone, she's gone' without feeling her pulse" etc.

I therefore ensured that the facts were entered into the system for any later reference and if at the


Signature:                                      Signature Witnessed by:
                                                 3

 inquests a request had been made to find or clarify this, a normal search would have produced

the message and the link to the statements of Paul TAYLOR. Indeed the retrieval of the message

and actions for this scrutiny confirms this.




Signature:                                     Signature Witnessed by:
