J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                        MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                W atery Street
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                              Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                         Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                  KNOWSLEY HALL
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                   Prescot
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                 Merseyside L34 4AF
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                        Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 00, extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                         Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
                                                I W.
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                        Our Ref:          JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                          Date:             3 August 1989


              Head of Department
              Administration and Legal Department
              City of Sheffild
              Metropolitan District                                 Copy To: R M Whalley, Secretary to the Inq
              Town Hall
              Sheffield
              S1 2HH


              Dear Sir

              I refer to your letter of 28 July in respect of Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club. You raised two aspects.

              Firstly, I am not in a position to indicate the barriers which were
              found to be corroded as this is a general observation of some and cannot,
              under any circumstances, be a difinitive statement on the general
              condition of barriers at the groud.  The purpose of my includig that in
              the letter was to ensure that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, their
              Consultant Engineers and Sheffield City Council were aware that there
              were difficulties and that a thorough check should be made before the
              ground was taken back into use. My advice would be that the Club, their
              Engineers and you should make a thorough examination of all barriers and
              draw your own conclusions and take appropriate action as you see fit.
              The onus must, therefore, rest with you and the other parties to make
              sure that the ground is safe, for I cannot, nor can West Midlands Police,
              nor the Health and Safety Executive take any responsibility for proper
              safety inspection of the ground. This is not intended to be unhelpful,
              for the purpose of my originl letter was merely to tender that advice.
              I have spoken to Mr Mackrell about this at the ground this morning and
              he indicated to me that he understood his responsibilities.

              The second aspect you raise is enquiring when you can have the return of
              your department's original files. At this stage we are still bringing
              together all details for the Coroner's Inquests and until these have been
              concluded, or until our enquiries have established that your records are
              of no further relevance, then I must retain the originals. Having said
              that I am quite happy for you to have free and regular access and if
              needs be for copies to be taken. Perhaps you would be so good as to let
              me know if you would like to take copies so that we can put
              arrangements in hand to our mutual satisfaction.




    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T                     Birmingham
< > \ z l




     r l AUG 89
