NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 22 JANUARY 1990


LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


Present:     Home Secretary
             Lord Ferrers
             Sir Clive Whitmore
             Mr Moriarty
             Mr Chilcot
             Mr Turney
             Mr Bolton
             Mr Goddard
             Mr Whalley
             Mr Mould
             Mr Mower
             Mr Gilbert
             Mr Godfrey
             Mr Brandon-Bravo
             Mr Taylor
             Mr Walters
             Ms Dent


      The meeting had been arranged to discuss Lord Justice Taylor's final
report and how it should be handled.

2.    The Home Secretary began by noting that Taylor did not support the
Government's proposals for a football membership scheme, nor the
implementation of Part I of the Football Spectators Act. The scheme would now
almost certainly have to be shelved•     Taylor's doubts about the membership
scheme focused on the effects on safety and police resources.        The Home
Secretary observed that Taylor's misgivings were along the lines of the Home
Office's original doubts about the scheme when it was first proposed.      He
found Taylor's alternatives (i.e. relying on improvements in the safety of
sports grounds to engender a better atmosphere at matches) unconvincing.

3.    It was noted that Part I of the Football Spectators Act also allowed for
the establishment of a Football Licensing Authority. This would be a new and
powerful way in which to improve the safety and quality of facilities at
grounds. Legal advice was that it would be possible to implement only those
sections of Part I of the Act which related to the Football Licensing
Authority (if this was desired).         The Hone Secretary noted that the
establishment of such an Authority could help improve safety as it could
mandate local authorities to do that which previously they had only discretion
to do. The Home Secretary wondered what response could be made to Taylor's
proposals for countering football hooliganism. It was noted that Taylor took
an optimistic view of the existing strategies, but that Parliament might not
see these as sufficient.     Taylor endorsed the use of CCTV for gathering
evidence and the establishment of a football intelligence unit, and the Home
Secretary could welcome this. However, doubts were expressed about Taylor's
proposed new offences. It was suggested that his proposed attendance centres
might be effective, but that there could be resource problems (e.g. staffing).
*
    E.R.                                     2.


       4.    The Home Secretary was impressed by the report's description of the
       success of all-seater stadia. He was anxious that the taxpayer should not pay
       for all-seater stadia or improvements to grounds. This was the responsibility
       of the football authorities. He highlighted the amount of money entering the
       game through sponsorship and Taylor's criticism of high transfer fees.

       5.   Discussion turned to the Home Secretary's possible response to specific
       recommendations:

               (i)   Recommendations 1 - 2 3 could all be accepted in
                     principle and fell within Home Office powers. The
                     proposals on all-seater stadia would need further
                     discussion with the football authorities, but
                     Ministers could respond positively to them. The
                     proposal to establish a national inspectorate could
                     be covered by the Home Office's proposal to set up
                     a   Football    Licensing   Authority.          The
                     recommendations on the maximum capacities of
                     terraces could be accepted without difficulty and
                     did not require legislation;

              (ii)   Recommendation 24 could be accepted in principle,
                     but    the   practicalities   required    further
                     consideration;

             (iii)   Recommendations 25 - 28 could be accepted without
                     question;

              (iv)   Recommendation 29 could be accepted in principle,
                     but the question of annual renewal would need
                     further consideration;

               (v)   Recommendations 30 & 31 could be accepted without
                     problems;

              (vi)   Recommendations 32 - 43 could be accepted, though
                     there were resource implications;

            (vii)    Recommendations 44 - 53 presented no difficulties.
                     It was noted that some of these were for Chief
                     Constables, and that PACE might need amendment to
                     comply with Recommendation 48;

           (viii)    Recommendations 54 - 58 could be accepted, though
                     the   practicalities   would  need    examination.
                     Recommendation   55   might   present    technical
                     difficulties;

             (ix)    Recommendations 59 - 63 could be accepted;

              (x)    Recommendations 64 - 69 could be accepted, but
                     Recommendation 69 would need further examination;
         (xi)   Reconendations    70   -   73  required     further
                examination, and consultation with ACPO;

        (xii)   Recouendations 74 - 76 could be accepted.

6.    The timing of the Home Secretary's statement and publication of the
report was discussed. It was agreed that if possible the report should be
published at the same time as the statement was made. If Lord Justice Taylor
wished to hold a press conference, it should preferably be held after the
statement. It was noted that Taylor had held a press conference to coincide
with publication of his interim report, but at the time Parliament had been
in recess. Taylor would probably be guided by the Home Secretary on a press
conference.   The need to publish as soon as possible was recognised, but
there were practical difficulties in printing and distributing the report.
It was agreed that the Home Secretary would propose Tuesday when he minuted
the Prime Minister that evening.

7.    in preparation for the meeting the following day with the Prime
Minister, the Home Secretary would write to her setting out his views on the
Taylor report and its implications for Part I of the Football Spectators Act.
On handling, he would propose that he make a statement to coincide with
publication of the report, and that this should be done on Tuesday.       His
minute and copies of the report would be circulated to those attending the
Prime Minister's meeting (Secretary of State for the Environment, Lord
President, Chief Whip, and possibly the Secretary of State for Scotland and
a Treasury Minister). The Home Secretary would take with him to the meeting
an outline of the statement he proposed to make. This should emphasise the
Home Secretary's positive response to the constructive alternatives proposed
by Taylor, and focus less on Taylor's judgment of the football membership
scheme, though he would obviously need to mention this. It was agreed that
the Home Secretary should, as a courtesy, meet Lord Justice Taylor before the
report was published.     (This has now been arranged for 5.30 p.m. on 25
January).




Private Office                      MS S J DENT
23 January 1990                  Private Secretary

c.c.   Ms   Snow
       Mr   Yates
       Mr   Moriarty
       Mr   Chilcot
       Mr   Turney
       Mr   Bolton
       Mr   Goddard
       ite-'Whsrtey
       Mr   Mould
       Mr   Mower
       Mr   Gilbert
       Mr   Godfrey
