INQUIRY     INTO         THE       HILLSBOROUGH
                                                  22
       S T A D I U M           D I S A S T E R




                       Before


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                         and

                PR OF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                         At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

             Thursday*   15th June,       1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                  I N D E X TO T R A N S C R I P T
                                    (Morning S e s s i o n )

                                                                     Page

GARY    VAUX,    called

        Examined by MR.             PHILLIPS                           1
        C ro ss -e xa mi ne d      by MR. HYTNER                       4
        C r o s s -e xa mi ne d    by MR. GLASGOW                      6
        C r o s s -e xa mi ne d    by MR. WOODWARD                    10
        R e-examined by            MR. COLLINS                        13

MR.    COLLINS                                                        14
                TWENTY-SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                   THURSDAY, 15th JUNE,1989

                      (MORNING SESSION)



          MR. PHILLIPS:     May I call Mr. Vaux?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, please.

          MR. PHILLIPS:    Mr. Vaux, please.

                          GARY VAUX Called

                    Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. Are you Gary Vaux? - A. Yes.

Q. And you live, I think,     in Middlesex.    Is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q.    Now, you came to send a letter after you read about the
     Hillsborough disaster on the 15th of April of this year
     and told about your experiences in 1981.   Is that right?
     - A. That is correct.

Q.    And you can give us some evidence, I think, of what
     happened on that occasion? - A. Yes.

Q. You attended the match, did you? - A. Yes.        Twelve of us
   travelled up from London in a minibus.

Q. Yes.  What time did you get to the ground on that occasion
   in 1981? - A. We got to Sheffield about half-past-12 but
   then there was a very bad traffic jam where we were diverted
   round the city to get to the ground, so by the time we had
   parked and walked to the ground we did not get to the ground
   until about quart.-to-3, 10-to-3.

Q. And were you at the Leppings Lane end of the ground? - A.
   Yes.

Q. And did you go through the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A.
   With extreme difficulty.   There were 12 of us had travelled
   up together, varying ages.   The youngest was a boy of 8.
   The oldest was a woman of 60. We got separated going
   into the ground because the crush outside the turnstiles
   was so bad.

Q. There were a lot of people waiting, were there, still at
   that time to get in?- A. Yes, mostly caused by the
   traffic jams getting through Sheffield.
                                                 G. VAUX

Did the crush at that time extend beyond the perimeter
gates of the ground itself?  Look, please, will you,
perhaps, and turn round and see the plan? Do you see
some outer gates and then the turnstiles further in?
I appreciate things were not exactly the same when you
came in 1981.  How far out did the crush extend? - A.
In distance I do not really know.  It took us quarter-
of-an-hour to get into the ground and that was constantly
pushing and shuffling in rather than in an orderly fashion.

Now, when you got into the ground where did you go to?
-A. Once we got through the turnstiles we were milling
around, if you like, betweenfifche turnstile and the
terracing.  We tried to locate the other people we
had come with.  I saw some other friends who said that
the terracing was very full, so we thought we had better
make our way as it was only a couple of minutes to the
kick-off straight through into the terracing.

Did you go through the tunnel? - A. I believe so, yes.

When you got into the terrace on the other side of the
tunnel. - A. Yes.

Did you stay in the vicinity of the tunnel or did you
move off to one side or the other? - A. We moved down
because the back of the terracing was just a solid mass
of bodies.  I was with my girlfriend and we moved our
way down the terracing down to the front where we thought
there may be more room.

And was there? - A. There was slightly more room, yes.
I mean, you could at least stand upright.

And how did things go for you when you found your final
position in the terrace? - A. We were about three or four
rows back from the bottom of the terracing, just to the
right-hand side of the goal, as you are looking at the
pitch and after about three or four minutes of the game
Tottenham scored at the other end and the cheering and
the crowd surging forward meant that we were pushed right
up against the fencing.  What I heard from friends after­
wards who had not got into the ground at that point when
Spurs scored the cheering made all the people who were
outside in the bit between the turnstiles and the terracing
surge forward to see what had happened and the whole
terrace just in fact fell forward towards the fencing.

What happened as a result of that?- A. We l l , as you can
see, I am six foot two and fifteen stone and I lost my
footing.  My girlfriend lost her footing.    There was a
small boy - we were standing with our back to a crush
barrier and there was a small boy who was sitting on
the barrier with his father behind him.   They became
                                3


                                                       G. VAUX

     separated so I was holding a small child up with one hand
     because he was about two foot off the ground, I suppose,
     at that point and my girlfriend had almost passed out on
     my right-hand side and we were pushed up against the fence.

Q. Were people injured? - A. Yes, there we«e people passing
   out and a lot of people, particularly small children who
   tend to go to the front of the terracing, were in very
   acute distress.

Q. And what happened? How were these people relieved of
   their distress? - A. By good fortune.   Where I was pushed
   up against was actually one of the gates on to the pitch.

Q.   Yes.   That would probably be No. 3, would not it?      No,
     it did not exist. -A. I do not know what ....

Q.   You do not know what gate it was? - A. I do not know what
     the gates were.   I think it was a slightly different
     system ....

Q.   It was. - A.   .... of fencing   in operation at the time.

Q.    Yes. - A. We were pushed up against this gate in the
     fencing and we were rattling it to try and attract the
     Police and stewards' attention.    The Police and stewards
     were a yard away from us and   we were shouting at them to
     open the gates to let people   out because we were saying
     that there were people in distress.

Q. Were there both Policemen and stewards there? - A. Yes.

Q. And was the gate opened? - A. Not immediately.  The
   Policeman who was facing me actually instructed me to
   stop trying to force the gate open.

Q. Yes. - A. I did not and at that point an Inspector came
   along or someone with a flat hat on any way and the
   Inspector, whoever it was, instructed that the gate be
   opened.

Q. Yes.  And the gate was opened.       Were people taken out
   of the pen? -A. Yes.

Q. How many people, could you estimate? - A. There was, I
   think, two - we were only concerned with getting through
   the gate we were at but I think there wasgaaather gate
   opened further along.  We got out and we spilled out on
   to the touch line of the pitch, the perimeter of the
   pitch.  I would esimate there was probably about 200 >
   maybe 250, and then another group of supporters were
   escorted out and taken around the pitch and placed at
   the far end of the ground which had been allocated to
   the Wolverhampton supporters because there were quite
S t m £>   *

                                          4


                                                                    g . VAUX

                  clearly gaps on the terracing at that end.

               Q. You were taken out and you say about 250 people al­
                  together? -A. It is hard to esimate because we were
                  along the edges of the pitch so I would not like to
                  give a number to it but I would estimate that.

               Q. Did any of those people appear to you to be injured?
                  - A. Yes.  The St. Johns Ambulance were in evidence -
                  it was a very hot day - and were reviving people who
                  had passed out.

               Q. Yes.  You, I think, were all right, were you not)? - A.
                  Yes.  I had been uncomfortable.  I gov to football matches
                  30/40 times a season and have done for 20 years and I
                  have never been as uncomfortable at a football match
                  as I was on that day.

               Q. And those people who were taken out of the pen and
                  attended to by the St. Johns Ambulance, where did they
                  spend the rest of the match? - A. Some of them were
                  taken off to treatment rooms.  Some of them just remained
                  round the edge of the pitch.

                       MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes.   Yes, thank you very much.

                               Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

               Q. Could I just get the picture of the scene outside in
                  Leppings Lane? You were scheduled to get there earlier,
                  I take it? - A. Yes, we had intended, because we were
                  travelling such a large group, we hoped to get into the
                  ground by, sort of, half-past-1/2 o'clock.

               Q. Yes. Could you just help us on this?   You are a regular
                  supporter, are you? - A. I am.

               Q. You go to big matches? - A. Yes.

               Q. Never mind a badly attended League match.  At an all ticket
                  match how long?do you expect it is going to take you to get
                  into the ground once you arrive? -A. You expect it to take
                  from starting to queue to getting into the ground probably
                  quarter-of-an-hour/half-an-hour but we had given ourselves
                  plenty of time.  We had set off from London at half-past-7/
                  8 o'clock in the morning.




                                              / Q. Do I take ....
                               5

                                                 G. VAUX

Q. Do I take it that it actually only took you fifteen
   minutes on this occasion?   A.  It took us about fifteen
   minutes but it was like pushing to get in;  it wasn't
   an orderly queueing system.

Q. Were there any police officers, as it were, stopping
   you pushing or controlling the queues or controlling
   the crowd?    A. No.

Q. The area between the turnstiles and the gates, which
   the usher will point out to you, was that full of
   people?   A. Yes, there were people all through it.
   I mean it wasn't solidly jam packed but it was very
   tight, yes.

Q. As you came along, did you walk from the roundabout from
   the top of Leppings Lane, or did you come over a
   bridge, over the river? A. I can't remember.

Q. Which direction did you come from,the town centre?
   A. We had parked quite a long way from the ground
   because it was the first available parking spot we
   found.  I had lost my bearings, if you like, by that
   point, because we had come such a long way round through
   Sheffield, so I can't say that I remember which direction
   we came to the ground from.

Q. Did you walk a long way down a lane _ do you remember -
   to get to the turnstiles, or did you sort of walk a
   short distance?    A. We came across a park ---

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Would a photograph help,
     do you think?      A. We came across a park area. We
     came across a park;   I remember that.

Q.          Mr. HYTNER:   And then suddenly turned into the ---
     A.   Yes, would we have turned right towards the ground?

Q. If you just look over there, I do not know whether it
   will help you.  Lord Justice Taylor suggested a photograph,
   but I think the park is over there----

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  If you came past Hillsborough
     Park, you must have come from Penistone Road, must you
     not?

            Mr. HYTNER:   I think over the bridge.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry, over the bridge.

Q.         Mr. HYTNER:   Did you see any police officers, as
     it were, helping to filter the crowd or to control the
     crowd on the approach ---    A. There were police officers
     who were instructing Wolverhampton fans to go one way
     and Tottenham fans to go another way.

Q. Did anyone ask you to show a ticket?       A. No.

            Mr. HYTNER:   Thank you.
                             6

                                                   G. VAUX

         Mr. JACKSON:    I have no questions.

         Mr. MAXWELL:    No questions.

         Mr. MULLER:    No questions, thank you.

             Cross-examined by Mr. GLASGOW:

Q. I wonder if I could just show you some photographs, Mr.
   Vaux? You have got a bundle there called 'South Yorkshire
   1'?   A. That's right.

Q. The composite bundle.   Just to help you, these are
   photographs taken obviously in 1989, and I do not want
   to confuse you because the lay-out is slightly different.
   The only thing Iwant your help on is the comparative
   crowding position.   Would you like to look first roughly
   half-way through the bundle? You will see it has got
   funny labelling in the top right-hand corner, MWL10, and
   it is 25A with that reference.    Can you find that? Have
   you got that?    A. Yes.

Q. And we there see, if you can orientate yourself, the
   general approach to one of the sets of turnstiles?
   A.  Yes, that is familiar.

Q. Is that familiar now?     A. Yes. The lay-out is slightly
   different, I think.

Q. Yes.  A.  The gate to the left I seem to remember being
   set further back or further round.

Q. Do not worry, Mr. Vaux.  We have got the drawings.  What
   I want your help with is the people more than the gates.
   Would I be right in suggesting that that is something
   like the sort of scene that you were part of in 1981?
   A. At that stage, yes, I would say it was about that
   nature.

Q. Could we just compare it with another photograph much
   later on?   Could you just flip on perhaps half a dozen
   photographs to MWL10-32A? Have you found that, 32A?
   A. Yes.

Q. Where the crowd is spread over the whole of that concourse
   area with the police horses and things?   A. Yes.

Q. Am I right in saying that that is something very much
   worse than what you experienced?   A.  It's not substantially
   worse.  There weren't people climbing over the fence or
   on the top there, and the crowd to the extreme left of
   the photograph wasn't quite as far back, but the body in
   the middle of the photograph was substantially the same.
                                  7

                                                   G. VAUX

Q. If you are pointing to the middle, are you saying that
   that part of the crowd on MWL10, that part of the crowd
   which is also illustrated on the first of the two
   photographs that we looked at, 25A, is much the same
   with solid lines or, shall we say, packed crowd up to
   the turnstiles?  Can you find your finger in both of
   them?     A. Yes.

Q.   Are you saying that that part of the crowd was roughly
     the same in 1981?    A. I am sorry, that 25A was?

Q. Yes.  But 32A, the spilling round to the left and all the
   way round back that you see, that was not there to that
   extent?   A. Not to that extent. I haven't quite got the
   perspective of the two photographs yet.

Q.    Let me help you.   The first photograph just shows the -
     'queue' is maybe an exaggerated word and I do not want
     to do that - the block of people waiting for the turnstiles?
     A.    Yes.

Q. Because the turnstiles themselves are on the right?          A. Yes,

Q. Behind the man with the red jumper?       A. Yes.

Q. And the man with the red anorak and the -— -        A.    The cap.

Q. --- middle-aged man with the hat, queueing or standing in
   front of one of the turnstiles?   A. Yes.

Q. And if we go back to 32A, that photograph is taken from
   a position much further back to the right than the camera
   was in 25A?   A. Yes.

Q. What I am suggesting to you or wanting your help with is
   whether or not the lines of people which are packed up
   in front of the turnstiles in 25A represented the sort of
   situation that you contended with in 1981, as distinct
   from the general spread of people all over the area, as
   represented in 32A?   A.  The crowd in 25A is about the
   density, though it wasn't as orderly because of the
   barriers which I can see in 25A, which seems to be
   funnelling it to some extent.  It was slightly more
   dispersed, though probably of that density.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Do we know, Mr. Glasgow, that
     that barrier was not there in 1981?

           Mr. GLASGOW:   No, it was not, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

           MR. GLASGOW:   And perhaps I ought to put that to
     Mr. Vaux.

Q. You are right in saying that there would have been
   nothing to confine it, but, despite the absence of the
   barrier, the appearance of the crowd was much the same?
   A.  It was a wider queue going to the turnstile.   It was
                                 8

                                                    G. VAUX

   very much a funnel of people, probably 15 or 2Q across,
   all trying to get through a space of a one person line.

Q. Thank you.  Having brought you back to a sort of pictorial
   memory of what it looked like, Mr. Vaux, can I ask you
   about one particular incident that you may not have seen
   at all but which you may be able to help us with? A. Yes,
   certainly.

Q. We have been told recently of an incident of approximately
   50 people being taken out of that crowd from somewhere
   and taken through a separate gate in an orderly line.
   Now, in the first place, can you remember anything like
   that happening?   A.  In 1981, no.

Q. Nothing at all?   A.   No.

Q. Up to the time that you got in the ground, were you ever
   conscious of any of those big gates of the kind that we
   saw in the photograph and which you probably remember -
   those blue concertina things - being opened? A. I wasn't
   aware.  My attention was solely on the turnstiles.  I
   cannot recollect the big gates being open.

Q. While you were queueing, if I can use that word in a very
   general sense, waiting to get in, was there ever a time
   when there was a sudden relief from the crowd?  Did it
   feel as if something had happened to relieve the crowd
   at some stage?   A. Not that I can recollect.

Q. When you did get through the turnstiles and you were
   understandably waiting for your friends in the central
   concourse area, that would have been at a very few minutes
   to 3 o'clock, would it?    A. Yes, it was two or three
   minutes before the kick-off.




                                /Q.   While you were standing
                            9

                                    G. VAUX


Q. While you were standing in that area, that concourse area
   again can you help us as to whether or not any of the big
   exit gates in that area was opened and a number of people
   came in? - A. I cannot recollect that happening.

Q. I wonder if you would just look at a document to help us
   with it which you won't have seen before but I think it
   may help. It is in the big fat grey bundle which is the
   Police Volume 1. Could you go to Tab 4, Mr. Vaux? - A. Yes.

Q. This Mr. Vaux, I don't want to confuse you, it has got
   nothing to do with you at all but you may be able to help.
   It is the Police de-briefing notes looking back at what
   happened on that day. - A. In 1981?

Q. In 1981 when you were there.  The matter particularly that
   I wanted your help with is on the second page of that note,
   the Police's description of what actually happened.  Would
   you go to page 2? - A. Yes.

Q. You see the paragraph starting almost in the middle of
   the page, the second one that starts with:   Mr. Herold
   had already referred to the late arrival ...." Do you see
   that? - A. Yes.

Q. Then there is a reference to:  "The flashpoint occurred
   when Tottenham scored after only three minutes." Again I
   think you would agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q. "The spectators just entering pushed forward to see what
   was happening and caused a crush ...." Again that is
   absolutely right according to your recollection? - A. Yes.

Q. It is the next little bit:

        "Inspector Greenwood also mentioned that there
         had been two or three fights, albeit of a
         minor nature, at the same time."

   Do you remember whether there was any actual fighting in
   the part of the terrace where you were? - A. I saw no
   fighting on the terracing.

Q. I am sorry to take it out of order. Go up to the paragraph
   before that, would you? - A. Yes.

0. You see there again Mr. Herold is talking about the capacity
   for the Leppings Lane enclosure and the certificate numbers
   and that kind of thing.
          Go on to the middle of that paragraph, you see the
    actual turnstile reading: " ---- to which must be ^Ided
    the 70 Spurs supporters who had managed to obtain tickets
    which put them amongst the Wolves supporters." - A. Yes.

 Q. It is the next sentence:  "These had been moved to Leppings
    Lane from the Kop ---- " I just wondered if you could help
                                 G. VAUX



with that.  Did you see an incident, whether or not you
witnessed it outside, in which a group of supporters, may
be 50, 60 or 70, were physically moved by the Police from
one end of the ground to the other? - A. The only movement
I saw of that nature were fans from the Leppings Lane end ...

Going the other way? - A. To the Kop after about ten minutes
into the game.

I appreciate that you saw.  You told us about that and I
am sure your recollection is right, but a number of people
now perhaps recall that there was an earlier movement of
a block of people possibly round the outside of the ground,
and I wondered whether that helped jog your memery as to
whether you had possibly seen a group of supporters being
shepherded by the Police outside the ground at any stage?
- A. No, by the time we got to the ground, I don't know
if that had already taken place. What I do recollect is
when we were in the, I think you refer to it as the
concourse area between the turnstiles and the terracing,
I said earlier that I saw some people who I did know who
said that the terracing was full, part of my earlier
evidence, though two of the people I saw had got tickets
for the other end of the ground but they had come through
the turnstiles that I had come through.  They had obtained
their tickets I think from Wolverhappton fans on the way
to the ground and then had come in at the Lpppings Lane
end.

But you can't help us ....   A. With a group of people
coming through?

Even with anything that you may have heard that was said
to you by other people about a group being seen to be
shepherded around in that way before the accident occurred?
- A. No, no.

      MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you for trying.   Thank you sir.


              Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Mr. Vaux, was that your first visit to Hillsborough? - A.
No, I had been there once previously for a league game.

Where had you gone on that occasion, which part of the
ground had you been in? - A. The same terracing.

On the occasion that you speak of you told Mr. Hytner you
expected to take about 10 to 15 minutes to get in once
you had arrived at the ground.  Is that right? - A. May
be 15 minutes to 30 minutes, you can never really tell.
We had given ourselves ample time, we thought, to get to
the ground hopefully for 1 o'clock, quarter—past-1.
                              11

                                     G. VAUX


Q. And in fact it took you about ten minutes to get in through
   the turnstiles? - A. About 15 minutes, yes.  There are some
   advantages in being 6'2" and 15 stone in a big crush.

Q. You weren't boring your way in and thrusting people aside,
   were you? - A. No, but you don't get pushed backwards either.

Q. And you did not encounter people being turned away from
   the turnstiles did you in front of you? - A. No.

Q. So you went through the turnstiles in the order of about
   10 minutes or so? - A. 10-15 minutes.

Q. And having gone through the turnstiles you then went to
   make your way to the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. Would you have a look please at South Yorkshire Document 1,
   Photograph 20.  Let me explain what that is. That is a
   view of the terraces as they are now? - A. Yes.

Q. And one can see the tunnel entrance in the centre and a
   fence coming down towards the perimeter? - A. Yesw

Q. And then to the left and right of the tunnel entrance can
   be seen other fences which divide the terrace up into various
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. To your recollection was the terrace divided up into pens
   at all or not? - A. I don't recollect the lateral fencing.

Q.    Any of it? - A.I don't  recollect because as we came in
     behind the goal we immediately ....  I can't recollect
     there being a fence immediately in front of us. As we
     came in on to the back of the terracing we came down to
     the right. We would not have gone as far over as to see
     if there was a fence there or not.

Q.   Very well.   By the time  you came through the entrance to
     the tunnel had the game started? - A. We literally got to
     the back of the tunnel as the match started. We were there
     almost as the whistle blew and we moved our way down to
     the front and we had just reached the front, it took us
     about three or four minutes getting through the crowd,
     when Spurs scored.

Q. Was that the sort of progress you would expect to make in
   a terrace? - A. It was very slow progress.

Q. It was a tolerable situation as you found it.     I think
   that was your description? - A. T h e lbottom part of the
   terrace was tolerable.  The top part was not.

 Q. Then the problem that occurred coincided with the scoring
    of the goal at the other end? - A. I don't know whether
    it coincided or was sparked off by.
                                 G. VAUX


It was your impression it was a consequence of the goal,
everybody surged forward? - A. It seemed to be but obviously
a crowd always moves when a goal is scored anyway, but
this seemed to be far worse and what I heard later was a lot
of people did rush in from the back when the goal is scored.

Did you notice that there seemed to be on this occasion
crowding in the wings of the terraces? - A. I am not aware
of that. We were only concerned for our own safety.




                   /Q.   LORD JUSTICE TAYLORt   I am
1^6 .
                                       13



                                                         G. V A U X

        Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not sure          A. When
             we came out on to the pitch, we remained on the pitch,
             on the gray ---

        Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   On the track.   A.    On the track
             The Police -----   There wasn't enough room to put us into
             the corner pens because I think the Police actually looked
             to see if we could have got in there and didn't.   We
             couldn't get in there and that is why some were taken to
             the other end and the remainder of us jjst sat around on
             that track.

        Q         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How far along were you on
             this photograph?   You were to the left of the goal as
             we are looking at it.     A.  As we are looking at it, yes.

        Q. Beyond the white fencing there or into the blue or how
           far along were you, do you think?      Can you point roughly?
           A.   It would be ob^iou&J^ the fencing, I think, may be
           different.    Where the gate is would be    about there.
           There was a gate there     but I don't know if it is the same
           fencing or not but we would be about in that position
           between the blue and the white fencing near the gate.
           As we got out, we then sat ---      I moved to the left and
           was directly behind the goal, when I was sitting on the
           perimeter track.

                             Re-examined    by MR.   COLLINS:

        Q.   I know memory plays tricks, slightly, does it not, on
             positions but in fact you see that  gate you are referring
             to was not there then.   A.   No.

        Q.   The gate that was there was the one my little            finger is
             now pointing to, a little further along. A.              Further
             along .

        Q.    And if you went to the right you must, in       fact, have ended
             up, I think, opposite or roughly opposite       that gate.
             A.    I will accept that, yes, sir.

        Q. Because equally that lateral fence that Mr. Woodward was
           referring to was not there then either.   A.   Right.

        Q.   So if you went to the right and ended up near a gate            I
             think it must have been that gate.   A.   Fine.

        Q.   Is that impossible from your recollection?   A.   No, no.
             We could have been that far along.   I mean, we were not
             there very long.   We were only there literally for a
             couple of minutes.

        Q.   Indeed.    Mr. Vaux, the only other thing I would like to
             ask you is this.    You have described the surge and the
             problem that arose as a result of the surge.   Now, you are
                                  14


                                                          VAUX

     obviously familiar with terraces and standing on terraces.
     The normal pattern we have heard is that if there is a
     surge you go forward, may be in some discomfort momentarily,
     and then it seems to go back again.   A.   Yes,

Q.   Is that the normal pattern?    A.   Yes, you re-find your
     footing after maybe some 10, 15, 30 seconds at maximum.
     You regain your place on the terracing.    Usually people
     have r eorganised themselves around you but you are generally
     back in the same position.

Q.   Now, on the occasion we are i nv estigating there was a surge
     and it did not go back.   People have given the description
     of that happening but not returning.     Was it like that in
     1981, a surge which did not go back?     A.   Yes.

Q.   So it was exactly the same sort of experience?   A.  Yes,
     it was like the surge continued for two minutes, three
     minutes, until we got out through the gate in the fencing
     on to the pitch.

Q.   So      the relief was in getting out on to the pitch instead
     of in going back to the original position?       A.   That's
     it, yes.       We turned round and were shouting to people
     to move back, to allow us to go back but, you know,
     were shouting that and they were shouting, "We can't move
     e i t h e r ."

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   I am grateful
     to you for volunteering your evidence and for coming.
     Thank you.

             MR. COLLINS:       Sir, that is all the live evidence
     we have for the time being.          What I now propose to do is
     to take you, sir, and those who appear through the bundle
     of documents that we have had prepared.          May I explain
     what that bundle consists of?           It is our choice, obviously
     with the assistance of counsel representing the interested
     parties, of documents which have been obtained by the West
     Mi dlands Police amounting to some 14 files and some, I
     think, 2,000 documents.          We have extracted those which
     seem to us to be relevant and helpful to the Inquiry to
     set out the history of the Safety C ertificate and safety
     co n si de ra ti on s in relation to the ground and more
     particularly, of course, in relation to the Leppings Lane
     end of the ground, both the turnstiles and the terraces.

           We obviously will have to consider, as part of the
     Inquiry, the evidence of the various interested parties
     as to what they or their organisations did in connection
     with the Safety C er ti ficate and so on but it occurred to
     me that it would save a lot of time and be helpful to
     you, sir, and to everyone if we went through the documents
     e ffectively because the documents tell the story, and
     then when we call the various witnesses what I would propose
     to do is to have their statements put in as their evidence
     and then simply ask questions upon those parts of their
     s tatements which seem to me to need questions or which
                                                   MR. C O L L I N S

deal with matters which are not strictly covered            by the
documents.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  !Yes.  I imagine you have
already indicated to counsel that that is what is going
to be done?

     MR. COLLINS:   I have told everyone and, as I
understand it, everyone agrees that it is a sensible
course and is happy that it should be done.

     May I make clear, of course, that some  of the documents
that we see in this bundle are documents we have already
referred to and they will appear in other bundles and in
other documents but I hope you feel, sir, that it was
convenient to put them altogether and alto§ether in c h r o n o ­
logical order so that one has a full picture and I hope
a sensible, logical picture of what happened.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        At the moment I do not think
we have got the volume as       bound in front of us.

     MR.   COLLINS:     You should have,   sir.

     LORD JU-STICE TAYLOR:      I am sure it is to hand but
I have not got it here.

     MR.   COLLINS:     They have been served,     I am assured.

     MR. HYTNER:   Might we inquire, have we had            this
bundle that Mr. Collins is going to ---

     MR. COLLINS:   Yes.   I say c at egorically          yes because
I know that they were handed out.

     LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:   When were they     handed     out?

     MR. COLLINS:    They were available as from Monday
evening.   Your solicitors will or should have had them.
If they have not ---    I think I can see it in the back
 there.   Actually they were available Monday evening
because I recall telling all counsel that they should not
go home until they had got the bundle.

     MR. HYTNER:       It was not a complaint,     sir,    it was
an inquiry.

     MR.   COLLINS:     I think some complained     at having          the
bundle!

     LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:   Has everybody     now got one?

     MR.    HYTNER:     It will be sorted out behind,         sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think it is desirable              you
should have it.   It is on its way-
                                              MR. C O L L I N S

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, what I will do as I go through
is to endeavour in going through to draw attention to the
matters which we consider to be important and which may
require some further inquiry when the witnesses who will
speak to it give their evidence.

       Sir, before I actually go to the documents themselves,
it might be sensible at this stage to remind ourselves
of the statutory provisions which apply and which establish
the requirement for Safety Certificates and set out the
r es ponsiblity for safety at football grounds.

       Sir, the principle Act is the Safety at Sportsgrounds
Act of 1975 which came into force on 1st Setpember, 1975
and which was an Act passed as a result of the Wheatley
Report into the Ibrox --or arising out of the Ibrox Disaster
i n , I t h i n k , 1971.

     Sir, if one looks at s1 of the Act, and this has been
amended by the 1987 Act but I am looking at this because
obviously his to ri ca ll y this is the Act under which the
original Safety Certif ic at e was provided, by s$ of the
Act:

     "The Secretary of State may by order designate
     as a stadium requiring  a certif ic at e any sports
     stadium which in his opinion has a c co mm od at io n for
     more than 10,000 spectators."

Clearly,   Hill sb or ou gh   qualifies   under   that provision.

      Originally it was not a designated stadium because
at the relevant time Sheffield Wednesday was in the Second
Division and the original d esignation only covered First
Division grounds, but it was still staging large games;
S emi-Finals were being held at Hillsborough, and clearly
it was in the interests of the ground that it should be
designated and so it was that it was decided that it would
be and the relevant d es ig nation order is Statutory Instrument
1978/1091, which d esignated Hillsborough as a ground which
required to have a Safety Certif ic at e under the 1975 Act
with effect from 1st January*     1979.

     Sir, we will see that there was then an application
made under the Act and it is to be noted as a matter of
interest that the then capacity of the ground, that is
the capacity de facto before a ny tquestions were raised
as to the capacity to be set under the Safety C er ti ficate
was 54,950, made up of 23,350 seated and 31,600 standing,
and indeed it was recorded that at Semi-Finals in 1976 and
1977, that capacity was reached.

     Sir, you will bear in mind that that figure of
54,950 was a figure in relation to the Kop as it then
was, without the additional roof -- it was not then roofed
and it did not have the additional spaces at the back
                                              MR. C O L L I N S

so e ffectively the capacity of the Kop and indeed
the capacity of the Leppings Lane terraces was above
that which was designated when the Safety C ertificate
e ventually came into force.

     Sir,   going   back to the 1975 Act, by s2 it is provided
thatjo i              ,




     "Safety C er ti ficates shall contain such terms and
     c onditions as the local authority consider necessary
     or expedient to secure reasonable safety."

Then ss(2) sets out certain matters which must and certain
ma tters which may be contained in a Safety Certificate.
I should say that ss(2) has been repealed by the 1987 Act
but, of course, in relation to the Safety C ertificate
which we have it was ss (2) which prevailed and, sir,
you will notice that one of the mandatory matters was
a s pe ci fi ca ti on of the maximum number of spectators to be
admitted to the stadium and a d is cretionary s pe cification
under (b) of the maximum number to be admitted to different
parts of the stadium.

     And then by 2 (c) (iii) there was a m andatory provision
for terms and c onditions as to the numbers, strength and
situation of any crush barriers.

     And then by ss (3) a requirement for records to be
kept of attendances, maintenance;   plan by ss (4) and by
ss (5) a r ecognition that different terne     and conditions
might relate to different activities to be held at the
stadium.    In fact, as we will see at H il ls borough it
was licensed for football matches and religious conventions
and one suspects that there might be slightly different
crowds at those two sorts of events.

     Section 3 deals with the application.        I would ask
you to note ss (3):

     "The local authority shall send a copy of an
     a pp lication for a Safety C ertificate for a stadium
     to the Chief Officer of Police and the Building
     Au thority for the area in which it is situated
     and shall consult them about the terms and conditions
     to be included in the certificate."

Now, sir, that has since been amended.     It was amended
as a result of the local government reorgan is at io n in 1985/86
and the reason for the amendment is this, that at the
relevant time the Fire Services were inco rp or at ed with
the local authority so there was no need to separate them
as a statutory consultee, but after the coming into force
of the local government r eo rganisation and effectively
the a bolition of the South Yorkshire Council the Fire
Aut hority became a statutory consultee, so since 1st April,
1986 the Fire Authority has been included in ss (3) as an
i nd ep endent statutory consultee.   That is the effect
of the legislation, I do not need, I think, to take you
                                                 MR. C O L L I N S

to the details of it;      it will   appear    in the documents
as we go through them.

     Then s4, the local authority can amend or replace
and if it does by ss (3) of s4, s2 applies again, so you
have to go through the same procedures.

      By ss (8) of s4 one sees the same duty to consult
again extended as the result of the local government
r eorganisation, as I have indicated.

      Then s5 deals with appeals.        That has been radically
amended by the 1987 Act,         the effect of the amendments
being that instead of an appeal to the Secretary of State
there is now an appeal, to the court, but one thing that is
to be noted is that there is reference there to an
in terested party in ss (3) of s5 and a definition of
"interested p a r t y " in ss(5) which again now extends to the
Fire Authority but in any event would be extended probably
by virtue of (b) because a Fire Authority inevitably
was involved in ensuring compliance.

       Section   6, Regulations.     Section   6 ss    (2):

      "The Secretary of State may by regulations make
p rovision for securing safety at s p o r t s g r o u n d s ."

Sir,   we have checked;    there are no such      regulations.




                           /I do not think it is necessary.
                        19
                                              HR. COLLINS

I do not think it is necessary for me to read you, I
think, any other - perhaps Section 11, Powers of Entry
and Inspection.

         "A person authorised by a local authority,
          Chief Officer of Police, Building ?
          authority or Secretary of State may
          enter and make inspection," etc.

     Then Section 12 is offences which include, as I
think I have already pointed out earlier in the Inquiry,
by 12(3.)(d) it is a criminal offence to break any term
or condition of a safety certificate, contravene any
term or condition and, as we see by Subsection 3, it is
not a minor offence because it carries on indictment
imprisonment for two years and an unlimited fine.   As
1 say, sir, I think that is all I need refer to in
relation to this Act.   That has, as I have indicated,
been amended by the 1987 Act, that is the 1987 Fire
Safety and Safety at Places of Sport Act 1987, an Act,
of course which came into being as a result of Bradford,
largely as a result of Bradford, and the Popplewell
Inquiry.   It is Part 2 of that Act which matters which
came into force on the 1st of January, 1988, and which
amends the 1975 Act.   Effectively it extends the 1975
Act to cover not only stadia but other sports grounds
and gives power, much wider power to certify the
requirement or the need for safety certificates of
sports grounds other than those whiehiwere originally
referred to in Section 1 of the 1975 Act.   We need
not bother with that aspect of it but that was one
of the major purposes of it.

     Section 19 subsection 2 deals with an amendment
of Section 2(2) and, asftl said, sir, subsection 2(2)
had been repealed and you will see that in 19(2)(a)
which substitutes for the original section subsection
2 of the 1975 Act, the provision there set out:

    "Insofar as an order under Section 15(a) below
     so requires as respects any classs6fgfports
     ground a safety certificate should include
     such terms and conditions as may be provided
     for in the order."

Otherwise the provisions of subsection 2 of Section
2 ©f the Afet are gone so there are no specific
requirements as a matter of law to be included in
the safety certificate but, as we shall see, the
HomevOffice Guidance indicated that local authorities
should effectively continue to include those same sort
of provisions. Section 15(a) is inserted ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry.  This really watered
down the legal requirement, did it?
                                               HR. COLLINS

     HR. COLLINS:   Well, it removed the need for there
to be the specific matters referred to in subsection 2
of Section 2.  It was not intended, I think, to be a
watering down.  It was intended simply to enable there
to be a wider diseretion because it was a recognition
that the Act extended beyond stadia and therefore there
would have to be much greater flexibility in the prov­
isions that would be applicable to the various sorts of
sports grounds to which the Act was going to ap^ly. I
think it was, as I say, a recognition of flexibility or
the need for flexibility which led to the repeal.   But
of course if one looks at Section 15(a) which is a prov­
ision inserted in the 1975 Act by subsection (c) of
Section 19(2) you will see that there is power given
to the Secretary of State to modify the provisions of
the Act in their application to sports grounds and
to make different modifications in relation to different
activities and include such supplementary and transitional
provision as he thinks expedient which gives him a power
to make an order effectively providing for specific
matters in relation to any ground.  He has not actually
made any orders under Section 15(a), at least not as far
as we have been able to - I should say not as far as Lexis
knows - but certainly there is that power given.

     Then by Section 21 there is added a subsection 2(a)
to Section 2 of the 1975 Act that no condition of a
safety certificate shall require the provision of the
services at the ground of any members of a Police Force
unless the extent of the provision of their services is
reserved for the determination of the Chief Officer of
Police of the Force. What  that#of "course means is that
the local authority cannot in a safety certificate
require the Chief Constable to do anything in particular,
specify that he must do something, it must be left to
his discretion as to precisely how he decides to carry
out any responsibilities.

     Sir, the only other section I think I need refer to
is Section 25 which adds a new Section 10(b) to the 197§
Act which enacts:

    "It shall be the duty of every local authority
     to enforce within their area the provisions
     of this Act and the regulations made under it
     and for that purpose to arrange for the
     periodical inspection of designated sports
     grounds;*" but nothing in this subsection to
     be ....

    "2.  In performing; the duty imposed by sub­
     section 1 above so far as it requires
     designated sports?grounds in their areas
     to be inspected local authorities shall act
                                                MR. COLLINS

     in accordance with such guidance as the
     Secretary of State may give them,"n4nd
     for the purposes of Subsection 1 above
     periodical means at least once in every
     12 months.

So it isimade qaitefiele&k-that it is^thesresponsibility
of the local authority to enforce and, indeed, it is the
responsibility of the local authority to set the require­
ments, relevant requirements, in the safety certificate.

     Sir, you   will note by Subsection 2 of Section 10(b)
the reference   to guidance from the Secretary of State.
The Secretary   of State has given guidance and, sir, if
I may ask you   to turn somewhat out of order to page 423
of the bundle   you will there see the guidance that he
has given and   I think it is convenient to refer to it
at this stage   as we are looking at the statutory back­
ground .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     These statutes apply England,
Wales and Scotland?

     MR. COLLINS:  Yes, they do.  It does not extend to
Northern Ireland and does not extend to the Isles of Scilly
except by an order provided under the section.  I was
going to say, it may be there are not a great number of
stadiums.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     No.

     MR. COLLINS:   Page 423 of the bundle is the letter
from the Home Office which includes the guidance. I
think we can look at 425 which is the statutory guidance.

    "The following guidance is given by the Secretary
     of State in pursuance of Section 10B(2)" and of
     course this has statutory effect or at least it
     has binding effect by virtue of the statute.
     "The local authority should be satisfied that
     inspections are carried out by a person or
     personssqualified." And in the Scope of the
     inspection, " y... should, where practicable,
     include .... certificates of testing and
     records ...." which are set out.

 (b) records of spectator attendances, accidents, maint­
enance, tests and checks on lighting, public address,
fire warning, etc, emergency evacuation and steward
training.

     Then 3, should normally include inspection of
items, part of the ground where an accident or incident
has occurred, recorded defect or deficiency, major
                                               MR. COLLINS

remedial work, public stairways, egress routes, fire
fighting equipment, accumulation of litter, emergency
lighting, first-aid facilities and equipment.   That
has some relevance here.  Then 10 per cent of crash
barriers, balustrading and hand-rails for overt signs
of weakness which might signal the need for further
testing, remedial action or additional restriction on
number of spectators, 10 per cent of terraces or
viewing slopes for general surface condition, even­
ness, slip resistance, anchorage, fastening of 10 per cent
of fixed seating, provision for the disabled.   And then
where the inspection of a sample of matters gives rise
to serious concern for safety the authority should go
on to inspect all the crush barriers and so on.   So if
you find a number you must go, with a badge, you go to
inspect the rest.  Testing of equipment is then set out.

     If one goes over to page 428 one sees the Home
Office has included supplementary advice and
explanatory notes which of course are not part
of the statutory guidance under the Act but are - or
should be taken into account.  There sets out in para­
graph 2 the Objective of Inspections, to monitor the
suitability of the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate where issued in the light of any change in
the condition of the ground and, secondly, to assist
local authorities in enforcing compliance with the
terms and conditions of the safety certificate or
other notice served on the ground occupier.

    "3.  Local authorities may wish to note that
     the inspection is not intended to shift
     responsibility for spectator safety away
     from the holder of any safety certificate
     or ground occupier, but rather to help
     see that he succeeds in aehieving (and
     maintaining) the safety standards intended
     to be set by any certificate for the number
     of spectators authorised to enter the ground
     for a specified activity."

I assume what that is intended to indicate is that as a
matter of law of course   the responsibility for those
who attend at any stadium is that of the occupier of
the stadium.  He has the primary responsibility to
ensure their safety.   But of course the local authority
has the power under the Act to require certain
provisions in the safety certificate as a fjpeeondition
of allowing people to go to the stadium at all and,
of course, it has emergency powers which I have not
specifically referred to under Section 10 of the 1987
Act to issue effectively prohibition notices if
satisfied there are any immediate dangers which
require the stadium to be shut down or part of it not
                         23
                                                 MR. COLLINS

to be used at any specific time.  Sir, I do not think it
is necessary to read any more of this guidance in detail.
I would simply ask you to turn over tbspage 429 and
note paragraphs 6 and 7, that the concept of the inspection
team is encouraged.  First sentence of paragraph 7:

    "Local authorities are also asked to bear in
     mind the potential advantages of a team
     approach to inspections under the Statutory
     Guidance and the role of the fire authority,
     building authority and the Police.  Local
     authorities in London and metropolitan counties"
  « ?■ we are of cosurse in a metropolitan county -
     "may therefore wish to arrange at least one
     inspection per year to be carried out with a
     representative of the fire authority in
     attendance," and so on.

 You will see, sir,from the approach of the South Yorkshire
Council up until 1986 and thereafter the City Council
that they have approached it in that way with a team
covering all the relevant disciplines.     I note while I
am here - someone behind me can do something about it,
perhaps - my page 430 is merely a duplicate of page
429 and there is thus an error in my bundle.     I do
not know whether that is the same in everybodys.

      So that is the statutory background.  As I say, I
hopfetit is helpful to have gone through that because at
least then we all know the framework within which we
are supposed to be operating.

     May I go back to the beginning of these documents
because what, as I said, I propose to do is to give
effectively a historical exposition and we can see
how the matter develops? May I say that the pagination
to be taken is that at the top, in the middle of each
page at the top? There are various other numbers,
bundles from which they have come, that is the guiding
one.




                              / Page 1 is ..
                                       MR. COLLINS

      Page 1 is simply Notes for the Guidance of Applicants
for Safety Certificates, but there is attached to it at
page 3 some notes - and I think this comes from Mr.
Eastwood's file, so I think that is in the writing of
someone, I--.think, in Mr. Eastwood's employ or possibly
Mr. Eastwood himself;   I am not certain of that, but we
will no doubt discover it from Mr. Eastwood — and they
would appear to be notes made by reference to the then
Green Guide which, of course, would have been the 1976
edition.

      I do ask you to note that there is a reference to
ramps and the requirement that ramps should be less than
one in ten, in the middle of the page.

      LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  Amongst various other references.
At the bottom there is a reference to an exit time of
eight minutes or less.  At page 4 there is the Home
Office Circular on the coming into force of the 1975
Act.  I am not going to ask you to read through all of
it, but I would ask you to note on page 5, the first
full paragraph beginning "It is suggested..."

      "It is suggested in paragraph 3 of the annex
      that local authorities will wish to keep in
      mind the guidelines set out in the^Guide to
      Safety at Sports Grounds when framing the
      additions which they consider should be included
      in the safety certificate.  Some of these
      recommendations have been revised in the light
      of the experience gained in the prime guidelines
      during the past year or so.  The guide has been
      reprinted and should be available well before
      the first designation order becomes effective.
      A copy will be sent to you as soon as it becomes
      available."

And then they say that they are going to set out the
amendments.   Then page 6, paragraph 3:

      "The local authority is required, by section 3(3)
      of the Act, to send a copy of any application for
      a safety certificate (general or special) to the
      appropriate Chief Officer of Police and building
      authority, and must consult them about the terms
      and conditions to be included in the certificate.
      In framing such conditions, local authorities will
      no doubt wish to keep in mind the principles or
      guidelines set out in the Guide to Safety^at Sports
      Grounds.  In this connection local authorities are
      reminded that, as was pointed out in paragraph 6 of
      the Annex to Home Office Circular No.150/1975, this
      non-statutory document is not a set of requirements
      to be rigidly applied regardless of individual
                             25
                                                Mr. COLLINS

       circumstances.   The maximum flexibility should be
       maintained to take account of the different
       circumstances at individual grounds deriving from
       differences in such matters as age, size and mode
       of construction.  In this regard, it should also
       be noted that the Act provides that the terms and
       conditions should be such as 'necessary or expedient
       to secure reasonable safety' and it would be
       unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek
       the absolute safety of everyone attending the sports
       stadium."

That, of course, as a matter of common sense, must be right,
but it does create the problem that it may sometimes encourage
the best possible steps not to be taken.  Paragraph 4:

       "It is envisaged that there will be a good deal of
       consultation between the local authority and the
       stadium representatives in the process of drawing
       up the certificate conditions."

Does that substitute page 430?
                                    -E.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It has not got a page number at
the top.  It is 430, is it?

       Mr. COLLINS:   Yes, that is the substitute for page
430.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Very well, I will just put it
in before it gets lost.

      Mr. COLLINS:   We will reach it in due time.  Now
back to page 6.   I was coming on to paragraph 4, which
reads as follows:

       "It is envisaged that there will be a good deal of
       consultation between the local authority and the
       stadium representatives in the process of drawing
       up the certificate conditions.  In this way, if
       evidence is advanced that a ground is rarely filled
       to capacity, the local authority may consider it
       proper to base its requirements on actual levels of
       attendance over a given period rather than on
       maximum capacity.  On the rare occasions on which
       a capacity crowd could be expected, separate provision
       might be made for this contingency on the lines
       indicated in paragraph 7 below...."

and so on.   Paragraph 5:

       "It will be apparent from theforegoing paragraphs,
       the form and content of a safety certificate is
       likely to vary according to the circumstances of
       the individual case.  Accordingly, a standard form
       of certificate would not be appropriate.   It must,
       however, contain full details of the terms and
                          26
                                       Mr. COLLINS

      conditions imposed including, in particular, the
      matters referred to in section 2(2) ..."

and you will remember those requirements.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  Sir, over the page, I draw attention to
paragraph 7, about two-thirds of the way down at the bottom
of that paragraph after the two insets:

      "In order to overcome this difficulty, it would seem
      desirable for local authorities and stadium
      authorities to seek to work out in advance the
      modifications to the normal terms and conditions
      which might be appropriate to such occasions, e.g.
      the admission of increased numbers to certain areas
      on the condition that extra stewards and police are
      employed, that notice is given to the local authority,
      and so on, and to provide for their incorporation in
      the general safety certificate."

That is to say, where you have activities of a fundamentally
different nature or likely to draw a fundamentally different
sort of crowd.  It was more relevant at the time that we
are thinking of, sir, because Sheffield Wednesday's normal
crowds at that time were, I think, in the region of 9,000,
10,000 or 11,000, except for the semi-finals when they
would expect a full house, so there was some relevance in
that approach, although it was not actually specifically
a crowd.

      Then at page 8, paragraph 11:

      "In this connection, Regulation 7 requires a local
      authority, on issuing or amending a safety certificate
      or refusing to do so, to give notice to certain
      specified interested parties and also to advertise
      their action in the press.    It is regretted that it
      has been necessary to incur the trouble and expense
      of advertising,   but, since Section 5(5) of the Act
      is not specific in the definition which it provides
      of 'interested party', no other means could be found
      of ensuring that   all persons who might validly claim
      to be 'interested parties' within the mean of the
      Act should be able to acquaint themselves with the
      local authority's decision ..."

Sir,   the importance of that is this - and I refer to it
for   this reason - thatthere is the right of an interested
party to appeal against the grant or indeed the failure to
grant a certificate in any particular case;    and, as we shall
see as we go through the history, there was a failure to
comply with those Regulations in relation, for example, to
the extension to the Rop and the capacity, and in certain
other respects.   There was indeed a similar failure, in so
far as it was a failure - and I am not pre-judging that at
                                            Mr. COLLINS

the moment - in relation to the putting in of the pens
on the terraces.  Therefore, it may be that those who
might have been interested in appealing were deprived
of the opportunity of so doing.  The Regulations referred
to are the ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This is what I am looking for
at the moment.  Which are they?

        Mr. COLLINS:   I forget the number of them in 1975,
but   they were effectively the procedural regulations on
how   to apply for certificates and how to appeal against
any   refusal.  They are referred to somewhere - forgive
me,   sir - in this Circular.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I would have thought they would
be.

      Mr. COLLINS:  But I have not noted, stupidly, precisely
where they are referred to.  It is page 5.  It is the
paragraph under the one that I read:

       "Section 6(1)(b) of the Act enables the Secretary
       of State to make regulations authorising local
       authorities to determine the fees which may be charged
       in respect of ..."

and so on, and then it refers to a particular regulation.
It is paragraph 2 on page 4 where the reference is made
to the regulations:  SI 1976 No.1263.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  We have not actually put them in the
bundle, sir. We have put the up-to-date Regulations in,
which are the 1987 Regulations.  They are, in fact, included
in the City Council bundle, which I do not know that you
have yet had and I do not think it is necessary to refer
to them specifically at this stage.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: All right.

      Mr. COLLINS:   Then on pages 9 to 11 there is a
specimen application form.  On page 13 there is an
indication of the amendments to the Guide.  Paragraph 4
on page 13 says:

       "The main amendments in the attached list are as
       follows:

       a.   Exits from each area of spectator accommodation
            should enable the spectators to leave that area
            in 8 minutes or less.

       b.   Every spectator on the terrace should be within
            12 metres of a gangway or exit.
                          28
                                       Mr. COLLINS

      c.   Railings and fences dividing sections of the
           ground should be of the same strength as handrails.

      d.   Depending on the condition of the individual
           stand, the time specified for the evacuation
           may lie between the prescribed maximum and
           minimum.

      e.   A recommended distance from terrace to touchline
           is now given only for a terrace gradient of 30
           degrees or more.

      f.   The recommended flow rate from all sections of
           the ground has been increased to 60 persons per
           minute per unit of exit width except in the case
           of stands (where it remains at 40).

      g.   Recommended strengths are given for handrails in
           various situations.

      h.   Recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd
           Behaviour.

     5.  It is again emphasised that the recommendations
     made in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds are
     essentially guidelines and should be applied to
     existing football grounds with the necessary degree
     of flexibility to take account of the particular
     circumstances at individual grounds.  The aim of
     securing a reasonable degree of safety should be kept
     uppermost in mind;  it would be unreasonable, even
     if it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety
     of everyone attending a ground."

Sir, that is reflected in paragraph 8 of the latest edition
of the Green Guide in very similar language.  Then there
is a list of the amendments.  I am not going to take you
 through those.  I go on to page 21.  This is the Fire
Service Order, "Scheme for Peacetime Major Disasters".
I do not propose to take you through it in any detail,
but I ask you to note page 22, Section 5, that it is there
indicated that it is the police who will normally act in
accordance with the major disaster scheme because they
will normally be the body to be first notified.

      "The Police have a responsibility on site to control
      and to co-ordinate aspects relating to the disaster
      so as to enable Emergency Services and other bodies
      to discharge their responsibilities.

      The extent to which each of these services is
      involved will depend upon the nature of the disaster,
      but, whatever form the incident may take and
      notwithstanding the size of the task facing each
      of these services, the senior police officer on
      site will be responsible for control and co-ordination
      of action at the scene so as to enable the Emergency
      Services and other bodies to discharge their
      responsibilities".
                                     Mr. COLLINS

And the same point is made on page 24, Section 9(a):
"The Police are the co-ordinating service." On page 27,
a document produced by the South Yorkshire County Council
on the implementation of the 1975 Act, there are set out
the primary areas of responsibility, and they say:

      "In order to avoid duplication and division of
      resources, the primary authority has been designated
      for the carrying out of inspections, reinspections
      and making final technical recommendations necessary
      using the headings given in the contents summary of
      the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' with some
      additions.  Where there is an overlap of the spheres
      of control, the primary authority responsible must
      consult the other authorities concerned before
      finalising any recommendations.   The following
      abbreviations have been used ..."

and then we see      various headings.  So far as ingress to
the ground is concerned, the primary authority is the
building authority in respect of structural' and to be
consulted are the Fire Brigade and the Police.    On means
of escape, it is the primary authority of the Fire Brigade,
and those to be consulted are the building authority and
the police;     egress from the ground is similar.   Then
terraces are dealt with:     Structural is the building
authority as the primaryauthority, with the consultation
of the Fire Brigade and the Police; means of escape is
the Fire Brigade with the consultation of the building
authority and the Police.

      So far as the building authority and the police are
concerned, sir, you will recall that by sub-section 3 of
Section 3, they have to be consulted on everything. The
Fire Brigade does not specifically independently have to
be consulted, but clearly it was sensible that they
should be.

      Over the page, the primary authority for access for
emergency vehicles is the Police with the Fire Brigade to
be consulted;  that is the second one.  Perhaps slightly
oddly---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   No reference to ambulance.

      Mr. COLLINS:   No reference to ambulance, sir,to
be consulted.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   No.

      Mr. COLLINS:  Then a little lower down, "Terrace
to touch-line distance" and the primary authority there
is the Police.  "Estimation of safe ground capacity has
the Council as the primary authority, in consultation
with the other three,  "Communications" has the Police
as the primary authority in consultation with the Fire
Brigade.  I think the rests speaks for itself, sir.
                                           Mr. COLLINS

      Then we have a letter from the Council to the Chief
Constable, July 1978:

      "You will be aware that the County Council has
      delegated its responsibilities under the above Act
      to the Fire Service Committee.  I enclose a copy
      of the draft Safety Certificate which I propose to
      submit to the Fire Service Committee at its meeting
      in September and shall be grateful for your comments.

     If approved, the draft will form the basis of the
     Safety Certificate to be carried by the County
     Council in respect of any stadium in South Yorkshire
     which may be designated under the Act ..."

I will be corrected if I am wrong, but I think that at that
stage there was no stadium in South Yorkshire which was a
primary designated stadium, that is to say, one in the
First Division at that time.  I do not think Sheffield
United was in the First Division.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Is there any particular reason
that you know of why the First Division should excite
interest in safety but not the Second?

      Mr. COLLINS:  I think probably because it w a s _
 anticipated that larger crowds would come to the First
Division and it was recognised that it simply was not
feasible to expect everyone to do its updating at once
and it was a question of implementing it piecemeal.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  I   should say - and it must be obvious -
that there are plenty   of documents in between but we have
only picked out those   that are relevant, so you will find
that I will jump some   in dates.

      The next document is a letter of 1st December 1978,
the Club resolving Dr. Eastwood to act on their behalf
in relation to the designation of the ground.  You will
recall that it was designated as from the 1st January,
1979.

      Then we have the notes of the first meeting of the
Officers' Working Party concerned with the safety
certificate.  One sees that the representatives of the
Working Party, apart from the Club, of course, include
two from the Fire Service - I am sorry, three from the
Fire Service - one from the Police;  a representative
of the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council;
a representative of the Architect's Division of the
South Yorkshire Council;  another police representative;
Mr. Sherriff of the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
Council;  and then two more from the South Yorkshire
County Council.   I think Mr. Vaughan was the lead so
far as the South Yorkshire County Council was concerned
at that time.
                                       Mr. COLLINS

      "1.  On behalf of the Club, Mr. Whitehead" (who
      was the director) "welcomed the Working Party and
      gave the apologies of the Chairman.  Mr. Whitehead
      stressed that the Club wished to see the Stadium
      used for big matches as regularly as possible.

      3.   During the course of the discussion, the
      following points were made:-

      (a)  the Stadium had been used for many capacity
      matches over the years and its safety record was
      the equal of any in the country;

      (b)   if the Code of Practice were to be applied
      literally, then there would probably be minor
      discrepancies such as in the width of the steps
      on the Spion Kop and in the width of the gangways
      and exits in the Stands;

      (c)  in order to form a base from which to work,
      all of the crush barriers would require to be
      tested initially, with up to 20% tested annually
      thereafter;

      (d)  it was likely that the fire risk in the North
      and West stands would be minimal, but the main
      stand would probably require more detailed attention:
      however, only a detailed inspection by the Fire
      Service would reveal the true position."

Sir,   that, as far as the minimal fire risk in the West Stand
is concerned,   is of some importance, as we will see later;
and that indeed was something that the Fire Service
accepted, because it is basically concrete.

      "(e) the police would be happy with the existing
      position of the Police Control Centre, but felt
      the present structure would not meet their
      requirements;

      (f)  the North and West Stands were modern structures
      but the main Stand had originally been built some
      50 years ago and there were now no records, which
      would mean a complete survey would be necessary;

      (g)  the only activity which normally took place
      at the Stadium other than football was the
      annual Jehovah's Witness Rally, and an endeavour
      would be made to make provision for this in the
      ©eneral Safety Certificate . . .'*

as we will see in due course it was.   I do not think I need
to read the rest.

      Then the City write to the County Council in
December, 1978, saying:
                  32

                                 Mr. COLLINS

"Following the joint meeting ... it was agreed that
Dr. Eastwood would prepare and submit a comprehensive
survey report on matters relating to the above Act.

You may consider it advisable before receipt of that
report that members of my staff make a joint survey
of the premises under consideration with
representatives of the Fire Service and possibly
the Police."




                       /Then we have a note
                                      MR. COLLINS

      Then we have a note or a memo     from the Chief Fire
Officer to the Chief Executive:
      "I thank you for your letter dated 22nd December,
      1978, and the copy letter of the Building Surveyor
      of the Sheffield Metropolitan District Council.

      It would seem essential that the officers of the
      County Council and Metropolitan District Council
      involved inthe production of the general safety
      certificate required by the Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club under the above Act, undertake a
      comprehensive survey of the ground. I feel sure
      that it would be beneficial to the Club if,
      initially, each department acted in unison in
      this respect rather than separately and I would
      make the necessary arrangements with my officers
      for this to be achieved."
 That is of course following up the suggestion made in the
 previous letter and clearly a very sensible suggestion.

      Then a little lower down:
      "It is my opinion that the necessary comprehensive
      survey could not be undertaken satisfactorily
      without plan drawings.  In this respect I refer
      to paragraph 1.3 of the 'green code';

      "The problem of crowd safety at football grounds
      is complex and cannot be solved simply by ensuring
      that each component of a ground, such as stairs,
      passages or sections of terracing, is satisfactory
      in itself. The inter-relation of components is
      essential: they should be compatible and combine
      to form a balanced unit".
      Following the receipt of drawings I suggests that
      Officers meet to agree on identification procedures.."

And so on.   Then he says:
      "There should be further visits .... Findings
      from visits other than the survey referred to
      will be limited and if we involve ourselves
      in consultation with the Club following the
      submission of Dr. Eastwood’s report with limited
      information this could prove unfortunate in the
      long term.*
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What essentially, Mr. Collins,
are the issues which are going to arise on all these
documents?
      MR. COLLINS: Sir, the issues that are going to arise
j think really are these: a consideration as to whether
                                   MR. COLLINS


the ground was, first of all whether the ground did conform
to the Green Guide requirements.

      Secondly, insofar as the ground did not comply with
the Green Guide requirements, whether those failures were
causative.

      Thirdly if, and to the extent that any such failures
were causative, whether they were matters which were recognised
by any of the relevant Authorities.  If they were recognised
why was nothing done about it. If they were not recognised
why were they not recognised.

      I think that, putting it broadly, is the relevance of
this aspect of the matter.

      Sir, of course what we are not concerned with in going
through this is apportioning blame in any way or seeing
whether and to what extent any individual party was or may
have been liable in perhaps civil terms, but what we are
concerned to do is to see where there were failures so that
we can, if we identify them, you sir can see whether there
are matters that need to be tightened up in due course
whether by legislation or in the Green Guide.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.

      MR. COLLINS:  Then we have Dr. Eastwood's report.
This is a report to the Club, January 1979.  It is described
as an "Interim Report” . He says on page 36, second paragraph:

      "The green guide has been used as a basis for
      our calculations, although as with probably all
      existing grounds, it will not be possible to
      satisfy all the recommendations in the guide.
      Reasonable compromise will be needed on the part
      of the fire officer and the police."
Then he deals with the Kop and I ask you to note in the middle
of 37,that of the barriers tested on the Kop, no less than
35% proved to be defective in one way or another.

      He deals in some detail with the capacity of the Kop.
I am not going to go through that in detail because we are
not directly concerned with it although we are indirectly
in some respects, but on page 40 (b) he deals with the
Leppings Lane terrace.  He says:

      "The west terrace is not quite so well endowed
      with barriers as Spion Kop.   The present layout
      is shown on the attached drawing 1610/2.   Our
      measurements show a total of area of 1480 sq.m.
      but there are no gangways.   We feel that some allowance
      should be made for circulation space as spectators
      have to move quite considerable horizontal distances
      to achieve good packing.   The full area would
                                       MR. COLLINS

        justify about 8000 spectators .... "

In fact if my arithmetic is correct 8192 is the precise figure
taking the 54/10 sq.m. but I don't guarantee my arithmetic.

        " ___ we suggest it would probably be appropriate
        to allow 10% as the equivalent of gangways giving
        a capacity of 7200 spectators.  The barriers should
        be designed to match this figure approximately."

Sir, of course as is perhaps obvious, that does not include
the north-west area that we have heard about.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It does include, does it, the
south-west corner, does it?

      MR. COLLINS:  Yes, it does.  It includes all along from
the south-west to the edge of the West Stand, the North end.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It just does not cover what has
been called the "cantilever" bit.  Is that right?

      MR. COLLINS:  That is right.  That is my understanding.
I am not sure whether it includes that bit Mr. Poole is pointing
out.  I think it doesn't but I will check.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Including lower level of north­
west.
      MR. COLLINS:  I beg your pardon, it does include that.
I am wrong.  It is just the cantilever bit.

        "The barriers should be designed to match this
        figure approximately.

        The shaded area on drawing 1610/2 is that which
        may be counted if the existing barriers are of
        Class A. About 15 of the existing barriers are
        likely to need strengthening to achieve this
        standard.  Even with this strengthening only
        4,300 spectators could be accommodated, representing
        a loss of nearly half. We presume this would be
        unacceptable.

        The extra barriers required to achieve approxi­
        mately 7200 capacity are shown in red on the
        second copy of drawing 1610/2.  You may feel that
        some of the proposed new barriers which are close
        to the entrances might restrict the passage of
        spectators undesirably.  In that case they could
        be omitted.

         "The three exits ....

That of course would be the tfctree tunnels, one at each end
and one in the middle.
                                     MR. COLLINS


     "The three exits have a total width of about
     11.5m which would permit about 1250 people per
     minute to leave the ground.  Thus the stand
     could empty in about six minutes which is very
     satisfactory.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Somebody has written:   "What about
perimeter gates"?

      MR. COLLINS:  Indeed.  It is important   and we shall see
through consideration of exit flows from the   terraces, that
the perimeter gates have not been taken into   account.  It
has been assumed in all considerations, even   after the ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  No, no, I think we are talking
about perimeter gates on the pitch.

      MR. COLLINS:  Even after the construction of the radial
fences that the perimeter gates would not be taken into
account in assessing exit times.

      I am told that my learned junior Mr. Goldsack confesses
to that note and thus it is not a note which is on the original
document, so that can perhaps be expunged.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

      MR. COLLINS:   It continues:

      "The guide suggests that everyone on a terrace
      should be within 12m of a gangway or exit. There
      are no gangways and some spectators will be 25m
      from an exit.  But we feel this is of no con­
      sequence as movement horizontally along this
      terrace will be easy and quick."

That of course, sir, is of importance because there were then
no radial fences.

      Then there is a reference to the north-west corner.

      "Unfortuantely, the crush barriers in this area
      were shown to be very inadequate when tested
      in 1973."

They did not test any others because they thought they were
in such poor condition and they are liable to collapse.
He goes on:

      "Assuming that the barriers are strengthened
      it will be seen from the drawing 1610/2 that they
      also need considerable supplementation.  The
      scheme shown on the second copy of this drawing
      does not quite justify the whole area being taken
      in the calculations.  But it would be reasonable
                                    MR. COLLINS


      to count say 2900. This would bring the total
      standing at the Leppings Lane end to 10,100."

I think I need to refer no more to his Interim Report.  I go
on to page 48 which is the report which I think was produced
or in the form it was produced to the Council.  Page 51 and 52
deal with the West Terrace and you will see, sir, that it
contains in a rather shorter form of the material that we have
looked at in the Interim Report.

      "The west terrace has a total of 1480 sq.m. but
      there are no gangways.  We feel that some
      allowance should be made for circulation space as
      spectators have to move quite considerable
      horizontal distances to achieve good packing.
      The full area would justify about 8000 spectators,
      but we suggest it would probably be appropriate
      to allow 10% as the equivalent of gangways
      giving a capacity of 7200 spectators.   The
      barriers should be designed to match this figure
      approximately.  Those barriers which cannot
      withstand the higher force should be appropriately
      strengthened, and extra ones provided where
      necessary."

He deals with the extras on the plan.

      "The three exits have a total widthi of 11.5m
      which would permit about 1250 people per
      minute ... could be emptied in about six
      minutes which is very satisfactory.

      The guide suggests that everyone on a terrace
      should be within 12m ...."

The same point we saw before.
      Page 57   is a record of the meeting following the
submission of   that report of the Officer Working Party.

      Page 58   at the top:

      "It was AGREED that the plans supplied had
      inaccuracies and inadequacies.   In particular, they
      lacked indications of cross sections, profiles,
      structural stability, position of handrails and
      balustrades ___    Where appropriate, these could,
      as an alternative, be described in a Report.

      The County Council's hope was that, in view of
      limited resources in the Architectural &
      Building Services Division, the plans supplied
      and finally accepted by the Working Party could
      form the basis of the Certificate Drawings."
                                   MR. COLLINS


      Sir, that is I think a real problem, the question as
to who in these instances should be responsible for the
detailed drawings.

      All I can say is that I have noted that in the Liverpool
Certificate I have seen the drawings appear to have been done
by the Local Authority, whereas here of course they were
drawings which were produced by the Club.  I am not sure that
it need make any difference.

      Then "General

      It was recognised that the criteria set out in
      the Home Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
      Grounds (Football)" required new work or re­
      construction to be to a standard not lower than
      the standard set out in the Guide, and that in
      existing situations the criterion was that of
      a reasonable degree of safety.  As the Guide
      stated, it would be unreasonable, even if it
      were practicable, to seek the absolute safety
      of everyone attending a ground.

      With these factors in mind, both the Fire Service
      and the Police felt that the flow of spectators
      was the most important criteria to be adopted.
      Whilst not disagreeing with this viewpoint, the
      Building Authority suggested it would be
      useful to know the reasoning behind the
      recommendation in the Guide that gangways should
      not be less than 1.1 metres wide.  The County
      Council AGREED to try to find this information
      out, and the Fire Service AGREED they would
      contact their colleagues in other areas who had
      been involved in the Certification process to
      ascertain how nearly the 1.1 metre gangway
      recommendation had been observed in existing
      situations in their respective areas.

      At the request of the Fire Service, the County
      Council also AGREED to try and find out if there
      was any general recommendation on reduced
      admission if a ground were used at a night time
      instead of during the day time."

Then over the page reference to the Kop. The third last paragraph
on page 59 may be of some interest, with reference to the Police.

      "For the purposes of crowd control, the Police
      suggested there should be some form of lateral
      separation.  The Working Party AGREED, and it was
      suggested that three metal fences sited centrally
      in the blocks (as opposed to adjacent to the
      gangways) should be provided, with acess between
      each limited to a padlocked gateway under the
      control of the Police."
b                               39
                                        MR. COLLINS


          I don't think that ever actually was put into effect
    although it appears to have been agreed to in the documentation,
    but is perhaps of some interest beeaase it shows the Police
    thinking, very understandable in connection with crowd control,
    that it is easier to control crowds on terraces if you are able
    to split them up into smaller units.

          It is perhaps worth saying here that we would suggest
    that the Police input is fully understandable and reasonable
    because what they must have most in their mind is the question
    of disorder and crowd control.  That is at this stage of the
    proceedings when we are concerned with the input into the
    requirements of the Safety Certificate.

          Insofar as the Police requirements or input on crowd
    control contain elements which for other reasons are unsafe,
    such as for example questions of capacity, questions of egress
    and questions of the mechanics of packing, that we would
    suggest was primarily for the other parties who were involved
    in the certification process.

          So at that stage we would suggest that it is as I say
    not   unreasonable for the Police input to be very much; angled
    or towards crowd control, which after all is their expertise.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  How it is resolved in the   end
    is a very difficult equation.

          MR. COLLINS:  That is a matter for the whole Working
    Party and obviously other matters are material and at the
    end of the day it is of course the Local Authority that has
    the responsibility of deciding what are the requirements that
    ought to be in any Safety Certificate having of course taken
    the appropriate advice.

          Then "(d) The West Terrace

          In view of the lack of depth of this terrace,
          the Club's offer ...." in fact it is I think I
          am right in saying 13.1m from the mouth of the
          tunnel as it were, from the bottom of the West
          Stand to the front of the terrace.   "In view
          of the lack of depth' of this terrace, the Club s
          offer to reduce the spectator limit to 7,200,
          and the diseharge time of 6.6 minutes, the
          Working Party AGREED that it would be unreasonable
          to insist that gangways or additional exits must
          be provided.
           However, even if the existing crush barriers were
           to pass the tests, the Working Party AGREED that
           the barriers would require special attention in
           view of the apparent sharp edges, corrosion,
           etc."
                                   MR. COLLINS


      Now it is not entirely clear, but you will recall from
Mr. Eastwood's report, certainly from his Interim Report although
it was not contained in the final report, he was saying that
as the crush barriers stood, without any new ones, the figure
of 7,200 should go down to something in the order of 4,300.

      Now unless I am misreading this, it would seem that
the Working Party agreed to the 7,200 capacity without the
need to make any modifications to the crush barriers other
than attention about sharp edges, corrosion etc., that is to
say the Working Party was not requiring the erection of further
crush barriers, so that they were accepting apparently a breach
of the Green Guide on the capacities in relation to the
existing configuration of the barriers.

      I don't think I need read any more of that Working
Party, save to draw your attention to page 62 which sets out
the capacity of the ground, where we see:

      "If additional exits are not provided on the
      Spion Kop, this will have the effect of
      reducing the ground capacity to 45,140 ....”

Seating 24,000; standing on Kop 11,040? standing at Leppings
Lane 10,100, a total of 45,140 and you will remember, as I
told you, in fact they were putting 54,000 in at that period.

      LQRB JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Can you give me, I know I am
going ahead, the date of the addition to the Kop and the
roofing?




                  /MR. COLLINS:   Sir, 1986
                                  41

                                                 MR. C O L L I N S

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, 1986.     I am not sure, off the
top of my head, when it was completed.        No doubt someone
will tell me but I think it is August or September, 1986 -
anyway in time for the season c o mm en ci ng 1986/87.

     Sir, page 63 is a letter indi ca ti ng a o e ep t an c e by
the Health Aut ho ri ty of advice on First Aid and medical
facilities.    A note on the next page from the C hief Fire
Officer to the Chief E xecuti ve ind ic at in g timing of
meetings and the last paragraph:

     "However, because of evident d if fe r en c es of
     opinion on means of escape, the original time
     and date of 10.00 a.m. on 30th March ... is
     being retained to discuss these d if ferences, prior
     to meeting the Club."

     Sir, I think those d if fe re nc es relate to the Kop,
in fact, so that it may be that that is not of i m po rt an ce
as was thought.

     Page 65,         note of a m e et in g of 30th March.           Para gr ap h
3:

     "R e p o r t .
      General

       The County Council had c o nt ac te d the Home Office
     but had been given little i nf or m at i on a dd it i on a l
     to that cont ai ne d in their various Circulars.
     Basically, they had said that anyn ew work or
     r e c o n s t r u c t i o n had to be to a stan da rd not lower
     than that set out in the Guide.                 However, the
     m aximum f lexibi li ty had to be m a in t a i n e d in the
     case of e xisting stru ct ur es and d i f fe r en c es in
     such m atters as age, size and mode of c o ns t ru c ti o n
     had to be taken into account."

I am tempted          to say it sounds   like the usual helpful
advice.

     "The Fire Service had c o nt ac te d four other B ri g ad e s with
     d e s i gn at ed grounds, and only in one case had the
     r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s of the Guide been strictly adhered
     to"

which may or may not be a matter of concern.    And then
there is reference to the Kop, third paragraph:

     "The Fire Service queried the exact form of
     the lateral s e pa ra ti on d i sc us se d at the m ee ting
     on 1 2 t h F e b r u a r y , as this w o u l d n a t u r a l l y have
     a bearing on the means of escape rec om me nd at io ns .
     After discussion, it was agreed that the metal
     fences should not be of the c l i m b - p r o o f type
     and it was not intended that they should obstruct
     the gangways and that in c on se q ue n ce the p a dl oc ke d
     gateway r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s hould be dropped.
                               42

                                                        MR. C O L L I N S

      "However it was agreed that it was still desi ra bl e
      to seek 3 x 2 central barr ie rs but if the Club
      really resisted the suggestion, 2 x 2 could r e lu ct an tl y
      be conceded.        The Buil di ng A u th or it y s t re ss ed that
      w hate ver barriers were provided would have to pass the
      a pp ro pr ia te strain tests."

       Sir, that is of interest and i m po rt an ce beca us e it
i llus tr at es the point I was seeking to?m a k e s e a r l i e r that
the Police input is on the crowd control;              they ,w an te d the
lateral barriers, but;here we have the Fire Service saying,
"Well, wait a minute, because that has a clear effect upon
egress and you have got to take that into acount."                  And
then:

      "The fact that the height of many of the e xi st in g
      crush b arriers was below the r e co m me n d a t i o n in the
      Guide, in some cases well below, was pointed out
      by the B uilding Authoirty.        The c o rr os io n point
      men ti on ed at the last m ee ti ng was also reiterated.
      It was agreed that these points must be drawn to
      the Club's a ttenti on ,"

Again I refer to that because on the West terraces as
we shall see, the height was and still is below the
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s in some cases in the Green Guide.

      "The West   Terrace

      As well as the c ondi ti on of the crush barr ie rs
      m en ti on ed at the last meeting, the Building
      A ut ho ri ty drew a tt e nt i on to the poor c o nd it io n
      in places of the terra ci ng in small areas near
      to the stand.        The c ross -f al l on the steps on the
      n ort h- we st corner exit would also r eq uire a tt e nt i on
      ...     The height of the crush barr ie rs m e n t i on e d in
      regard to the Spion Kop also a pplied."

And then on page 67 at the bottom,          "General R e q u i r em e nt s "   ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am bound to say I do not myse lf
quite see how having the crush barrier at any p a rt ic ul ar
height is going t o       it cannot be ideal for everybody,*
we are not all ---

     MR. COLLINS:    We are not all the same height.        No,
I think, sir, and I e mphasi se that this is my view and
no-one else's at this stage, as I u nd er s ta n d it the purpose
in not having them too low is that if they are too low
for an average person it means that they oper at e as a
sort of fulcrum - if you come up against them, if there
is any p ressure behind, you tip over, if they are below
the centre of gravity of the body.     If they are too high
and are at chest level, as it were, or perhaps even higher
for smaller people then there is liable to be damage to
the lungs and the ribs up here and it may be thought that
if they catch you in the stomach, that     is the least v u ln er ab le
part, and the average stomach or lower a bd omen of the average
                                 43

                                                  MR. C O L L I N S

person e xpected to be on a terrace comes at about 1.1m,
but w hether that is right or not, I do not know.    That
appears to be c onsistent with P aragraph 110 of the Green
Guide, a lthough that says:

     "In order to locate the top rail agai ns t that part
     of the body most able to tole ra te pressure.   The
     height of crush barri er s should be between ..."

I do not know the part of the body most able to tolerate
pressure is n e ce ss ar il y there but thet appears to be the
thinking.

     Bottom of 67      (h):

     "As well as the Fire Service pointing out that
     the present tem po ra ry s tr uc t ur e s used for police and
     first-aid p urposess would need removal from a
     means of escape point of view if the c a pa ci ty of
     the North Stand was not to be reduced, the Police
     stated that they were ready to discuss with the Club
     the facilities they would require.                  Briefly, they
     e nv is ag ed a p erman en t s tr uc tu re almost twice as large
     as the e xisting t e mp or ar y s t r u c t ur e .. . "

and so on.

     "So far as Fir st -A i d was concerned, the Shef fi el d
     Area Health Aut ho ri t y had c on fi rm ed their w i l li n gn e ss
     to ..."

assist with Dr.      Bailey.

     Page 69,      minutes    of the next meeting:

     "Mr. McGee" - the Club Chairman, I think - "welcomed
     the represent at iv e s, and stre ss ed that the Club were
     a mbitious and want ed to make the S ta dium the best in
     Europe.   Crowds had been a v er ag in g 11,000 this season
     and, viewed purely as a football operation, the
     Club had been losing money since 1967.        C o mw er ci al
     ventures had made the Club viable and it was hoped
     to expand this side of the Club's a c ti vi ti es ."

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       What does that m ean?        Is that
letting off the g y m na si um or what other c om me r ci a l --- ?

     MR. COLLINS:   May be that but I think largely that
if they could attract other events - pop concerts, I
suppose, is the sort of example, or whatever.    Obvi ou sl y
if you have a sell-out you get more money.    And Semi-
Finals, in the football context.

      And then at 71:

      "B.   West   Terrace.

      It was agreed     -
                                44

                                                   MR. C O L L I N S

     1. That the Club's prop os al s for the i n s t a l l at i on
     of addit io na l barr ie rs and the r e du ct io n in capacity
     ...without the need for a dd it i on a l g an gw ay s should
     be i m p l e m e n t e d ."

So here we do have the a dd it i on a l barriers.      It may be
that I was wrong in the earlier one;        it c er ta in ly was not
s pe ci fi ca ll y referred to but it is now.

     "2. That the qu es t io n of the c r os s- fa ll   on the steps
     on the nor th -w e st corner exit" -

that I do not think we need worry about.            And then on
page 73:

     "It was agreed that c o n s i d er a ti o n would be given
     to the i n s t a l la ti o n of an improved publ ic address
     system, with the Police having a c c e s s ^ t o g e t h e r
     with its use as a fire alarm system, subject to
     an e mergency b ack-up."

    "First Aid   Facilit ie s

     2. The Police would supply the Club S e cr et ar y with
     a copy of their initial sketch plan showing the
     facilities they wished to see and that Dr. Bailey
     would inspect the existin g ...and then discuss
     future fac ilities."

     " Future Action

     The Club stressed that they wished to carry out as
     much work as p o s s i bl e before the issue of the
     C e r t i f ic at e by the start of the 1979/80 Season."


Then the next meeting, 18th April, 1979, page 74, over
on 75, a lthough it refers to the Kop it is referrable,
too, because it deals with the height of the barriers.
P aragr aph 6:

     "It was agreed that the q ue st io n of the height of
     some of the crush b ar ri er s be c on si d er e d again
     after it was seen which of them failed on testing."

I suppose there is not much point, it is true, in              dealing
with the height of a barrier which is going to be              repl ac ed
because it fails anyway.   I imag in e that was what           was in
mind.   Again, the same in Para gr ap h 2 in respect           of the
West Terrace.

     The   bottom of page 76 - "C om mu ni ca ti on s" :

     " ...upgrading...    It was agreed that the Police
     should have the o ver-r id e facility...         Dr. East wo od
     u n dertook to look into the p o s si b il i ty of a c hi ev in g
     this through radio rather than wire means."
                                        45


                                                          MR. C O L L I N S

        " Police and First Aid F a ci li ti es

        The Police stressed that it was esse nt ia l that
        there was no gap in the p ro vi si on of Police
        facilities when the t emporary s t ru ct ur e was
        replaced by the perm an en t structure.        With this
        in mind, they were happy for the safety aspects
        to receive first priority and to wait for the
        1980 close season for the work to be c ar ried out.
        It was under st oo d that Dr. Bailey had not yet
        c o m pl et ed his i n v es t ig a ti o ns . ^

Then 1st May, 1979, we have the Building Surve yo r of
S h effield City's input into the c e rt i fi c at e and on the
West Terrace he refers to the down wa rd slope of the exit
steps and:

        "2. L im i t a t i o n of numbers         as agreed b e tw ee n Police
        r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s and club.

        Subject     to these two points this area is a cc ep t ab l e. "

Then under       "General"       at the bottom of 79,           P a ra gr ap h   1, he
refers to:

          "All crush barriers, b al us t ra d e walls, fences and
rai li n gs to be tested and replaced or s t r e n g t he n ed where
n e c e s s a r y ."

      Then there is the input from the Fire Service D ep ar t me n t
a lthou gh page 81 is headed, "South York sh ir e County Council"
it is in fact from the Fire D ep ar t me n t of the County Council.

     You will see, sir, that in rela ti on to the Kop the
gates on to the p erimete r fence were to be taken into
account in c o n s i d e r a t i o n of exit points b ec ause Para gr ap h
2   :
        "To secure a crowd capacit y of 16,850 p eople                        the
        following work to be undertaken, in a dd i ti o n                     to
        item 1.

        (a) Provide four gates of at least ,1.1 metre wide
        from the radial gangway s to the p er i me t er track of
        the ground area."

Because they were to be used as exit gates, the^ were
required to be the 1.1 metres beca us e that is the width
in the Green Guide, the m ini mu m width for gates which
are to be used as m eans of egress.    We will hear in due
c ourse that the gates in the peri me te r fence on the
Leppings Lane end were not of 1.1, they were in fact under
1 metre width 0.8 s omethi ng or other and 0.9 s om e th i ng or
other respectively.    And then (b) - p r o v i si o n of an
add it io na l exit.
                                                                  MR. C O L L I N S

Then,     at the bottom of page 82:

        "West and North West         Terrace.

        The exit routes . f r o m     these parts of the ground
        are satisf ac to ry "

and,    as I emphasise,       not including      the p er i me t er   fence.

        The Fire B rigade also refer at the b o tt om of 83:

        "Training    of Staff.

        To ensure that the s taff are c o n ve r sa n t with the
        safety p r e c a u t i o n s they will be e xp ec te d to administer,
        a meeting can be a rrang ed with this D ep ar t me n t
        suitable to all parties."

And on 84:

        "Access    for e mergen cy    Vehicles

        A de qu at e roads should be prov id ed to ensu re that
        speedy and direct access can be obta in ed by e me rg e nc y
        v ehicles to all exter io r parts of the stadium.

        2.    Ensure that parked vehi cl es will not o bs tr uc t
        e m ergency v ehicl es on these access roads."

Crowd c apacity      is then set out in somewhat more detail:

        "The following numbers are c on si d er e d to be
        s a t i s f ac to ry to the Fire A ut ho ri ty p ro vi d in g that
        the r e co mm en de d work as d et ai le d above is carr ie d
        out"                       .

and then we see the two figures for the West Terrace,
North West Terrace, 7,200 and 2,900 making a t ot al of
1 0 ,1 0 0 .

       Then the Police input at page 85.         The r eq ui re m en t s
the C hi ef Cons ta bl e requir es are exis ti ng crush barr ie rs
to be tested to a load of 400 lb./ft., the m ax i mu m requ ir ed
by the guide to the Act.         This is to be done i mm ed i at e ly and
t h ereafter 20% of the crush barr ie rs chos en at random to
be tested.

        "2. Vertical barriers be placed on the spion Kop
        to prevent lateral m ovemen t of the crowd.

          3.   G ateways in the e xi st in g p e ri me te r fencing be
        r eal ig ne d with the gang wa ys of the Spion Kop.

        4. The Police have the         facility    to o v er ri de    the
        public address system.

        5. A s uitable    Police     room be provided.
                                                    MR. C O L L I N S

     " R e p r e s en ta ti ve s of the S h ef fi el d W ed n es d ay Football
     Club have acc ep t ed these p r op os al s with ou t demur and,
     with the e x c e p t i o n of item 5, will be carr ie d out
     during the close season of 1979.                    The police room
     will be p rovided during 1980."

And then there is a sketch         over   the page of the required
police room.

     LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      But   "2" never was.

     MR. COLLINS:        "2" never was, so far as one can tell
and there is no i n di ca ti on in the docu me nt s that I have
seen i n di ca ti ng why it did not happen;    it just did not
happen for some reason.

     Then, 31st May, 1979, this is Dr. Baily i n di ca ti ng
what he would require, after c o n s u l t at i on with St. John's
and over the page on 88 he sets out the r eq ui rements:

      "Structure

     The e xisting fac il it ie s are much below an
     a cc ep t a b l e s tanda rd and I would suggest the
     Club c onsider p r ov id in g a more p e rm an en t
     s t ructure which is not likely to require upgr ad in g
     for a very long time."

     " Treatment A r e a .

     The Treatment Area should be s u ff ic ie nt to a c c o m ­
     modate two or three patie nt s at any one time and
     c o n s i d e r a t i o n should be given to the needs for
     privacy ...bearing in mind that the three patie nt s
     may well be lying on couches."

Supply   of hot water and cold water.

     "Storage facilities are requ ir ed for six s tr et c he r s
     two sets of wheels for stretchers, b l an ke ts and
     other bed linen.

     "Equipment.

     The following is a m inimu m list to prov id e a basic
     service.   T reatm en t couc he s with lift up ends,
     two or three in number d e pe nd in g on space a v ai la bl e
     and/or number of cubicles, if the a c c o m m o d a t i o n is
     cubicled.    Six stretchers.       Twocsets of stre tc he r
     wheels.   20 blankets.       6 pillows.    One M i nu t e - M a n
     resuscitator.

      Telephone    Facilities.

     A t elephone facility would appear to be basic in
     1979.    This can be achieved by an e x te ns io n from
     the main switch, or sharing with Police."
                                  48

                                                    MR. C O L L I N S

      Sir, it is perhaps inter e st i ng to recall that despite
that there is or was at the a ft e rn o on in question,
acco rd in g to the evidence we have heard, no M i n u t e - M a n resusc-
itator and there was no telepho ne either in the room.
I am not sure w hether we have heard s p ec i fi c al l y about
the number of blankets, etc.      There were, I think, six
stretchers, is the evidence and two sets o f wheels.

      And then at the bottom,           "Ambulances":

      "Access for a m b ul an c es at the pres en t time appears
      to be ade qu at e but must not be o ve rl o ok e d in any
      redesigning.         It is u n d e r s t o o d that the p e ri me te r
      track is i n s u f f ic i en t in d im en s io n to easily run
      the a m b ul an ce around the football pitch."

          Then the letter from the County Coun ci l in June
sending the c omments to the Club in the form of a schedule
which is at pages 91 following.            92 (e) refers to the
limit at io n of numbers        as agreed and a d d i ti o na l barr ie rs
as indi ca te d on the plan.         "L" on 94 requ ir es trai ni ng of
staff, safety stewards.            "0" on 95 requires the access
and "R" r equires dr sets out, really, in exte ns o the
r e q u i r e me nt s that Dr. Bailey set out that we have already
looked at.            And then the numbers capac it y is set out
at 97.

     Then on 98 we have an internal memo from East wo od
& Partners.   In fact that is a memo written I think by
Mr. Strange who was the g e nt le ma n in E as tw o od s who was
largely concerned, together with Dr. Eastwood, deal in g
with the football club.

      There is a ref er e nc e to p er im e te r fence found the
pitch wants testing and strengthe ni ng .          Is it "Don" or
"Dan Sherriff", I am not sure which "wants to witn es s
tests."    Mr. S he rr i f f is or was the South York sh ir e
County Council or was he the City Council, I forget
which.    City Council.

      "Barriers,     General.

      Replace barrier ,8if * :/far ;too low, only about 730
high.    OK had already i n st ru ct ed this one to be
removed.    Corrosion, all d an ge ro us items to be repaired
that could cause injury, e.g. caps on ends of corr od ed
tubes" and so on.

      Then we have      the Working      Party,   12th N o ve mb er

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Then it adds,                 "Thin plates welded
over c orroded gusset plates."

        MR. COLLINS:      I ndic at in g what work had been carried
out.       At (e) on page 100 you will see that the West Terrace
r eq ui re me nt s had been carr ie d out.     (q) 102, "Police
Facil it ie s and First Aid Facilities":
                                                     MR. C O L L I N S

     "AS agreed, a suitable permanent Police Room would
     be provided in 1980.        Club explained that it would
     be p referable from a building point of view for both
     the police and first aid facilities to be in the same
     overall building, although physically separated.
     The police repr es en ta ti ve s reserved their position
     on this point, pending the outcome of detailed
     di sc us si on s with the Club.

     The question of parking for both police and St. John's
     personnel purposes would also need to be looked at
     in detail."

And then   "T"   over the page,    103:

     "The Club were anxious that the Certif ic at e should
     be in force by the flerby game with Sheffield United
     on Boxing Day morning."

Meeting of the 18th December, the purpose, in "1", to
check that o ut st anding matters referred to in the Note
of the meeting had been completed or were in the course
of completion.     Various minor matters.

     LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:     Mr.     D u c k e nf ie ld was in on that.

     MR. COLLINS:    Yes, he was.  "Major matters, emergency
lighting and South Stand structure" which we do not, I think,
need to go into and then we have the c er ti fi ca te itself
on page 107, the terms and conditions, dated, you will see,
21st December, 1979.

     "3.  The terms and conditions hereby imposed are
     those which the South Yorkshire County Council consider
     necessary or expedient" - that i s 4 of course, following
     the wording of the Act."

It comes into force on 21st December            for an indefinite
period, s u b - p a ra gr ap h 6.

Page 110, I am not going to read through all the general
terms and conditions.               (3) is the numbers.  If we
look at page 117, and may I emphasise, sir, that this
is the c er ti fi c a t e s t i l l in force, unamended.  117,
Schedule (3) Part 1, crowd capacity, note the Kop, 16850
and, of course, the West Terrace and N orth-West Terrace
7,200 and 2,900, and those are the figures we have seen
in the reports hitherto.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   So there was no change made
in 1986 when the Kop was enlarged.

     MR. COLLINS:      Not to the Safety Certificate. As we
will see, there was a note which indicates the County
Council approved it but it never was amended on the
Safety C er ti ficate and never formalised.


                           /(3)    we have dealt with.
                            50


                                                    MR. COLLINS

3 we have dealt with.   Then 5(2).

     "If whilst the Certificate is in operation it
      is proposed to alter or extend the Stadium
      or any of its installations in a manner men­
      tioned inSection 8 of the Act the Holder
      shall at least 21 days before the carrying out
      of the proposal give notice in writing of the
      proposal to the Councy Council."

I did not refer you to Section 8.    I ought perhaps to
have done because that requires or that states, 1975
Act of course, if while a general safety certificate
is in operation with respect to a stadium it is proposed
to alter or extend that    stadium or any of its install­
ations and the alteration or extension is likely to
affect the safety of persons at the stadium the holder
of the certificate shall before the carrying out of the
....  Subsection 1 in particular requires notice when
it is proposed to alter the entrances to or exits from
the stadium and so on.  Over the page    ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is relevant simply
to the extension of the   Kop, is it?

     MR. COLLINS:   No,   because on the face of it
putting in the radial fences would be an alteration
within Section 8 because ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Not an extension but an
alteration.

     MR. COLLINS:   .... it would affect the safety
or potentially affect safety.  I may say it is not
suggested the club did not give the necessary notice
to the local authority in respect of all these
extensions.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes.

     MR. COLLINS:   Or alterations.        6(1).

     "The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable
      at least 21 days (or such shorter time to which
      the Chief Constable may consent) prior to every
      Specified Activity the methods of admission to
      be employed .... and (in relation to a Football
>1    Match) the methods to be used for the segretation
      of home and visiting supporters.

     (2) The Holder shall refuse admission to, or
     evacuate spectators from, the Stadium or any
     part thereof at any time before or during a
     Specified Activity upon receiving instructions
     so to do from the Chief Constable.
<VN\<k
 l'L                                     51


                                                                MR. COLLINS

                  7. The Holder shall at his own expense
                  arrange for the attendance at every Specified
                  Activity of an adequate number of Police
                  Officers to secure the orderly and lawful
                  behaviour of the spectators and the number of
                  Police Officers shall be agreed between the
                  Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21
                  days before."

             Note the requirement to secure orderly and lawful
             behaviour because that appears so far as the safety
             certificate is concerned to be the role of the Police.

                 "8(1).  Subject to such interim arrangements as
                  may be agreed by the County Council the Holder
                  shall provide and maintaiin at the Stadium to
                  the satisfaction* of the County Countil a
                  suitably equipped First Aid Room." Adequately
                  signed, capable of being lit by emergency power.

                 "(2) The Holder shall ensure that during every
                  Specified Activity a physician employed or
                  retained by the Holder is available to attend
                  at the First Aid room if required and that his
                  whereabouts are known to those in the Police
                  Central Control Room at the Stadium."

             Sir, there was in fact a doctor present, as we will hear
             in due course.  We have not yet received direct evidence
             about it. A Dr. Purcell.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        He issthe club's doctor?

                  MR. COLLINS:    The club's doctor.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Who we see on the video?

                  MR. COLLINS:  Indeed.  Whether his whereabouts
             were known to those in the Police Central Control Room
             I am not sure.  I am not sure we have had any specific
             evidence about that.

                 "The Holder shall arrange for the attendance
                  at every Specified Activity of such numbers
                  of qualaified First Aid assistants as the
                  County Council shall require but without
                  prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
                  ensure that at every specified activity there
             ^6 av:iSfeat^leastf©neUFir^tsAid&&ssist;a«t®for every
                  2,000 spectators."

         ^   Thene th^aqtifestion of stewards.  The holder shalllaxrange
             for the attendance at everySspecified activity of such
             number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2
             of Schedule 3.     Page 117 gives the minimum number of
                                                 MR. COLLINS

stewards to be required.    That is 26 for the exits.     That
is of course the exits from the ground to the public roads
outside or to the road down by the river.       26 to the main
exit.€!*€0atr6&;c&adAd£r£c£ien of spectators leaving the
stadium 38& One per vomitory.     Patrolling the stadium
and dealing with any emergency 2. And they should be
distributed at each main exit 2 6 , fSSofchfiStand 12, West
Stand 8f North Stand 18, under South Stand 2. And
going back to paragraph 9, they shall be:

    "(a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
     (b) properly trained and instructed (c) ident­
     ifiable by dress (d) provided with written
     instructions as to their general duties in order
     to carry out the followingt manning of exits,
     control and direction of spectators entering,
     using or leaving the stadium" - which of course
     may be of importance - "patrolling the stadium
     and dealing with any emergency including raising
     an alarm and extinguishing any small fire."

Then page 113, paragraph 14, sub. 3, there is a requirement
that there should be provided to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable inter ilia a public address system audible
in all parts of the stadium which the Police may override.

114, 24, inspections by suitably qualified chartered
engineer.  25 deals with the requirement of inspecting
the crush barriers.  28 on 115 requires the keeping of
records and notification of accidents.  29 at the top
of 116.

    "The stadium shall be maintained with the
     facilities and structures including all
     crush barriers, entrances, exits and means
     of access tothe entrances and exits in the
     number, size, position and strength existing
     at the date of the Certificate and indicated
     on the plans and no alteration shall be made
     thereto unless prior notice in writing is
     given to the County Council in accordance
     with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule."

That is ?(f>f course a reflection of Section 2 (2) (c)(3)
of the 1975 Act.     So that, for example, the crush
barriers that were altered when the radial fences
were put in and the crush barrier which was removed
from the mouth of pen 3 - that is the tunnel end of
pen 3 - notification of that would have had to be
given to the County Council under the provisions of
the certificate.     Then we have details on 119 of the
evacuation procedure.     Rather than appears in the middle
of that page, you will see, sir, rather than an announce­
ment in the form that we have seen playing of music was
         *




1u   V                              53


                                                            MR. COLLINS

             anticipated.  ISam not quite sure whether the tune was
             changed for musical reasons or for other reasons but,
             any way, I do not think we need go into the details.

                  Then on the 28th January, 1980, we have Dr. Eastwood's
              formal report on the load tests on the crush barriers
             carried out between June and December and he  says over
             the page (b) Leppings Lane, page 122, "In the first
             series of tests six barriers had failures of the tube
             retaining clips.  Five barriers suffered permanent
             deformation of the horizontal rail.  All were repaired.
             In addition 11 new clips and five rails which were badly
             corroded were replaced and any protruding or sharp edges
             removed.  After construction of the new barriers they and
             all the repaired barriers were tested and all withstood
             the test load satisfactorily."

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   At some stage, I imagine, we
             may be going to look at a safety certificate from else­
             where?

                  MR. COLLINS:   We have some, sir.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR*   I leave it entirely to you
             how you do it but a comparison might be of interest.
             Maybe better to do it later on.

                  MR. COLLINS:    Yes.  We have in fact got the Liverpool
             one which can be compared and we have also got, I think,
             the Aston Villa one which, as you know, was the other
             ground used for ....   Page 125, County Council to
             Eastwood, July, 1980, thanking him for his letter.

                 "After consultations with the Building Authority
                  and in view of the fact that all of the barriers
                  were tested prior to certification, the County
                  Council is able to agree this year with the
                  course of action which you propose.  I would
                  stress this ggreement is conditional .... accepted
                  without prejudice as to what may be required in
                  future years."

             That is the questions of retesting under the certificate.
             Then he deals with that over the page, Eastwood.   "In
             July I made inspections and had approximately one-fifth
             of the crush barriers tested by members of my staff
             under my control." You will see, sir, there were a
             number which failed of that one-fifth.   Perhaps the
             importance of that it indicates that in a period of
             12 months the possibility of the failure of a sig­
             nificant number of the barriers because of course
             all had been tested as we have seen pripr to the
             safety certificate.   Whether that is because of the
             age of some of the barriers I do not know.   But we do
        -


y   —

                                    54

                                                               MR. COLLINS

            kftow of course some of them are fairly ancient and
            indeed the one that failed was pre-1931.

                 127.   Minutes for debriefing of the semi-final in 1981

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     We have seen this document.

                 MR. COLLINS:   We have seen this document. Yes, I
            think we have seen it. This is the one that was referred
            to ....

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Tab 4 or something.

                 MR. COLLINS:    Tab 4.  I would as well as it
            happens to come here in the bundle draw your attention
            to the fourth paragraph.

                "The Chairman invited views on this point.
                 Superintendent Chapman said that the
                 entrances to Leppings Lane were controlled
                 to ensure an even distribut io ns ^ ff as s.
                 However, as the ground 1filled up the usual
                 packing problems occurred.  There was space
                 in the centre of the enclosure but fans
                 refused to move over and fill it."

            The only reason I draw attention to that is it perhaps
            is an?indication that left to themselves fans do not
            actually always even themselves or put themselves evenly
            on terracing and, indeed, there is a recognition in
            that paragraph by the Police Officer that that actually
            did not always happen.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You mean even when you do not
            inhibit them by putting fences?

                 MR. COLLINS:   Exactly.  Exactly.   Unless they are
            made to move in some way then you get the problem or the
            potential problem of them not standing in the places
            which perhaps give slightly worse views.   One can
            understand that.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Also rather strange that it
            seem® h to suggest contrary to all we have heard  it was
            the centre that they ....

                 MR. COLLINS:   Indeed.    Then we have this, "Police
            Officers were placed in the crowd to ensure that the
            best use was made of the available space." So there is
            a recognition there o s ;apparent®regognition of the role
            certainly being carried out then by the Police in
            ensuring even packing of the terraces.

                 Over the page, 128, third paragraph, Ml. Herold
                                                  MR. COLLINS

said that the capacity for the Leppings Lane enclosure
stated in the certificate is 10,100,must contain a
safety margin.  The actual turnstile reading was 10,435
to which must be added 70 supporters making a total of
about 405 over the authorised limit.  Assuming that there
is a safety margin in the 10,100 it is not a large increase
over the capacity that one had on that occasion.

      The bottom of the page, 128, and this no doubt is a
matter we will have to ask Inspector Calvert who will be
giving evidence - there is a reference to Inspector
Calvert expressing concern about the central entrance to
the Leppittgs Lane area because it always causes delays
and blockages.   It would benefit from reconstruction.
Not entirely clear from that which is being referred to
because central entrance to the Leppings Lane area
could mean the tunnel but I do not think it is likely
to mean that or it could mean, I suppose, outside at
the gates.   Of course, that was a configuration which
has since been checked but, nevertheless, no doubt we
will find out precisely what was meant by that in due
time.   I do not think I need go through more of that.

      Next is the report on the same incident by
Sheffield Wednesday to the County Council in accordance
with the certificate, required to report accidents.
Actually they were a day or two late but that, I think,
does not matter.      It gives the details of the injuries.
Board minute, relevant Board minute, on page 134.
"Concern was expressed at the crushing which occurred
at Leppings Lane end of the ground and further
investigation into making it more comfortable should
be looked into.      Then there is the internal Police
report, another internal Police report, from the Chief
Superintendent to the Assistant Chief Constable.
I©MEthn>£ar:«gi£a|*h. i^f-have informed Mr.England" - who
was the then club secretary - "that our consensus view
is that the 10,100 crowd figure specified in the
safety certificate is too high.       Understandably, he
refutes this and defends the position by stating that
the former capacity , prior to the implementation of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act at Hillsborough in
Deeeafcer, 1979, was 11,100 and that on a npaber of
occasions in previous all-ticket matches the terracing
has accommodated that number.      Certainly, at the 1980
semi-final, when we again had a cpacity crowd of 50,174, we
also had some hundreds:6ffforged tickets, all for the
Leppings Lane end, and apart from one very minor
crushing of spectators there was no problem."


                           / filr.MEaglapdp'has
                                    Mr.   COLLINS

      Mr. England has been acquainted with our view that
      the Leppings Lane terracing should be sectioned
      vertically front to back to produce pens to enable
      more accurate crowd control and prevent sideways
      movement, and heis already actively considering
      this.  He has also considered using turnstiles 1
      to 4 for one part of the terracing and 5 to 6 for
      another, controlling the crowd entering through
      those turnstiles by the placing of safety barriers
      in that open area between the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles and the back of the West Stand terracing.
      I agree with him that for most matches that would
      possibly work but have grave reservations as to
      its efficacy for the potentially troublesome games.
      Additionally, to implement it he would have to find
      some way for spectators to enter the West Stand
      without crossing the other corridors that support


Then there is the report from the Chief Constable to the
F.A. at pages 138 and 139.  In the second paragraph of
page 139, the Chief Constable says:

      "The capacity at the. Leppings Lane end is 10,100
      and this obviously contains a safety factor.   At
      a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
      gained entry into this part of the ground and were
      absorbed without any apparent difficulty.   However,
      on this date turnstile readings showed that 10,435
      people were admitted to this part of the ground."

With regard to the first part of that, one is entitled to
perhaps comment that that is not wholly consistent with
the views expressed in the internal memorandum that we
were just looking at>

      "A policy of packing spectators occurs at most
      football grounds where large crowds are in
      attendance so that all the available space is
      utilised.  On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur
      fans, who had arrived early in the day and taken
      up advantageous viewing points, refused to move
      into the centre of the enclosure, thereby creating
      a jamming effect at the extremities of it.  The
      late arrivals caused an immediate problem ..."

and so on.   The policy of paeking spectators means, I
assume, that   they should be, as indeed it says, they
should be spread out evenly, and it is pointed out that
that did not happen.

      Page 140 is a copy of the Police letter to the
Club.  I think we have already seen that. In the middle
of the second paragraph - and I am sorry it is not all
that legible - is the reference to the Chief Constable's
only criticism of senior officers for not opening the
gates earlier, "thus avoiding the emergency measure of
allowing and helping spectators to climb over the fence".
                                          Mr. COLLINS

      Sir, what happened was that the gate was opened as
described by Mr. Vaux earlier, but some people did escape
by climbing over.  The Club were criticising the police
for allowing people climb over, the police making the
point "We only helped people to climb over who were
escaping from the emergency".

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

          Mr. COLLINS:   Sub-paragraph (b) at the bottom says:

          "The Leppings Lane end is not  constructed to give
          maximum aid to the packing and control of the crowd
          and the accepted crowd capacity is such that there
          is no safety margin."

Again one sees the slight inconsistency in what is said
to the F.A. and what is said to the Club for internal
consumption.

          Then, over the page, at the top, about three lines
do wn :

          "I consider it advisable for the Safety and
          Grounds Committee of the South Yorkshire County
          Council to visit the Leppings Lane end to discuss —

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose the letter to the
F.A. may mean that the capacity is 10,100 and that that
is obviously intended to contain a safety factor?

          Mr. COLLINS:   Yes, sir, to be fair, that may well
be so.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Anyway, there it is.

      Mr. COLLINS:   At the top of page 141, sir, I was
just reading as follows:

          "I consider it advisable for the Safety and
          Grounds Committee of the South Yorkshire County
          Council to visit the Leppings Lane end to discuss
          the problems encountered at the semi-final with
          a view to taking further preventative measures.
          I do not wish spectators again to be climbing
          over the fence and it is therefore important that
          the construction of barriers and the arrangements
          of the crowd at the Leppings Lane end should be
          looked at critically to ensure that the police and
          the stewards are able to control and maintain order
          more effectively within the terrace.  I am in favour
          of a free zone on the terraces behind the g°a l to
          which spectators can be moved in an emergency".

He then talks about getting the whole matter into
perspective, considering a crowd of 50,000 and the
problem that there was not a wholesale condemnation.
                                        M r .COLLINS

              Then we come to the penultimate paragraph,
which says:

      "I have tried to be constructive in this letter.
      I have not attempted to seek relief from the
      responsibility of ensuring the safety of spectators
      at Hillsborough.  I regard this to be a joint venture
      and I suggest that when we do get problems, as
      inevitably we will, we should stand together and
      refrain from blaming one another, especially
      before all the facts have been marshalled".

So there is indeed, one would suggest, an obvious sensible
approach being put forward there, that each has a
responsibility for safety and each must work together.


      Page 142 is a meeting of the 8th June, 1981, and
at the bottom you will see a reference to the West Stand
which says:

      "Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi Final,
      the Club were considering revised arrangements on
      the terracing in front of the stand.  An assurance
      was given that the Officer Working Party would be
      consulted when these had substance."

Then we have another internal police memorandum of August
1981   from,Ithink, the Chief Superintendent, Mr. Herold:

      "You are botly^iware of my feelings that Club Stewards
      at Hillsborough often do less than they should and
      are at times not aware of our function and operation
      and our respective roles."

Then the fourth paragraph:

      "We should stress to the stewards that the admission
      of spectators and the packing of those spectators
      at the bigger games under the terracing is primarily
      their function and not a police one".

A little lower down:

      "We should co-operate fully with them and they with
      us, and not pull in opposite directions".

145 is a letter from Dr. Eastwood to the County Council:

      "We have been instructed by the Club to organise
      the installation of two radial fences on the
      terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

      It is intended that these fences are so positioned
      that they divide this section of the terrace into
      approximately three equal areas, each served by
      its own entrance".
                                    Mr. COLLINS

Effectively, sir, what was proposed then and indeed what
was carried out in the event was the fence dividing 2
from 3 and the fence dividing 4 from 5, and those were
theonly two that were originally to be installed.

      "By dividing the terrace,more control over
      supporters should result.   A visiting team with
      only a few followers will be allocated one section,
      with the other two sections retained by the home
      supporters.

      Larger contingents of visiting spectators could
      be accommodated in two or all three areas as their
      numbers dictate.

      A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
      each fence to give access for maintenance and
      also policing during a game.    The gate could be
      left opened but fastened back to connect the areas
      during a game if adjacent ones are occupied by
      supporters of the same team.   When establishing
      the heigh: we have considered that the views to the
      corner flags should not be restricted any further
      than they are at present by the perimeter fence.
      We therefore propose that the top of the fence
      should be approximately 1680 mm above the terrace.

      This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing
      the fence but should eliminate a mass invasion
      from one area to the other. Fences this height
      appear to work successfully at St. James's Park,
      the home of Newcastle United."

Then there is an internal note by M r . Strange referring to
possible alterations of arrangements at the turnstiles
and indicating, on pages 149 and 150, possible new plans.
The only point that I think is of perhaps some importance
out of all this, sir, is that it is an indication that
there are ways of increasing the turnstile capacity at
the Leppings Lane end which have been considered. This
one, as you can see, sir, includes the possibility of
some new turnstiles with a queueing area along the side
road running beside theriver ; and also the possibility of
a double system, that is to say, original entry points
through the turnstile and then a further turnstile
allowing those into the stand who might want to pay extra
to get into the stand.   Those possibilities are all
considered.

      Page 151 is dated 9th September, 1981;  further
crush barrier tests in 1981, and one or two showed signs
of distress - again an indication of the need for the
annual test because crush barriers did go in that period,
this time two years since all the tests, of course.
                                       Mr. COLLINS

      Page 152 is a Police internal minute, at the bottom
of the page of which there is a reference to attending a
meeting:

        "Members of the Fire Service and Buildings Department
        were in attendance and the only reservations
        expressed were by the Fire Service, who indicated
        that the security gates - which will be open
        during football matches - should not in any way
        restrict the egress routes which they feel are of
        minimum width as it is."

That, of course, is of some importance, sir, because there
is the Fire Service saying "You have got to keep  those
gates at the back available and clear for exit if these
fences are to be put in".

        153 is a Working Party Meeting of the 11th September,
1981.    Item 2:

        "Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of
        the terrace into approximately three equal areas,
        each served by its own entrance, the Working Party
        felt that increased control on the Terrace should
        result from the proposals.   For instance, there
        could well be problems with the opposing fans
        mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the
        final exit gates, but the police consider they
        could cope with any problems of this nature.

        The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be
        installed at the rear of the radial barriers was
        also discussed, as well as the use of the existing
        gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the
        front of the Terrace.

        It was noted that the plans submitted did not
        indicate the amount of headroom which would be
        available at the rear of the Terrace should the
        radial barriers and gates be installed.
        It was agreed that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs.
        Eastwood and Partners that the Officer Working
        Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
        two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre
        wide gate at the rear, on the West Terrace at the
        Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

        (i)     the further calculations required by the
                Building Authority being satisfactory;

        (ii)    confirmation that adequate headroom will
                 be available at the rear of the Terrace, and

        (iii)   the new gates at the rear of the^ Terrace
                 also being under police control."
                                   M r . COLLINS

Then item 4:

      "It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory
      police and first aid facilities under the North
      Stand had been accepted on an interim basis.  The
      Club had undertaken to provide purpose-built
      facilities ... during the 1980 close season.
      Whilst some progress had been made in discussing
      details of the facilities, no firm indication had
      yet been given as to when they would actually be
      provided. It was agreed that Mr. D. Vaughan would
      press the Club."
And then there is an indication of those decisions written
to the Club in the letter at page 155 and 156, and I do
not need to go through that, sir, because it is repetition.
I am sorry, sir, that is wrong.  I said that it was sent
to the Club.   In fact, it was sent to Messrs. Eastwood
and Partners.  Eastwoods send a copy to the Club at page
157:

      "I enclose a copy of a letter from David Vaughan
      dated 14th September from which you will see that
      the proposal to instal the radial barriers on the
      West Terrace and to provide security gates round
      the North Stand are accepted, although with some
      reservations ..."

Then in October 1981 he refers to the test, which I do
not think I need go into.  At 160 there is an internal
memorandum, or rather an telephone message from the
Club Secretary.  Blessvale are the contractors who dealt
with the installation of the radial barriers:

      "Blessvale have cut existing barriers on each side
      of fences.  Is it the intention to put rails back
      or leave off?

      Explained that if left off, some capacity will be
      lost (theoretically).  He said that^putting them
      back would provide a jumping off point for
      spectators.  Agreed.  Which does he consider more
      important? Agreed to discuss."

The point there, sir, is that if you remove the barriers
you create a gangway down either side and that affects
the capacity in accordance with the Green Guide; and the
point is made, "Otherwise they will jump over."
      Then we have a letter referring to a drawing of the
standing capacities of the five areas at Leppings Lane
end. I am not sure that we have got that. Unfortunately
we do not have that drawing, sir, and I am not quite sure
which are the five areas. There are three in the front.
I imagine he is either including the corners as separate
areas or some part of the north west as being a separate
area as well, but I do not think it matters.
                                   Mr. COLLINS

Then there are further telephone calls from Mr. England
to Mr. Strange:

     "The police have been to inspect fences at Leppings
     Lane., They are not happy that existing barriers
     go through the fence.  Barriers can be used as a
     jumping off point.  Eric and I had discussed this
     last week.  We agreed to let the police make first
     comments.  Eric thinks that barriers should be cut
     away.  I explained about calculated loss of spectator
     would bring capacity below 50,000.  He said that
     crush during last semi-final made him suspicious
     of crowd calculation at that end anyway".

I think that is a record of Mr. England,   the Club Secretary
speaking.  It goes on:

      "Said that perimeter fence was cause of this.
      Suggested that Kop could take more because area
      is larger to dispose those affected by fence.
      Agreed to leave barriers in position for QPR game
      to see what happens.   Ring Monday".

Then on the same day Mr. England was ringing to say that
there had been no sign of Blessvales, but I do not think
we need worry with that.  I will simply ask you to note
the Club's reservations, or at least Mr. England's
reservations about capacity.

      On page 163 there is another message on the same
day, Mr. England to Mr. Strange:

      "Asked him if Police had passed any adverse comment
      about operation of fences at Leppings Lane end. No.
      All went well on Saturday.   Chief Constable has seen
      them.  Agreed that we would leave barriers going
      through for time being.   If they do cause trouble,
      then cut them down.  OK."

Then we have Eastwoods saying that there is no comment
yet from the Working Party.

      Page 165 is the 18th January 1982, from the Police
to the County Council, the second paragraph:

      "Dealing now with the radial   fences which have
      recently been installed on the Leppings Lane
      terracing, I can confirm that the fences are
      working particularly well and proving to be most
      satisfactory in effecting the segregation of
      opposing groups of fans.   Since the fences were
      put up there has been no fixture at the ground of
      sufficient interest to result in that entire section
      of terracing being given to one group of fans and
      so I am unable to comment in that respect, but I
      see no problems whatever".
                                              MR. COLLINS

At the bottom of the page, about six lines up:

      "I would point out that Mr. England totally agrees
      with police observations regarding the construction
      of the radial fences but I understand from him that
      it is being suggested that any alterations could
      conceivably result in a reduction in the capacity
      of the Leppings Lane terracing.  I am not aware
      of the thinking behind that but for my part see no
      reason why that should be."

That is on the.question of cutting them away so as not
to allow people to jump over.

      Then we have a letter from the County Council to
Eastwoods with M r .Strange1s comments thereon, about the
various comments:

      "(a)   Radial Barriers on West Terrace

      The matches played at the stadium since the
      installation of the barriers confirm that they
      appear to be working well and satisfactorily effect
      the segregation of opposing groups of fans.  However,
      the entire section of the Terrace has yet to be
      given to one group of fans.

      The police inform me that, on installation of the
      new radial barriers, the existing crush barriers
      have been extended in some places up to and
      completely through the new radial barriers at a
      height of 4' 6" or so from the ground."

Mr.   Strange points out that they   were left there and it
was   not a question of them being   extended:

      "The effect is to make it very easy for fans to
      climb from one pen to another.  In other places
      the existing crush barrier rails have been cut
      off short of the radial barriers in_a manner which
      leaves dangerous pieces protruding into some of the
      gangways".

The note that he has put on is, "Not intended to be gangways
If counted as gangways, then you lose capacity .

      Then we have a copy of a letter    from Eastwoods to
the County Council in reply to that, on 169, the third
paragraph:

      "Turning now to the radial barriers on the West
      Terrace, it is of course accepted that where there
      is a crush barrier passing through or close to the
      radial barrier it will make it easier for anyone
      who so wishes to climb over.  Nevertheless we
      believe it is not unreasonable to leave the crush
      barriers as they are.  If all barriers were removed
      back to a distance say 1.2m from the fence, it would
                                 Mr. COLLINS

mean a 2.4m wide gap which is not protected by
barriers.  There would be a consequent loss of
calculated spectator capacity which is undesirable
from the Club's point of view.  However, from the
point of view of safety a strip of that width without
a single crush barrier would be a major hazard.

It should be kept in mind that the introduction of
these radial barriers has affected a very great
improvement from the point of view of segregation
of spectators but to achieve perfection from the
point of view of segregation brings with it other^
disadvantages.  I believe that what we have done is
a reasonable compromise between the various interests.




                    /Meeting, 4th February
                                   MR. COLLINS


      Meeting 4th of February on page 172 where the point
is discussed and then it was agreed, at the bottom of the
page:

      "That, on balance, it was preferable from a
      safety point of view to prevent crowd surge by
      the existing barriers being extended up to
      and/ot* through the new radial barriers than to
      completely prevent persons being able to climb
      from one pen to another ...."

Then go over to 174 there is reference to the Police and
First Aid Facilities:

      " ____ the Club would shortly be in a position
      to formally notify the County Council that the
      new Police and First Aid Facilities would be
      provided in the forthcoming close season.1*

175 Dr. Eastwood again to the Club about the "Annual
Certificate of Ground Safety", testing the barriers on the
Kop.  The only reason I refer to it is about six or seven
lines in the sentence:  "It is inevitable .... this is
referring to the retaining clips:

      "It is inevitable that water gets under these
      clips and they rust thus becoming weaker with
      the passage of time."

Then the Club's reply to that:

      "Many thanks for your letter of the 12th July
      re barriers on Spion Kop and Leppings Lane,
      and I agree that you put the work in hand as
      detailed in order that we have no dangerous
      barriers for the start of the season."

Then Mr. Eastwood's record of inspection on 178 and 179, a
copy of the same on 180—181 and effectively 182—183•
Then 184 is the next meeting in January.  We move on now
to January 1985.

      Perhaps I should pause there and simply make this
comment:  you will have noted, sir, that no one seems to
have taken account of the potential effect upon the capacity
and the question, apart from the barriers going through the
radial fences, as to whether there should be any reconsideration
of the capacity of the ground at the Leppings Lane end, parti­
cularly having regard to the comments in 1981 not only of
the Police but also apparently the view of Mr. England, that
the figure of 10,100 may be a figure which ought to be
reconsidered.
      We would suggest that the putting of the radial fences
made it imperative to reconsider it when you couple that
                                    MR.   COLLINS


with the crushing that had occurred without any radial fences
at the Tottenham/Wolves match, but for some reason or other
that appears not to have been taken into account at all.

      184 B. at the bottom:

      "The Club recalled the practice followed in
      consultation with the South Yorkshire Police of
      separating home and visiting supporters at the
      rear of the Stand at certain matches (such as
      with Liverpool) by erecting temporary barriers.
      This worked well but on all other normal occasions
      it was the policy of the Police to aim for
      exclusive use by visiting supporters of the West
      Stand and Terrace.  On those occasions when the
      number of visiting supporters was small and the
      weather was inclement, it was obviously desirable
      to allow home supporters access to a sheltered
      area.

      IT WAS AGREED -

      (i) That the    Club would consider at some future
      date a scheme   for permanent barriers at the rear
      of the Stand,   subject to any proposals being
      submitted for   prior approval by the Officer
      Working Party   in the usual way."

At the bottom of the page there is reference to an improved
public address sytem.

      Then we have at 187 through to 204 the Ambulance
Major Incident Plan.  I hope I will be forgiven by
Mr. Kallipetis if I don't take you through that because
it can of course be referred to in due course insofar as it
is relevant, but it is not specific to Hillsborough, of
course, it is the general Ambulance Emergency Plan.

      204, the letter of the 4th of February, the Police to
the Club.
      "With reference to our conversation of last week
      regarding improvements required to the West End
      of the ground, I forward herewith our thoughts.

      You will see that we favour the erection of a
      stone wall on the ground side of the current
      terraces, with such wall housing a bank of
      turnstiles.  Our belief is that once a spectator
      goes through the turnstiles he should then be
      segregated from the other fans, and this can
      be achieved by the erection of permanent high
      metal railings on that concrete area at present
      behind the Stand.  Similarly, there should be a
      high metal railing down the centre of the West
                                    MR. COLLINS


      Stand.  What is then created is total segregation
      of all three portions of the Terrace and the two
      areas of the West Stand, with each of these
      segregated areas having its own refreshment and
      toilet facilities."

The effect of course being you go through the correct turnstile
and you are automatically segregated in going to a particular
part, either of the terrace or of the Stand.

      Then a letter from the Club to Eastwood asking for
discussion and we have then in the beginning of April 1985
Eastwood’s sketches of a possible layout segregating visitors
from home supporters.

      If we look at the plan, sir, page 207, drawing 6705/2
there is possible modification which leads, as you see, to
29 turnstiles in number.  I think it perhaps speaks for itself
as to how the division is proposed.  -i e ;

      Effectively 1-6 would go to the North Stand, as at
present; 7-12 home supporters to the north-west terrace;
13-16 home supporters to the West Stand; 17-21 visiting
supporters down the tunnel in the middle to the central
terrace; 22-25 visitors to the West Stand and finally 26-29
visitors to the south-west terrace area.

      9th of April a letter to the County Council saying:
"The club is anxious to segregate" and prepare the scheme
for the Working Party.  Please consider that scheme.

      Then a note from, a telephone call I think, from
Mr. Strange to Mr. Chester who had become by then the Club
Secretary.

      "Turnstile at back of West Stand.

      1) He ____ " that is Mr. Chester I assume "... will
      speak to his colleagues to decide how many turn­
      stiles are required.   (Fundamental to scheme)

      2) Include in the scheme, new toilets and
      refreshment areas.  Keep it basic

I don't think we need bother with the rest of that.

      Over the page there is a n o t e . Sharon Ithink is
the Secretary's Secretary at the Club. A call from Mr.    Strange
to Sharon about turnstiles.  An indication of the total numbers
wanted.  In fact a total of 34 rather than the 29 that were
in the plan. As he says:

       "We had 29 in our scheme.  Turnstiles have
       to be in pairs.  Said I will re-do our scheme
       and submit it to Dick."
                                    MR. COLLINS


      Then we have the Officer Working Party meeting of 18th
of April.

      "1•   Purpose of Meeting

      The purpose of the meeting was to consider the
      letter dated 9th April and plan from Messrs.
      Eastwood & Partners relating to the proposals
      of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
      construct two new banks of turnstiles and
      various runs of fencing and new gates in order
      to achieve segregation

That of course was the 29 one.

      "2•   Consideration of Proposals

      The Police representatives pointed out that the
      proposals had been prompted in the main by comments
      they had made to the Club. At one time, both the
      West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as
      exclusively for the use of visiting supporters,
      but recent patterns of attendances at the Stadium
      made it necessary to allow for some element of use
      by home supporters as well.

      The proposals now outlined by the ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    When did Sheffield go into the
First Division?

      MR. COLLINS:  I think it did not go in till 1986/87.
I think at this stage it was rising and it believed that it
would get into ....

      LORD JUSTICES TAYLOR:   It was on the up and up?

      MR. COLLINS:   Yes.

      "The proposals now outlined by the Club were
      generally acceptable to the Police representatives,
      subject to:-

      (a) additional gates being provided between the
      turnstile numbered 16 and the wall of the inner
      access road;

      (b) the central area of the Terrace (indicated
      as the neutral area or visiting supporters| terrace)
      being divided in half by a new central radial
      fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
      pitchside security fence with gates erected so as
      to permit entry to be diverted to either half as
      appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial
      fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
      on the plan to be abandoned);
                                   MR. COLLINS


      (c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated
      as home supporters' terrace) also to be divided
      in half by a new central radial fence running
      from back to front with two gate (the existing
      radial fence dividing the present two Terrace
      areas - neutral area and home supporters - to
      have a second gate installed;

      (d) the existing pitch perimeter fence to have
      additional exit gates installed - one in the
      neutral area and one in the home supporters
      area.

      The County Fire Service saw no objection in
      principle to the proposals, subject to more
      detailed investigation of the means of escape
      aspects, and the Building Authority similarly
      saw no objection, subject to submission of
      detailed plans ....

      IT WAS AGREED:-

      (a) That R. Grimshaw should investigate as a
      matter of urgency the means of escape aspects
      of the proposals and let D.I. Vaughan know the
      outcome.

      (b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance
      of these aspects by the County Fire Service,
      the outline proposals .... be agreed as now
      amended by the suggestions of the South
      Yorkshire Police ....'*

A letter of the 19th April, Eastwood to Club:

      "After speaking to Sharon last Wednesday about
      the number of turnstiles ... we have altered
      our proposed layout.

      The eighteen existing turnstiles will remain.
      Ten will serve the North Stand and eight the
      terraces for the home supporters......
      Four each of these will be for home and away
      spectators .... We understand the Police have
      suggested a central fence to divide the middle
      section rather than provide a 2m wide sterile
      area to one side.This may work   providing you are
      happy having home and away supporters in the
      same area outside."

Then we see on page 215 the proposal which increases the 29
to 34.   Effectively it is done by increasing what was 1-16
to 1-18 adding two extra there and numbers 23-36 there are
there   12 instead of the 8 that were in the original. That
is where the extra ones show. What of course it does indicate
                                     MR. COLLINS



is that thought had been given to the possibility of increasing
the number of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end and an
indication that in the view anyway of Eastwood and Partners,
it was feasible that there should be the increased number of
turnstiles.
      Sir, if you care to work out the numbers of spectators
who would go through the various turnstiles, I think the
maximum comes to a figure and that is the ones who are
to the visiting supporters to the south-west terrace, of some­
thing around 800.per turnstile.  About 800 is the maximum
otherwise they are all at or around or below the 700 level,
taking account of course of the fact that the North Stand one
would normally have the 12 ones on the Penistone Road as well
as the 10 here.
      There are some rough drawings on the next pages which
I don't for the moment feel it is necessary to refer to and
then a repetition on page 220 of the original scheme for the
29.
      On to 227, a note of call from Mr. Strange to Mr. Chester

      "Asked him about central fence down terrace.
      Yes, seems a reasonable idea.  Do it that way to
      satisfy police.  He isn't worried about loss of
      capacity.

      He still isn't satisfied that the numbers of
      turnstiles are right.  Left it with him.

      Reminded me about estimate for fences along front
      of stands.  OK.  I will do one."

Then 26th of April, over the page, it starts on the right-hand
side this message:
       "Discussed copies of our drawing ... •" this is
       again Strange and Chester.

       "(I didn't agree with what he wants but in essence
       it is)
       1) Area wanted in front of turnstiles to hold
       early visitors.  Gate them in.

       2) 4 banks of three turnstiles & gate to let
       people in if all ticket.  (Disaster)

 Sir I think what that refers to, if you look at page 230
 you'will see that in the banks of turnstiles, •»hat
 had been banks of turnstiles, there is what is ^ s c r i b e d as
 "New gate", theie are four of them, in those turnstiles
                                     MR. COLLINS


closest to the back of the Stand, and I think what was being
suggested and what Mr. Strange very rightly I think considered
to be a disaster, was that if you had all ticket matches you
would not need to use turnstiles, you could let people thropgh
those gates.

      "Don't put partition across 1st floor level.
      Couple of (?) will do.

      4)   May be 13 turnstiles to North Stand.

      5)   OK to use old Ladies toilets ....

      6) Put new radial fence down centre pen.     OK.

      7) No separation on seating.

      Agreed to alter drawing.  Send him a copy and
      then hold meeting with SY Police early next week
      to discuss."

Then he does indeed do the new drawings. That is the one on
230 we just looked at.  Then on 231 we have the Fire comments
to the County Council:

      "Further to the joint meeting on 18th April 1985,
      to discuss the proposals for new crowd control
      arrangements, the means of escape implications
      have now been considered.  The scheme would appear
      to be satisfactory providing that certain gates
      have the minimum widths (in metres) as indicated
      on the enclosed plan.  It is understood that these
      gates will be supervised by either the police or
      club officials."

Sir, the gates that are being referred to in that letter are
the rear gates.  Can I ask you to turn on to 237 for the
moment.  You will see the widths and the gates referred to.

      If you look on this drawing for example, sir, where
you see River Don and there is a gate just above "Visiting
Supporters, South West Terrace" there is a figure of 6 metres
and you can see similar figures relating to all those gates
at the back, all those new gates at the back.

      Sir, this does not refer in any way, as indeed as one
would expect, because it is only concerned with the turnstiles
access, it does not relate to the gates of the proposed new
radial fence down the centre of the terrace.

       Page 232:

       "Would like a note from us with a guess at cost
       of work at Leppings Lane end.  OK. Can't do it
       accurately.  No matter.
                                   MR. COLLINS



     Also agreed that we include all the other bits
     & pieces requested to be done by SYCC in this
     contract i.e. pointing ....

     Make sure note is with him by no later than
     tomorrow p.m.  Board meeting @ 7.00.

That is dated the 1st of May for the purpose of a bo^    meeting
on the 2nd of May and then we see the estimate in writing
the 2nd of May and a total including some £3,i°00 for bits
and pieces in addition required comes to £130,000 at the
of the letter on 234.
      There was in fact, sir. a board meeting on the 2nd May
1985 and it was decided to adjourn consideration to the 22nd
of May.




                      /There is a letter on the 2nd of May
                            73



                                           MR. C O L L I N S

     There is a letter on 2nd May from the County Council
to Eastwood indicating to Eastwoods what the reaction was
of the Fire Service and really that repeats the matters
that were set out in that letter from the Fire Service,
but it is important to note (b) "the central area of the
terrace" - because this, of course, goes beyond the
gates at the back:

      "(b) the central area of the Terrace (indicated
      as the neutral area or visiting supporters'
      terrace) being divided in half by a new central
      fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
      p it chside security fence with gates erected so
      as to permit entry to be diverted to either half
      as a pp ro pr ia te (the proposed new secdndary radial
      fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
      on the plan to be abandoned)."

Sir, I think I have misled you.     This letter, of course,
i n co rporates all the comments, Police and Fire, and this
particular one, of course, is the Police requirement.

      "(c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated
      as home supporters' terrace) also to be divided into
      half by a new central radial fence running from back
      to front with two gates (the existing radial fence
      dividing the present two Terrace areas -neutral area
      and home supporters to have a second gate installed)."

Someone has written "Why?"   I gather that could be my
friend and over the page (e) ---   I think actually it is
not, he is blaming himself wrongly here, I think it is
Mr. Strange.

      "(e) certain gates to have the minimum widths (in
      metres) indicated on the attached plan and to them
      being fully supervised."

Again, it is quite plain from the letter from the Fire
Service that that relates not to the gates in the terrace
but to the (ptes behind.

       Telephone message,   238,   Inspector Calvert phoning
Mr.   Strange:

       "Discussed p ro posals for fences and terraces and
       gates.   Gate wanted by Fire Brigade.    I do not
       see why.   He explained about extra fence.     Would
       like to meet tomorrow."

Then Mr. Strange obvio.Ksly telephoned Mr.          Chester,   tells
him about the d iscussion with Mr. Calvert:

       "Dick thinks   that Board won't go along with spending"         -

I cannot   read   that.




                                                                           A
                                                       MR. C O L L I N S

      LORD JUSTICE       TAYLOR:     £110,000.

      MR.   COLLINS:       Looks,   like,   yes.

      "Let him think about it for a while.      Okay we won't
      meet Police for     now. I will tell them."

Then there is an important           letter,   240,   from Eastw oo d      to
the County Council:

     "Thank you for your letter...               In the interim period
     several of the points which you raised had already
     been i nc or p o r a t e d in our latest scheme which has yet
     to be c on si d e r e d by the Club Board.       However I would
     ask that further c on s i d e r a t i o n should be given to
     the request in p ar agraph (c) of your letter for
     a second gate to be installed in the radial barrier
     and for the         new      radial barrierwhich you have asked
     for to have         two      gates. If these   gates are meant
     for use in emergency it would mean having a steward
     in a tt en d a n c e on each occasion, the expense of which
     would hardly be justified.              It is our view that
     in the event of emergency, spect at or s can be
     eva cu at ed quickly enough by the gates on to the
     pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear.
     We will of course be p re pa re d to disciiss the matter
     with the Fire Officer's s t af f should you so wish."

Two comments on that.         First of all, expense is hardly,
one would have thought, a relevant c o n s i d e r a t i o n when one
knows that s te wards are paid, I think, £9 now a match for
their s er vices but, perhaps more importantly, there is
reference to the e vacuation by the gates on to the pitch.
You will recall, sir, that those were never i nt ended to
be, nor were they, e vacuation gates taken into account.
Indeed, they were too small to be such and the normal
exit gates at the rear, of course, are the tunnel e ff ec ti ve ly
and p r e su ma bl y the gates at the back of the radial fence.

     LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR:     Yes.

      MR. COLLINS:     And then there is a copy letter to
the Club.    If one looks in fact at the reference on both
those letters these are letters that appear and indeed
c learly are writ te n by Mr. £a>stwood himself.  8th May:

     "I understand, following John S tr ange's tel ep ho ne
     c o n v e r s a t i o n with you yesterday, that South Y orkshire
     County Council did not send you a copy of their
     l e t t e r ... H o w e v e r , I do not think that it is rea li st ic
     to ask for the gates in the radial fences and have
     written to David Vaughan a c c o r d in gl y. "

Then Mr.    Vaug ha n   writes   back,   10thMay,   page 242:

     "...the extra gates referred to in p aragraph (c)
     were i nc lu de d primarily at the request of the
     South Y o r k sh ir e Police. Provided that the rem ai nd er
                                          MR. C O L L I N S

     of the points raised by the Officer Working Party
     are i nc or p o r a t e d in the latest proposals (yet to be
     cons id er ed     by the Club), the Police are p re pared to
     concede the request for two gates per radial fence
     in the right hand area of the Leppings Lane End
     Terrace (indicated as home supporters' terrace on the
     plan)."

Then at the bottom:

     "Agreed over the phone with Inspector              Clive    Calvert
     and stat io n Officer Tony Vickers"

who I assume to be the Fire.      Copy to the County Council,
the City Council I suppose that would be, C hief Fire Officer
and the B ui ld in g Authority. C hief Constable, yes, quite
right, I am sorry.

     Then we have a further copy of the drawing                 of the
proposed a r r a n ge me nt on 244.

     13th May,   1985,    a letter   on 243:

     "I would be obliged if a rr an g e m e n t s could be made
     for us to meet on site to c on sider the full
     i mp lications, o perations and c os tings of the above
     c on ta in ed in your Drawing.   Please conf ir m one or
     two s ui ta bl e times and dates."

Mr.   Glas go w reminds me that was writ te n two days, I think,
after the B ra df or d fire and so that was som et hi ng which
no doubt would begin o bv iously to come into the equation.

     LORD   JUSTICE    TAYLOR:     Is that   a good moment        to
break?

     MR. COLLINS:       Good enough,    sir.       We are about
half way through,     as you see.

                      ( Luncheon   adjournment)
