                                        cc   Mr    Turney
                                             Mr    Haslam
                                             Mr    Goddard
                                             Mr    Bolton
                                             Mr    Brown




Mr Chi1cot


TAYLOR REPORT.:.PUBLICATION


I attach a short draft reply to Mr Eastwood's letter of 7 August
to the Home Secretary, prepared by Mr Smith in consultation with
Mr -flaslam.




                                        SUE JAGO
                                        F8 Division




17 August 1989
Thank you for your letter of 7 August about publication
arrangements for Lord Justice Taylor's interim report on the
Hillsborough stadium disaster.


The decision collectively by Government Ministers on this
occasion was that advance copies of the report should be made
available only to those represented at the enquiry, those     . : :: i
directly criticised in the report and, as is customary, to a
limited number of press.    It was not intended that others would
receive copies before publication at 11 am on Friday 4 August.
The Superintendents1 Association and ACPO were also tied to this
arrangement.    I am sorry for the misunderstanding that seems to
have arisen.
   >

I recognise the difficulty your.identify of rv.ery :prompt questions
beings asked of you and others by the :press,       =sorffess to some
sympathy for your point of view.    We -will certainly bear this in
mind for the future.


Might I also say that I am grateful for the measured and
sympathetic comments you made to the media in interviews about
the report.    Thank you.
                                                                                                  F ^ w ,\rr

                                                                                                                    753
                                                                                                        ✓   r       r   ' ? r«   ^   *
                                                                                                        ^ L Auu »1?;*

                                          Established by Act of Parliament


              Police Federation of England and Wales
                                 15-17 Langley Road Surbiton Surrey KT6 6LP
                                      Telephone 01 399 2224 (4Lines)
From the Chairman’s Office                                                                            ,x        -
Our Ref   A E /A “     VourRe(                                                                   A u g u s t,           1989



                                                                             U   r       '                              ^
                                                                                 C UikoK                                                        <
     The Right Hon. Douglas Hurd, C.B.E.,M.P.,                               — —     —       —
     Secretary of State,                     £
     Home Office,                             •’
                                               0/                                        ti/rs*
     50 Queen Anne's Gate,                                                                     ^                                         0- #
     London SW1H 9AT.                                                                                                   ^
                                                                   ^                                                                     Hovo-vr

                                                                                                                    ..
     Dear Mr. Hurd,

     I am writing to draw your attention to the way in which the Police Federation
     was treated over the publication of the Taylor Report on Hillsborough.

      Well aware that the media will require an immediate response from the Police
      Federation, I asked Mr. Chilcott last Thursday if I-could see an advance copy in
      order that our comments could be based on knowledge of the contents of the
      Report.  However, I was assured that there was no way in which this could be
      done and that the press would not be seeing copies until 11.00 a.m. on Friday.
      The only people who would see copies in advance, I was told, were those who had
      been specifically criticised in the Report.  It became clear to me early on
 .... Friday morning that the media had received the Report before 11.00 a.m. and I ^
      was told that it had been released to them at 9.30 a.m. This.put me in a'
      position of having to react to what I was told was in the Report rather than
      what I had read.

    I have in the past, as have my predecessors, complained about the way in which
    the Police Federation is overlooked on such occasions.   On matters of this kind
    it is important that the Federation speaks with knowledge of the facts, but when
    the facts are witheld, as they were in this case, we are placed in an impossible
    position.

    I hope you will do what you can to ensure that this does not happen in the
    future.

    Yours sincerely,



            Qa .
   ALAN EASTWOOD,
   Chairman.




                                        Joint Central Committee
               fA^ajb - f h ^          h               t todd&bfa ^liLcLji-, K &e6-h
                     ri^ Jbri    f& ~f& A0k~*\ ( w % r£ fa {c & fr'S tty-H
                    jL'         tHrOA, 4s*>*JL*s^d&A^,      \(q^
       From:    Jonathan Haslam                      \z ~ *   15 August 1989
                Deputy Director of Information
                Public Relations Branch
                Room 144, QAG.
                Ext. 3735

       To:      Mr Smith
                   Snji^h F8


                                TAYLOR REPORT - PUBLICATION

       Thank you for letting me see your draft reply for Mr Chilcot to
       send to the Police Federation.

       I have two minor comments.

     / I n the second paragraph could you insert after 'as is customary',
Is      'to a limited number of press'?

       In the third, might I suggest dropping everything after the first
/v     sentence and inserting "We will certainly bear this in mind for
       the future"?

       It seems to me that brevity is our ally in responding            to these
 y/~   issues - CFRs always leave some parties aggrieved.




                                       ONATHAN HASLAM
                                                     cc Mr Turney
                                                        Mr Goddard PS
                                                        Mr Bolton>

 1.   Mr Haslam, PRB
 2.   Mr Chilcot


...JTAYLOR REPORT: PUBLICATION


 You suggested that I prepare a short draft reply to Mr Eastwood's
 letter of 7 August to the Home Secretary and pass it to Mr Haslam
 toconsider the more general question of advance disclosure of
 reports to (eg) the Police Federation.


 My draft reply and submission are attached, with a tentative
 section on advance disclosure in square brackets.   You were
 inclined to be sympathetic to the Federation's concerns.   I
 should be grateful if Mr Haslam could amend the draft as he
 thinks appropriate.




                                              F J SMITH
                                              F8 Division
 14 August 1989
Draft - for signature by Mr Chilcot                cc Ms   Adams
                                                      Mr   Turney
                                                      Mr   Mower (o/r)
                                                      Mr   Bolton
                                                      Mr   Goddard
                                                      Mr   Haslam
Mr Storr


TAYLOR REPORT: PUBLICATION                     ’


You asked for advice on the attached letter of 7 August from
Alan Eastwood, Chairman of the Police Federation, to the Home
Secretary.   A draft reply is also attached.


Mr Eastwood had a reasonable wish to obtain early sight of
Sir Peter's report.   However, in this instance advance disclosure
to the Federation would have been contrary to Ministers' wishes.
Mr Eastwood must have misunderstood my explanation over
arrangements for disclosure as I was well aware of the
availability fo copies for the press from 9.30 am.


[I have heard that] Mr Eastwood spoke very Responsibly on
television on news interviews on 4 August and the Home Secretary
may wish to refer to that, as in the final paragraph of the
draft.




                                                   J A CHILCOT
Thank you for your letter of 7 August about publication
arrangements for Lord Justice Taylor's interim report on the
Hillsborough stadium disaster.


The decision collectively by Government Ministers on this
occasion was that advance copies of the report should be made
available only to those represented at the enquiry, those        ,;
directly criticised in the report and, as is customary, to
press.   It was not intended that others would receive copies
before publication at 11 am on Friday 4 August.   The
Superintendents' Association and ACPO were also tied to this
arrangement.   I am sorry for the misunderstanding that seems to
have arisen.


[Mr Haslam? I recognise the difficulty you identify of very
prompt questions being asked of you and others by the press, and
I confess to some sympathy for your point of view. ^Ifevertheless,
where it is decided not to make advance copi^s-^f^a report
available it follows that^^medlately^after publication you will




                                                                      hf
                                                                      fWOj
have to explain to^the—pfess that you have not yet had time to
examine th^-document.   That is certainly a possible awkwardness
we^should bear in mind together with other considerations over
timing.          —




Might I also say that I am grateful for the measured and
sympathetic comments you made to the media in interviews about
the report. Thank you.
