From: Paul Pugh                           cc: Mr Michael
      Head of Operational Policing            Mr O’Brien
      Policy Unit                             Mr Howarth
      Room 539                                Sir Richard Wilson
      Queen Anne’s Gate                       Miss Wheldon
      S 0171-273-3141                         Mr Boys Smith
      13 June 1997                            Mr Granatt
                                              Mr Middleton LAB
                                              Ms Loudon              £„(L \
                                              Mr Edmundson
                                              Mr Warner              LT
                                              Mr Owen


                                                                    *»l                     &r»>A

Home Se
                                                                              7
                                                  5tiA«JcA     .V *U~»-       4*   T
HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                                                   '\

Issue                                            * fU r
                                                          *
                                                          ' Kt^ilxU — A

Taking forward the establishment of the independent review of the evidence in the J
light of the letters from the Attorney General and the Lord Chancellor.           ^\ '

Timing                                                                                 s L -U

2.
better.
        Pressing - the sooner we can clear the air and announce the Inquiry the                 L
                                                                                          —/ctic
Summary
                                                                                       (Jvu-A
3.    Lord Irvine wrote on 6 June (attached at A) proposing Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to carry out the review. You have indicated that you would be happy to Q s
appoint him.                                                                     ,

4.     The Attorney General has agreed in principle with commissioning an                 %
independent examination of the evidence but has concerns about the terms of
reference which you proposed (his letter is attached at B). He is anxious not to               .
compromise the statutory responsibilities which he and the DPP exercise. He wants        g»~\<-a
to make sure that the terms of reference do not appear to fetter or pre-empt their     t
discretion. He proposes amended terms of reference to meet that concern.     ©-"v'^“T_




                                                               RECBVED BY
                                                                   13 JUN 1997
f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pddoc
                                                              HOME SECRETARY
Recommendation

5.    That you agree to the amended terms of reference proposed by the Attorney,
subject to some minor qualifications; and that you confirm that you are happy for
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be appointed. A draft letter is attached.

Consideration

6.     You wrote on 29 May to the Lord Chancellor about who would be a suitable
person to carry out the examination. He considers that it would be better not to
appoint Mr Justice Collins, who was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry, but to appoint a
senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. He proposes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
whom he describes as “in first class intellectual order. He has the requisite
experience; his public presence is impressive.” Home Office experience of Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith through his work in dealing with complaints against the security
services confirms the opinion expressed by the Lord Chancellor that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith is very impressive both intellectually and in public presence - although
he can be austere and lacking in warmth. You have already indicated that you
would be content to appoint him and the draft letter attached confirms that.

7.      Your letter of 5 June (attached at C) proposed terms of reference asking the
person appointed to advise on whether there is new evidence which provides
sufficient grounds for you to establish a Public Inquiry, or for the Attorney to consider
applying to the High Court for a new Inquest, or for the DPP to consider bringing
criminal charges against any person. The Attorney is concerned that terms of
reference which specifically ask the person to advise on those issues could fetter or
pre-empt the discretion which rests with him and the DPP. We anticipated this
concern when we discussed the terms of reference with you on 4 June, but the
Attorney considers that the terms of reference are still too specific and invite the
person appointed to impinge on the statutory responsibilities which rest with him and
the DPP. He raises a particular concern in relation to the possibility of any future
criminal proceedings: if a High Court Judge had publicly expressed a view that there
were grounds for criminal proceedings, such views would be likely to carry such
weight that they might be regarded as making a fair trial impossible. This last point
seems particularly telling: it would be completely counter-productive if terms of
reference which invited a Judge to make specific recommendations about criminal
proceedings were later held to make a fair trial impossible.

8.     I have consulted Home Office legal advisers, and our view is that you should
accept the Attorney’s assessment of how the terms of reference might affect the
statutory responsibilities which he and the DPP exercise. Although the terms of
reference which the Attorney proposes are not as explicit as those which we would
have liked, they still allow sufficient scope for the examination to deal with the main
issue of concern - that is, whether there is any new evidence.

9.     There are a couple of minor qualifications which he might want to raise: the
draft proposed by the Attorney makes no reference explicitly to the Home Secretary.


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd.doc
We think it should. Secondly, our original draft allowed for the possibility that the
Judge might comment on whether there is any other action which should be taken in
the public interest, beyond the specific issues covered in the terms of reference. We
think a sentence to that effect should appear in the terms of reference. The draft
letter attached at D covers these two points.

Handling

10.     If the Attorney is content with the slightly amended proposals, that should
allow the terms of reference to be agreed during the course of next week. We need
to consider when an oral statement might be made: I suggest Private Office should
sound out the business managers about possible dates. We need to take account
of when you might announce the inquiry into relations between the police and
minority ethnic communities. (Steve Wells is putting forward further advice on that in
parallel with this submission). If that inquiry is also announced by way of an oral
statement, we should keep some distance between the two announcements, so that
you are not making two oral statements announcing inquiries in the same week. We
will put forward further advice on the handling of an announcement on Hillsborough
during the course of next week, together with a first draft of an oral statement. We
need to prepare the handling of this one very carefully, but I suggest we might be
looking to an announcement at the end of the week beginning 23 June or the
following week.




                                                                        PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd.doc
                                   0171 219 4711
09 06    97    09:20        FAX 0171 219 4711                                                          HOME OFFICE SEC            ®001/002
                                                                         E f         n \£
                             F ro m T h e R ig h t H o n o u r a b l e T h e L o r d I r v in e   of   L a ir g


                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                   H o u se       of   L o rds,
                                                                                                           London        s w i a opw



                                                                                     3      r
        The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
        Secretary o f State for the Home Department
                                                                                                                                       §
        Home Office
        50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                                                           *
        London SW 1H9AT

                                              \                                                                         T1,np 1097

                                               /s r .                                                                   RECEIVED 8V
        Dear                                                                                                               0 9 JUN 1997
               .      f-4                                                                                              HOME SECRETARY
              ✓  ■H., '-t
                                              &
                                    THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

        1 have seen*$5ur Private Secretary’s letter to my Private Secretary o f 29 May 1997 about the
        possibility that you may wish to establish some form o f further judicial examination o f the
        Hillsborough Stadium disaster in 1989.1 agree in principle that, if you do decide to proceed m
        that way, it would be a suitable task for a High Court Judge.

         I consider that, in terms both o f his ability and standing, Mr Justice Collins would be well able
         to carry out this task. However, my own feeling, and my advice, is that the fact that Collins J
         was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry makes it preferable for the task to be given to another
         Judge, almost certainly from a Queen’s Bench Division background.

         There is, however, a more fundamental point. Although the terms o f reference do not in any
         way suggest that the Inquiry may result in any criticism or questioning o f his findings in the
         Taylor Report, that could arise or be thought to have arisen. It is therefore my view, and the
         view o f the Lord Chief Justice, that it would be appropriate for this task to be entrusted to a
         senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal.

         I took the view after our discussion about this after Cabinet yesterday, that the quickest way
         through was for me to have a direct word with the Lord Chief Justice. He and I agree that
         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is the best choice. He is 69 and approaching retirement and in first
         class intellectual order. He also has the requisite experience; his public p r e s e n c e j s j ^
         and if the Inquiry were to result in a Public Inquiry (which 1 appreciate may well be unlikely),
         it will be no disadvantage for him to carry on as Chairman o f that Public Inquiry in retirement.
         I believe that he may become Treasurer o f Gray’s Inn next year but that merely adds to his
         status and in no way diminishes his capacity to undertake the task. I therefore strongly
         recommend him to you, with the support o f the Lord Chief Justice.
I



    4
 07   09:21    FAX 0171 219 4711                                           HOME OFFICE SEC   @002/




The Lord Chief Justice is taking steps to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will be
willing to accept this task but is reasonably confident that he will be. It would be helpful if
you could let me know as soon as possible;

       (a) whether you wish Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake this task and,

       (b) your decision on whether diere is to be another judicial examination of
       Hillsborough.                              —’

In view o f your letter o f 5 June, I am copying this letter to John Morris.

                                               Yours
                                    0171   828 0593                                                                        , o c/fc-
12-J.t'N     riT H U   08     ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                                                                                 193?
                                                                  T E L :01 ' i 828 0593                                P. 0 0 1



                                        The Rt Hon Joh n Morris QC MP
                                                                                                                    ©
                                                                                     9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                                                                  , , LONDON SW1E 6JP
                                                                               Ka. C U a .*t
                                                                            Mr o ^& r.C r\
      01 71-828 1884
                                                                            (U- H
            The Rt Hon J a ck Straw MP                                       P        Sec.
            Secretary of State for the Home Departm ent                      W>          t«)c3r.
            Home Office                                                      Mr              S/W
            50 Q ueen A nne’s Gate
            LONDON SW 1H 9AT               Mr         X-                            CrfQTiOUot
                                                                             w      PcqVo                        M / vOor<vzr
            10 J u n e 1997                                                   Kv                                 N*r CsUi'W'
                                                                                 Uooc ^ cva
                                                                              W~ (2- C 'ic W }
                                                                                      -   - >•-■■   ■a**'****
                                                                              i - h -*              w ^ - in v
                                                      V --A   £ x ...
                                                                               1           n o 11
                                                                    I2.|^      !     12 JUN 1997
                                                                                 H O '- c S l C H S ^R Y
           THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

           Thank you for your letter of 5 Ju n e 1997 outlining the considerations w hich
           have led you to conclu de that we should initiate an independent exam ination
           of the alleged new evidence because this appears to be the only w ay to allav
           public concern.

            I have no difficulty in principle with your approach. There undoubtedly
           rem ains deep rooted dissatisfaction am ongst the relatives of those w ho died as
           well as som e of the survivors and their relatives about the m anner in w hich the
           public authorities conducted them selves at the material tim e. Thev have
           m anifested them selves in calls for official action w hich, even if acceded to
           w ould in all probability not then address the concerns. For exam ple, a further
           inq uest - w hich can only be ordered by the High Court - w ould have to
           consid er the statutory issu e s prescribed by the Coroners Act 1988 and could
           not properly becom e a wide ranging or generalised enquiry.

        But i do have difficulty w ith the draft Terms of Reference. They do not
       distin gu ish adequately betw een the question of a further public enquiry w hich
       is properly a m atter of political judgm ent and the questions of a further
       in q u est or possible prosecution w hich have to be addressed on a quasi-judicial
       th S S        according to establish ed criteria. We start from a position where
       there is nothing to su ggest that the Director of Public Prosecutions and m v
                          m faIled Pr°P erly ^ consider, in accordance w ith the relevant
       tests, all the evidence w h ich h a s been m ade available to them . The sole issu e
       therefore in relation to qu estion s about further Inquests or prosecution is
       w hether there is any evidence w hich h as not already b L n c o n s S e d
       Moreover, consideration of that further evidence would be a m atter for th e DPP
           u f f ^ r Prtate- ,t wouid f°r a "umber of reasons be ^
      p blic enquiry to exp ress a view, for exam ple, on p ossib le criminal charges
                                                                                                       for a
      AG/0S06/1                                                                                       9
E
IJUN       9 " STHU) 0 8 - 1 4   ATTORNEY GENERAL             T E L - ' 0 1 ’’ I 8 2 8 0 5 9 3




               Mfr at*



           Statutory responsibility for th ese decisions rests w ith m yself and th e DPP. We
           m u st not let our discretion be fettered or pre-em pted. Any recom m endation
           of a public enquiry would create an alm ost irresistible pressure: th is scenario
           could not properly be compared with th e taking of private legal advice from
           co u n sel. In relation to the prosecution issu e the publicly expressed view s of
           a High Court ju d ge about prosecution w ould be likely to carry su ch weight that
           they m ight be regarded as m aking a fair trial im possible.

          ^     SC circu m stan ces' 1 en close a su ggested revised wording for the Terms
          of Reference. If you are intending to proceed as envisaged, I w ould be content
          for Lord J u stic e Stewart Sm ith to be appointed.




                                                JOHN MORRIS




       A 0 /0 9 0 fi/ 1
- J U N.    9 ' ( T HU) 08 14        AT TORNEY GENERAL            T E L -0171 828 0593              P




             SUGGESTED TERM S OF REFERENCE


             To ascertain w h eth er any evidence exists relating to the d isaster at the
             Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 w hich w as not available:


             (a)         to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor: or


             (b)         to the Director of Public Prosecution or the Attorney G eneral for the
                       purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities:


             (c)       to the ch ief officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
                                              r
                       discipline matter:


            and in relation to (a) above to advise w hether any evidence not previously
            available is of su ch significance a s to ju stify establishm ent of a further public
            inquiry and. in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention an y evidence
            not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to their respective
            duties.


                   I            tm          PC -                        J



                                     !x-            C    pvvC      ^        W




           sw/ oook/ s
                                                 QUEEN ANNE S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT


                                                                                 -5JU M 997


 The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
 The Attorney General
                                                 K, H
 70 Whitehall
                                                 (Po_r^-v Gs*c
 London
 SW1A 2AS                                              U/\r^Uda^



                                                 fj^r   f^ u o (c U j2 k * v   L-Aft
                                                 O V £oi-*t< ^ 0Vc/^
                                                 Ho
                                                 /A / £ (St/cutw
                                                  i/ty l~J~C</hJ&
                                                   v v c3t/v/^''"


THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

As you know, I have been considering the representations which have been
made about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster
was of course fully investigated by the late Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, but
concern has been raised about a number of features of the case and material
considered by some to represent new evidence has been brought to our
attention. These and related matters were raised in the Granada Television
documentary drama "Hillsborough" last December.

 My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the
 allegations made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that
 there are no grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has
 also been considered by the Attorney General's Office and the DPP's Office.
 None of those who have examined the material consider that there is evidence
to justify a new public enquiry, a re-opening of the inquest, or the prosecution of
individuals. But I am certain that continuing public concern will not be allayed
with a reassurance from the Home Office that there is no new evidence. I
therefore propose that there should be an independent examination of the
alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a respected judge (serving or
recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be important to ensure that
whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior and respected to command
public confidence. My personal preference would be for a judge. The proposed
terms of reference are:
c
"To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new
evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
which provides sufficient grounds for:

       i.     the Secretary of State for the Home Department to establish a
              further public inquiry;

       ii.    the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
              Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

       iii.   The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
              charges against^ny person;

       iv.    The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary
              action against any police officer.

Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
interest."

There will need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the
independent examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the
announcement will have to be made in the House. But I shall want to make sure
that the ground is properly prepared before the announcement is made with
those outside Government with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster
including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor's advice on a suitable figure to lead
the independent examination, and for your comments and those of copy
recipients on the proposed terms of reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister W ithout Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.




                                  JACK STRAW
                                                                                                             \7JbZ8--3-*




                                                                                                  ANNEX D


DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY


The Right Hon John Morris QC MP
Attorney General


THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


Thank you for your letter of 10 June about the proposed independent examination of
the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.


I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle with what I proposed.                                     I
understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
responsibilities which rest with you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Although            I would              prefer terms        of reference which      invited   more     explicit
recommendations, I am broadly content with the amended terms which you
proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer explicitly to
my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to advise on any
other action which should be taken in the public interest. I suggest therefore terms
of reference along the following lines:


           To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
            Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                       (a)          To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                       (b)          To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                       for         the     purpose      of     discharging   their   respective       statutory
                       responsibilities; or




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd.doc
                        (c)        To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                        police disciplinary matters;


            And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
            is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State
            for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
            (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
            which which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise
            whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.


I would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy with the slightly amended
version.


I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might take
on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind. If Derry is
able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the task, I suggest
the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet officials to discuss his
requirements.                 The appropriate official is Paul Pugh, Head of the Operational
Policing Policy Unit here (0171-273 3141).


I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the Secretary
of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and to Sir Robin
Butler.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0234pd-doc
