                                                                                     (9
                                                7)       7jj;

From:       Clare Sumner                                  cc    Mr   Howarth
            PS/Home Secretary                                   Mr   Butler
            0171 27 3 4 6 0 2                                   Mr   Boys Smith
                                                                Mr   Bone
                                                                Mr   Granatt
            10 July 1997                                        Mr   Owen




HILLSBOROUGH: LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH

Mike Granatt and Brian Butler from CD met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith yesterday
to discuss media handling arrangements. Mr Butler minuted the Home Secretary
and commented:

          "The judge's view is that the submission will not be made public and all
          he will submit to you will be his report. This could be seen to be at
          variance with your comments in the House that the evidence will be
          published. You may want to speak to the judge about this".

2.    The Home Secretary has asked for further advice on this point and I would
be grateful if I could have this for the Friday box if at all possible.




                                   CLARE SUMNER




13228CS
                                                      11 JUL 1997

From:       Clare Sumner                              cc   Mr Howarth
            PS/Home Secretary                              W lfiM Q h   5 2^
            0171 273 4 6 0 2                               Mr   Boys Smith
                                                           Mr   Bone
                                                           Mr   Granatt
            10 July 1997                                   Mr   Owen




Mr Butler



PHOTO CALL AND BRIEFING BY LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH

The Home Secretary has seen your minute of 9 July. He commented that it was
a very helpful note and asked me to pass on his thanks.

2.     The Home Secretary is entirely content for a photo call. However he is
concerned about interviews or briefings at this stage and would want to be
closely consulted about any such proposed arrangements.

3.   I am minuting Mr Pugh separately about the issue of public evidence who
may wish to speak to you further about the issue you raised.




                                CLARE SUMNER




1322GCS
                                 RESTRICTED - POLICY



MEMORANDUM


From: Brian Butler, Deputy Director,               cc:         Mr Howarth
      Communication
      Room 144QAG
      Communication Directorate                                Ed Owen 17   ,
      Queen Anne's Gate
      Tel      0171 273 3735                       Your ref:
                                                   File Ref:

Date:   9 July 1997

To:     HOME SECRETARY
                                                                                                     st
PHOTO CALL AND BRIEFING BY LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH                               i r < ( U   *>,




I have today ( W ednesday 9 July ) met Lord Justice. Stuart-Smith and agreed with him a
media handling plan, the essential elements o f which are:

Monday 14 July - Lord J S-S to be photographed and filmed at his Home Office desk,
followed by a few short remarks to Home Affairs correspondents and selected regional
media. He will use this occasion to say he is starting the Hillsborough scrutiny that day, how
he will receive submissions and underlining that he will not be holding public sessions. With
one exception, this is the only occasion on which he will be available to the media.

October - date to be agreed, the judge will meet relatives and their representatives in
Liverpool. We are considering how to manage this with the media, to prevent the judge being
doorstepped. The likelihood is an arranged photo call with the relatives, at which the judge at
least will say nothing.

Generally the judge is content for CD to have a standard line to take if the media ask us or
him to respond to comments made by those who make submissions to him. This line, which
will be cleared shortly with you ( Home Secretary ) and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will
basically refuse to com m ent on w hat is being said but reiterate that material has been
submitted and neither we nor the judge will be commenting on it.

There is one other issue, o f which you need to be aware. The judge’s view is that the
submissions will not be made public and all he will submit to you will be his report. This
could be seen to be at variance with your own comments in the House that the evidence will
be published. You may want to speak to the judge about this.




                                  RESTRICTED - POLICY

G:\JUDGE.DOC
                                   RESTRICTED - POLICY



C D ’s view is that by arranging filming and off-camera opening remarks from the judge we
can manage the media and avoid damaging stories about secrecy. It also seems vital that we
do not lose control o f the media in Liverpool at the time o f the judge s visit. I have assuied
him that however private he may think the visit, the media will find out.

We will issue an operational note to national, Yorkshire and Merseyside media on Friday 11
July inviting them to film/meet the judge at QAG at 10am on Monday 14 July.

Are you content with these arrangements?




                                    RESTRICTED - POLICY

 G:\JIJDGE.DOC
