                                           ru Svv'xt-

                                                    r- 4 MAY 1989
                                                cc Miss Bannister
                                                     Ms Craig
                                                     Mr Yates
                                                     Mr Moriarty
                                                     Mr^Turney(o.$
                                                     Mr Mower
                                                  -'/Mr Goddard
                                                     Mr Mould G1
                                                     Mr Lidington
From: R R G Watts
      G1 Division
      (x 2764)
      4 May 1989



Miss Nicholson

HILLSBOROUGH - PITCH PERIMETER FENCES


I attach a draft    reply for Lord Ferrers’ signature to the letter
of 21 April from    Mr Chris Smith MP.

2.   The Home Secretary considered at his meeting on 24 April, in
the light of my note of 19 April to Mr Mawer, whether clubs and
local authorities should be advised now to remove pitch perimeter
fences.    It was  decided not to go down that path. Since then
the Home Secretary has decided, in the light of Mr Turney's
submission of 26 April, that generally no interim guidance should
be issued.

3.   I think it would be advisable not to go into the merits and
disadvantages of pitch perimeter fences in the reply to Mr Smith.
It would be consistent with Ministerial thinking to adhere for
the time being to the present position and await any
recommendation which Lord Justice Taylor makes on these fences.

4.   The attached draft reply has been prepared on this basis.




                                    R R G WATTS
FEP/89 35/48/5
E .R .



          DRAFT REPLY TO MR CHRIS SMITH MP



          Thank you for your letter of 21 April to the Home Secretary about
          perimeter fences at football grounds.



          You do of course raise an important issue.    As the Home

          Secretary said on 17 April in response to comments made on his
          statement that day, it is one for Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry

         to look into.     We shall           consider very carefully any

         recommendation which he may make on this, but we do not think

         that it would be right in advance of that to amend the advice in

         the Home Office/Scottish Office "Guide to Safety at Sports

         Grounds", which gives guidance on a variety of safety issues

         which have to be taken into consideration, including pitch
         perimeter fences.



         A pitch               fence is sometimes required by the terms and

         conditions of safety certificates issued by the local authority

         which must be complied with.     In some cases such a fence has

         been erected, not because of a specific requirement in the safety

         certificate, but as a segregation measure.    Such measures are

         necessary to help combat hoologanism and violence, outbreaks of

         which can lead to the death and injury of spectators.



         As you say, a number of clubs are removing their pitch perimeter

         fence.    it is of course open to them to consider this, but it

         would be wise for them to do so in consultation with authorities

         locally; where the fence is a requirement of the safety


                                          1
   ♦




E .R .



         certificate the club would of course need to seek the local
         authority's agreement to a change in the safety certificate.



         But, as I have said, this is a matter which Lord Justice Taylor's
         Inquiry will be looking into, and we shall consider carefully
         what he has to say.




                                        2
