        S ou th Yorkshire

        POLICE
        JUSTICE        with   COURAGE




Mr C Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1108                                            Our Ref:      D&C/AMH/EMR
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                 Date:         8 October 1997
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




RE: REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION FROM HILLSBOROUGH ARCHIVES
                                                             I
During the visit of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Chris Catherall and yourself to the
Hillsborough Archives at Heeley on Wednesday 24 September 1997, you made a number of
requests to us for information, which you agreed to put in writing. To date we have not received
these.

Of the two requests we have already responded to, one on 24 September 1997 was to supply
transcripts of the main and mini inquests and the other was the provision of copies of the plans of
the Leppings Lane terrace reference C275 and C276, which we forwarded on
30 September 1997.

If my memory serves me correctly the other requests were:-

Report on continued research into amendment of officers' recollections:

Research and report on the suggestion that officers were coached to give evidence to
Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry;

Research and report on the provision of video tapes to Yorkshire Television;

Examine the copy video tape provided by            yourself via Trevor Hicks and identify where the
various shots are from;




           Discipline and Complaints Department
           Windsor Road
           Sheffield S8 8UB                          The person dealing with this correspondence is:
           Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3855     Superintendent Hepworth
           Direct Dial No:                           (0114) 296 3084
Research any breach of the law              by   Granada     Television   in   the   approach   to   a
Hillsborough Inquest Jury Member;

Prepare a report on policy and procedure for the release of Hillsborough Documentation to
interested parties;

Report to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on a number of outcomes from the civil actions.

Incidentally, neither Ken Greenway nor myself has sufficient knowledge, nor the information to
supply the details which you are likely to request about the civil actions, particularly as most of
them were confidential. The outcomes are not within the knowledge of the force solicitor,
Alan Walker either. I therefore have in mind to write to Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards
Solicitors at Empire House, 10 Piccadilly, Bradford BD1 3LR, who acted for
South Yorkshire Police and our Insurers in these hearings, asking him if he will respond to your
request once we receive it, unless of course you wish to write to him directly. I will not action this
further until I hear from you.

Work is progressing on the other requests and I shall soon be in a position to start responding.
                                                 \
Finally, I believe there was a suggestion that Cilris Catherall should revisit Heeley to examine the
police officers' statements and the amendments made to them. Can you inform me if this is to
take place and a likely date, please.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent




                                                     The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                     Superintendent Hepworth
                                                     (0114) 296 3084
