                                                                    (•'hJ/CZLL^
                                         fik
                                                              ri<
                                                                                  (5 -

INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH        T he Rt H on Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER                     50 Queen Anne s Gate
                                     London SW1H9AT
                                     01-2732577/3602/2370




Rosemary Grogan
Director
Westminster Strategy
Number One
Dean's Yard
Westminster
LONDON SW1P 3NR                            December 1989




D
                       /
 Thank you very much for your letter of 1
 December with information about the Tottenham
 Hotspur Membership Scheme. I know ^that ^Lord ^
 Justice Taylor and his Assessors will find this
 most interesting.
 With best wishes.
                                Y<
                                 Ou*-,
                                                         )


                                R M WHALLEY         d-
                           Secretary to the Inquiry




                                                                                         1
                      Westminster Strategy
                          Government and media relations
              Number One, Dean's Yard, Westminster, London SW 1P 3NR
                      Telephone 01-799 9811 Fax01-2330124




R.M. Whalley Esq
Hillsborough Stadium Inquiry
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT


1 December 1989


Dear Bob,

As promised, I enclose some information on the Tottenham Hotspur
Membership Scheme. It takes the form of a memorandum from the
ticket office manager, Chris Belt to Peter Barnes, Club
Secretary. If there are any points which you would like to
develop further, please contact Chris on             [ or let me
know and I will provide you with the necessary details.
Looking forward to some interesting reading in January!
With best wishes
Yours sincerely




Rosemary Grogan
Director




                               Westminster Strategy Limited
                     A member of the Grayling Group of Companies
            Registered office as ahnve Registered in Eneland number 770266.
                                                          MEMORANDUM



   To:       Mr P Bames                                                   Ref:     CB/SS

    From:    Chris Belt                                                   Date:   28.11.89



   Re:       Manbership Scheme




Adninistration

All applications are dealt with by Synchro Systems Limited fron Stoke on Trent. Existing members
autanatically receive a renewal notice frctn Synchro tqgettier with a 'postal paid' reply envelope.
This renewal notice together with remittance and two passport size photographs should be returned
by 30th June.
Synchro mail out all cards and bank all relevant monies on the clubs behalf. The club also
receives a regular 'update disk' frctn Synchro which is copied on to the main canputer thus
ensuring that the club has access to all of the patron records.


Manbership Cards

All membership cards that are produced include a photograph of the member tqgettier with the
relevant patron nunber. Included on the reverse side of the cards are rules and regulations
tqgettier with a bar code. The reverse sides of the cards are in fact a perforated section of
the application forms and the reason for this is to ensure that membership cards can be produced
as quickly as possible.


Advance Sales

Tickets for tine membership area are available for all heme matches one calendar month in advance.
Tickets for all heme matches are issued at tine rate of one per member. Personal, postal and
credit card telephone bookings are accepted. The elite ticketing system has tine membership
database on line and when a ticket is issued tine relevant membership is 'figged' in order
that a member cannot obtain more than one ticket.


Matchday Procedures

On tine morning of a match, tine membership details are 'downloaded' to tine members turnstiles
in Paxton Road. Each of tine turnstiles has a swipe reader installed and tine spectators have
to hand their cards to tine gateman who swipes it through the reader. If tine reader 'limits
up' green, tine spectator can obtain entry. If tine reader displays a red light, entry is refused.
    After the match has taken place manbers details are 1uploaded1 back to the main computer in
    order that the club has an up to date attendance record.




t
      0
lA 'U w




    C. BELT
