  10/11    '97 00:34    FAX                                TREVOR HICKS




      O     —
           sup?<fc                                                                                        su ppci®*
                              Hillsborough Family Support Group

           Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP                                       | [^cvT                  cL       c-d'svot
           Home Secretary
           Home Office                                                      0   /V J   W
           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
           London
                                                                                       C   M    -C    \ a j ) \
           SW1H 9AT
                                                                                                 9th November 1997
                                                                                               BY FAX AND POST

           Dear Mr Straw,

           r e : Hillsborough Scrutiny                                 -v                        '4*1M
                                                        V— ^
           It is with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your
           intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement of the scrutiny on the
           30th June the problems of slow or non-disclosure of information by South Yorkshire Police^,
           and others have continued unabated. . It is of such scale and regularity as to render any
           arguments oTmistake, oversight or pressure of work totally untenable. We believe it is a
           deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
           outcome of the scrutiny.

           We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
           Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
           our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation of our case are being thwarted.

           You will recall from our meeting at the Commons that families expressed concern that custody
           (and apparently control!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
           Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
           Rather than the spirit of “openness” so vigorously espoused-by New Labour the continuation
           of the problems of the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

           They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it.
           It cannot be right, fair or just thaif they teve the scope tolnampulate the proceedings by denial
           or delay of information.

           Examples of the problems we are encountering are:-

           1) As late as the 6thNovember we received four important photographs - they were requested
           over three months ago!!!              ~ ~--------------------------------


CHAIRMAN                                        VICE-CHAIRMAN/ SECRETARY                              TREASURER
T- Hicks                                        P. Hammond__________                                  Mrs. J. Traynor
10/11    '97 00:34   FAX                             TREVOR HICKS                                       ®03




    2)Several families are still waiting to receive all or parts of their loved ones “bodyfiles”

    3)On the 24th September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
    written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

    4)Medical records of the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
    Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

    The initial “deadline” for submissions was 1st September but this had to be relaxed when it
    became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
    information until late August. The HFSG made preliminary submissions mid-September and
    lodged others on the 25* September. Both of those documents made it clear that our efforts
    were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

    Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn of the year” full consideration o f newly
    disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it could not form part of any deliberation or
    conclusion.

    It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control of all the
    documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
    parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families of the deceased.

    We further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for submissions and
    their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
    public as fair and exhaustive.

    All of us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the families implore
    you to introduce a one or two month extension to the timescale to ensure all our concerns can
    be properly investigated and “scrutinised”. It is the families view that this is our last chance
    for justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” if faith in the judicial
    process is to be regained by the many thousands of voters who wrote to you, attended the
    justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support of our cause.

    We shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
    T erm s of Reference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and these may also give
    rise for revision of the scrutiny programme.

    Yours sincere!1



        Trevor Hicks
        Chairman. - HFSG
