       From:   A H Turney (2798)                      cc   Miss Nicholson
               Fire and Emergency                          Ms Craig
               Planning Department                         Ms Rex
                                                           Mr Yates
                20 June 1989                               Mr Moriarty
                                                           Mr Hammond
                                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                           Mr Mower
                                                           Mr Clayton
                                                           Mr Osborne
                                                           Mr Goddard
                                                           Mr Watts
                                                           Mr Gilbert
                                                           Mr Mould ""
                                                           Mr Lidington
                                                           Mr Godfrey



        Miss Bannister




        FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL      SAFETY

fc'!-
        This note -seeks the Home Secretary1s agreement to a Department of
        the Environment (DOE) proposal to seek at 2nd Reading of the
 . .
        Football Spectators Bill (the Bill) next Tuesday, 27 June, a
        resolution widening its scope so as to enable it to deal with
        safety issues at designated football matches.

        Background
        2. The Home Secretary will recall that, to help ensure that
        relevant and acceptable Taylor Inquiry recommendations can be
        implemented promptly Ministers agreed earlier, as part of the
        tactical arrangements for dealing with the Bill, that a
        resolution should be put for approval by the House of Commons to
        the effect that the safety of spectators is a matter cognate to
        the Bill.

        Proposal
        3. DOE now propose that such a resolution should be put at the
        Bill's 2nd Reading. The House authorities have indicated to
        Parliamentary Counsel that they would regard a resolution in the
        following terms as suitable:

               "(Mr Ridley) to move: that it be an instruction to the
               Committee on the Football Spectators Bill (Lords) that they
               have the power to make provisions in the Bill relating to
    any aspect of the safety of spectators at designated
    football matches."

DOE officials are seeking Mr Ridley's approval to this form of
words, for moving at 2nd Reading, tonight, and if he agrees he
will be writing to the Lord President to this effect.
Discussion

4. The wide terms of the resolution are intended to ensure that
the Bill can be used to deal with the Inquiry's recommendations
without pre-empting the nature of those recommendations. Even so
it might be seen to be putting pressure on the Inquiry for an
early interim report and perhaps anticipating recommendations
which cannot be implemented by other means, eg by using the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act). On the other
hand, it is not clear that the 1975 Act can be used to impose a
requirement for all seated stadiums (which is not contingent on
the Inquiry).

5. DOE want to move the resolution at 2nd Reading so that they
will not need to go back to the whole House again before the Bill
leaves Committee. While they understand.that it might be
preferable not to table actual amendments to the Bill covering
Taylor recommendations until after the Summer recess, the
Government might need to do so beforehand if the Committee get
through their other work quickly; and DOE would not like to be
caught out in that situation without the "cognate" resolution
already having been agreed.
Recommendation

6. On balance we accept the DOE case for moving the resolution
at 2nd Reading. We should be glad to know whether the Home
Secretary is content with this.




                                        A H TURNEY
