                               Health &          R e s e a rc h a nd L a b o ra to ry
                                                 S e r v ic e s Div is io n
                                                 Bro a d L ane
                               Safety            S h e ffie ld S3 7 H Q

                               Executive         TelePhone 0 7 4 2 758141
                                                 ext
                                                 Telex 5 4 5 5 6 (HSE RLS G)
                                                 r a c s im iie 0 7 4 2 7 5 5 79 2




Mr J M Jones
Assistant Chief Constable                        Y o u r reference
West Midlands Police HQ
PO Box 52                                        O ur reference               SME/956/01
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway                         Da1e                         23 October 1989
BIRMINGHAM      B4 6NQ




Thank you for your letter of 12 October and copy of your response to
Bob Whalley re the letter from Brian Thompson & Partners.

 I note your views on their request for sight of HSE's documents to the Inquiry
P'-tc. I have checked back through our files and, as far as I am aware, the only
 documents which have been presented are as follows:

1)   A summary of the HSE Investigation to date - 8 June 1989 - which I
     presented to a meeting of lord Justice Taylor, Mr Johnson, Professor
     Maunder, Mr Whalley and yourself at Sheffield Laboratories.

2)   The HSE report "The Hillsborough Incident 15 April 1989: An investigation
      into various technical aspects prepared for the Court of Inquiry" by
      C E Nicholson, Report No IR/I/ME/MEV89/I.

3)   A diagram illustrating a method of calculating the capacity of Pens 3 and
      4 which was submitted to the Inquiry by Mr Andrew Collins QC on DAY 28
      (26 June 1989) during the cross-examination of Dr Eastwood.

Although marry other matters have been discussed, no other reports have been
presented to date.

You noted that our report on the calculation concerning the               barrier collapse
was now in final draft and wondered if a copy could be sent               to you. All of our
work is for the Inquiry and this report, and any subsequent               reports, will be
sent direct to Mr Whalley. Any subsequent circulation will                have to 'be agreed
with Lord Justice Taylor.

I have now received a preliminary view from HSE Management regarding our
assistance with the criminal proceedings. The view is that we are ready in
principle to assist on technical matters, but until it is clear what is
involved it is not possible to say whether or not our services will be charged
for. Ed you have any further information or possible dates for our meeting
with the Director of Public Prosecutions or his QC?
I have sent you under separate cover a copy of irty letter to Mr Whalley
concerning a request from the Chief Constables' Working Party and would be
grateful for your view of my involvement with this group.

Yours sincerely




DR C E NICHOLSON
Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1



cc Mr Whalley
   Dr A Jones
X
CN
\

     ❖




         #
