JOHN MORGAN



Police Sergeant 758



'F ' Division



At 9.45 a.m. on Saturday, 15 April 1989, I attended at Hillsborough

Football Stadium, Sheffield, in respect of the F.A. cup semi-final between

Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC.      The pre-match briefing was to be

held in the North Stand adjacent to the Spion Kop, but before attending

that locatio    I went into the gymnasium where I collected a radio, meal

tickets and my br^iefing     notes.

I was in command of Serial 18 consisting of myself and two other police

officers.     I met these on row 15 of the North Stand between seats 167 and

178 where I carried out     a check of the personnel who were allocated to work

with me.    All were present and the officers in question were Police

Constable 2961 JENKINSON, Police Constable 3118 CROOKES, Police Constable

782 HEMSWORTH, Police Constable 1171 HORSFIELD, Police Constable 513

FRANCIS, Police Constable 159 MARSH, Police Constable 183^ SCHOLEY, Police

Constable 320 BRADSHAW, Police Constable 2960 ALEXANDER and Police

Constable 33*12 BLOUNT.     The briefing was carried out by a number of senior

officers including Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, Superintendent MURRAY

and Inspector SEWELL who all spoke on a dedicated public address system to

 the assembled duty team.     A detailed briefing took place covering the

 general aspects of crowd safety and logistical arrangements.     Further

 information about individual aspects of the two groups of visiting

 supporters and their behaviour was given by Detective Sergeant

 CHARLESWORTH, Divisional Crime Intelligence



                                        c
                                A




I have served as a Sergeant at TF ' Division for eight years and five months

 and have attended many such occasions.     I would estimate that I have

performed duty at the ground at well in excess of 150 footbaLl matches

 during my service, including a number of semi-finals.      I have been in

 charge of serials engaged on various duties in all parts of the ground and

 have an overall wide and varied experience of all aspects of crowd control

 at Hillsborough Stadium.   There is no doubt in my mind that the system of

 crowd control which has evolved over many years at the ground, is one of

 the most efficient and well tried in the country.      There have been problems

 of public disorder which I can personally remember over the years, but we

 have always coped admirably.

 After the initial briefing, I collected snack meals for my serial from the

 gymnasium, returned to the North Stand and distributed the meals to my

 officers.   At this point I liaised with my Sector Commander, Inspector

'SYKES, and arranged to rendezvous with him in the enclosure behind the West

 Stand at 11.00 a.m. for a further more detailed briefing by him regarding

 the specific duties of my serial.     I instructed officers under my command

 regarding the.ir conduct and. individual roles, during ,the ..forthcoming

 afternoon

 At 11.00 a.m., as arranged, I went with my serials to the enclosure at the

 rear of the West Stand, where I met Inspector SYKES.       The Officer spoke to

 members of his sector about the task in hand, including evacuation

 procedures and their search duties at the turnstiles.       My serial were

 responsible for turnstiles 9 to 16 of entrances 'A' and 'C' which provide

  access to the North Stand and the West Stand.     Their brief was to ensure

  that spectators entering the ground did not possess items prohibited by the

  ground rules, such as weapons, banners, missiles and alcohol.       They were to

  maintain order, ensure orderly queues were formed and give advice and
                                  3




assistance to spectators where possible.      All were provided with labels and

black plastic bin liners for property which they confiscated and plastic

dustbins were provided at each of the turnstiles for this purpose.       I noted

that there was a police property post located in a caravan in the enclosure

behind the West Stand, together with other cabins for the sale of match

programmes, souvenirs and refreshments.

Officers of Serial 18 were retained in this area initially, on standby,

prior to the build up of supporters.       They were instructed on the

appearance of the tickets which would be produced at that end of the

ground, primarily brown coloured ones for the North Stand, red for the West

Stand seats and purple for the West Stand terraces.       They were deployed on

their points at approximately 11.30 a.m. and all the turnstiles were open

by 12 noon.

There was some activity outside with early arrivals and I saw that Police

horses were deployed on the Leppings Lane concourse.       I remember two

coaches and a double deck South Yorkshire bus arriving and being off­

loaded.   This was apparently contrary to the planned reception

arrangements, because visiting coaches were to be unloaded on Penistone

Road North and Halifax Road.   Nevertheless, further coaches, vans and

double deck buses continued to arrive at Leppings Lane throughout the early

 afternoon.

 I remember seeing several people who were the worse for drink arriving

 early at the ground.   Many asked for directions to the nearest licensed

 premises, several were drinking from cans of lager and beer, others from

 large plastic bottles of beer.       I personally advised a number of people

 that they would not be admitted to the ground if they were considered to be

 intoxicated.   The activity of the Leppings Lane concourse became busier as

 the afternoon progressed.   There was a lot
and entry to the correct part of the ground.     I was constantly questioned

by people throughout the afternoon about this problem.

The weather was fine and warm with bright sunshine.     There was a happy

carnival atmosphere at this stage.     People were purchasing programmes from

vendors outside and numerous people were eating and drinking as they milled

about.   I noticed that there was an inordinate volume of litter scattered

about at various locations consisting of food wrappers, tins and empty

bottles which people were discarding all over the area.       Many people were

standing about in groups waiting to meet friends and making no effort to

enter the ground.   These were being continually dispersed by mounted and

foot officers.

During the course of the early afternoon, I remember Police Constable 2902

ROBERTS arresting a ticket tout.       I am not sure of the correct time, but

believe that this occurred about 12.30 p.m.     This man was in his early

twenties, tall and slim with blonde hair/.    The officer took him through,

concertina gate 'A' where he detained and spoke to him.       I joined them

there prior to the officer taking the man to the Police Room.          I saw that

P.C. ROBERTS had taken a.large amount of money from him and eleven or

twelve tickets for the Liverpool end of.the ground.     These were all the

purple coloured ones for the terraces and some discussion took place with a

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Official in that vicinity, as to whether

they were forgeries.   I returned to the turnstiles and rejoined my serial

after about ten minutes.

I witnessed several people having intoxicating liquor confiscated from them

by Inspector SYKES and other officers.     These containers of alcohol were

placed in the dustbins adjacent to the turnstiles.     C.I.D. officers were

 present on the concourse on covert observations for pick-pockets.

 I was approached by numerous people                      ™   =   n-
                                5 "




that several Liverpool supporters had acquired tickets for the Spion Kop

terrace and were asking whether they would be admitted there.   It was

pointed out that a section of that end of the ground had been reserved for

that eventuality.

The volume of people entering the ground through the turnstiles which I was

supervising was moderate until approximately 2.10 p.m. when I was called

away temporarily.   At that time I was approached by an off-duty police

officer from Lincolnshire Constabulary and three friends of his, two males

and a female.   That officer stated that his wallet containing £40.00 cash

and four football tickets had been stolen from his rear trouser pocket.      I

nformed Inspector SYKES about the incident and conducted the Lincolnshire

Officer to the gymnasium in order that he could report the theft to C.I.D.

personnel.   I waited at that location until this had been done and then

escorted him and his friends back to the rear of the West Stand where I

gained them admission to the:terraces.

As I walked along the corridor beneath the North Stand, making my way back

to the West Stand and turnstiles , I distinctly remember hearing a message

on talk-through, made by INspector SYKES.    There was a lot of background

noise, but I heard him ask. for more men to be sent to Leppings Lane

urgently.    I only heard the message being passed once and there was other

r^idio traffic being passed constantly at that time.   I had changed my radio

battery in the gymnasium whilst I was there, because I was having trouble

receiving the signals from Police Control.    I believe there was a fault,

 because I noted that whenever they tried to use the radio themselves, the

 transmission was broken and the operator's voice was spasmodic.   Messages

 from officers on the ground were loud and clear on the talk-through

 facility.   At about the same time as this message was passed, I saw

 Inspector WHITE and another officer escorting a prisoner along the corridor
which I was using, back towards the Police Room and I acknowledged the

officers.

On arrival back there, at about 2.30 p.m., I was confronted with an

alarming situation.    The crowd had obviously built up and there was serious

congestion outside the turnstiles.        I saw several youths climbing over the

walls into the enclosure and this was a new experience which I had never

before seen.    Police Officers were attempting to discourage this and

attempting to remove them from the walls.        I looked through the turnstile

gates 'A' to 'G' of entrance 'B' where I saw a crush of people outside.

Many were distressed and shouting for assistance.        They were screaming for

help and many appeared to be injured, amongst them women and teenage

youths.     I climbed on to one turnstile gate and encouraged them not to

push.     I remember youths having their legs pushed with considerable force

against the bars of the turnstiles and they were obviously in great pain.

There was a pandemonium of noise and together with other officers, amongst

whom was Inspector BENNETT, I attempted to calm the situation inside the

enclosure.     I was approached by several-men who were clearly angry, they

began to jostle me and grabbed hold of my uniform anorak shouting into my :

face.     'Do something,   people   are getting,crushed out there.   Open the

gates'.     As they spoke I became aware of the concertina gate to my left

being opened by stewards.       This was gate 'C T, I believe, around the side of

the enclosure, immediately adjacent to the car park driveway and river.

There were a couple of horses outside who were attempting to regulate the

 flow of people being pushed through the opening.        The mood of these people

 appeared to be quite aggressive and it was obvious that many were

 intoxicated.    I could smell drink on their breath.      I stood in their path

 and attempted to push in the opposite direction, shouting for order and

 discouraging their headlong surge bi '            "           T                "^de
and saw several people lose their feet, being trampled by the crowd.       I do

not recall any injured being left in that location after the surge had

subsided.    This was not a dramatic influx of people but I believe no more

that 200 entered at this time.      I forced my way outside after the initial

onslaught, where I joined colleagues by the side of turnstiles at entrance

B.

There was an extremely large crowd of people, densely packed into the area

in front of the turnstiles.      I would estimate in excess of 4,000.   This

area is enclosed by railings and gates at the entrance, a sheet steel fence

and concertina gate 'B' on the left, turnstile walls in front and a

continuous steel bar on the right with supports spaced at regular intervals

along its length.    Together with Inspector WHITE and Inspector PURDY, I

went to the side of this bar and began pulling people underneath in order

to relieve the pressure.      I also saw Inspector DELANEY at that location.

We moved dozens of people in this manner, pushing them under the bar by

their heads.    Women and youths in considerable distress were pulled from

the crowd.     Some men resisted our attempts to rescue them, fearing that

they would lose their places in the crowd and be denied entry.       Many were

the worse for drink and unruly., failing to. obey instructions not to. push.

As the people repeatedly surged forwards, chanting and shouting, I heard

 cries of pain as people were crushed against the bar and walls of the

 turnstiles.    Mounted   officers in the middle of this were just pushed, about

 in the throng.    At one stage, I saw a horse go down at the back end,

 obviously lifted from its feet by the pressure of bodies.      There was a very

 real danger of serious injury or even death being caused in this

 area

 I recall that youths continued to climb the walls and fences over into the

 enclosure at the back of the West Sts
Inspector BENNETT on top of one of the turnstile walls trying to present

this practice.

I saw concertina gate 'B' being opened and after the number of people had

built up on the driveway where I was standing, together with other officers

I took these people through concertina gate 'C' which was opened a second

time.   I must point out that people appeared to be aggressive and in a

state of haste, obviously concerned that the game was about to start before

they were able to gain entry.       I am quite satisfied that the decision to

open the gates in order to ease the congestion outside was soundly based

and was necessary       in the circumstances. There was imminent danger of

various injury to       supporters throughoutthat time.

As the crush of people dispersed, there was a lull in the situation outside

and I was able to       rejoin officers of myserial.   The majority of these were

distressed and had obviously been crushed against the turnstile walls

themselves by the sudden influx of supporters. .There, was still a great

many people standing in groups in Leppings Lane on the bridge and at

various positions on the concourse.       A lot of these looked dejected as

though they    were   resigned to missing the game.    Suddenly I heard a radio

message, being, passed by Police Control, which was repeated several times.

The voice on the radio was that of Police Sergeant GODDARD and from his

tone I gained the impression that he was upset about something.         He said;

 'All available assistance onto the perimeter track.        People are invading

 the pitch'.     I believe he repeated this message several times.

 I immediately alerted members of my serial, who were all present and

 together outside the turnstiles where they had been working.        We all ran

 inside through one of the turnstiles and made our way round to the gate at

 the rear of the Police Control Box.      I remember that a man had climbed onto

 this gate and he was pulled down bodily to facilitate the opening of the
gate.   He caught the sleeve of the denim jacket which he wore on one of the

spiked railings and damaged the material, at which point he began

complaining vehemently.    He was pushed aside and together with the other

police officers I ran down the first gangway of the South Stand open seated

section on my left.    As I did so I saw Superintendent MURRAY walking

towards me.   His face was ashen and he was obviously deeply shocked.       He

said, 'Do what you can'.    I made my way over the wall onto the perimeter

track in front of Leppings Lane terraces.     I witnessed an horrific scene,

which I shall never forget.     People were being pressed up bodily against

the netting of the pen fence at this location.     The pen was bulging under

the pressure which was being exerted by the crush.     I could see women and

male youths with their eyes open, tongues extended through their mouths,

their skin was cyanoxed and there were blue coloured arms, faces and necks

pressed against the netting.     Some had blood seeping from their mouths and

noses which were bubbling with mucus.     'Officers were frantic in their

efforts to pull people over the fence and I saw several people escaping by

this means.     Others were being pulled onto the track through a small gate

in the fence.     I saw people climbing up into the West Stand sealed area

above the central pen.     It was obvious to me .that the people pressed

against the fence at this particular section were, in the majority of

cases, already deceased.     Although they apparently appeared to be standing

against the fence, their position was'being maintained upright by the

unrelenting pressure of the spectators behind them.     There were numerous

police officers gathered on the pitch and track.     Some were giving first

aid, others attempting to rescue spectators.     I saw some spectators

 climbing over the dividing railings into the adjacent pens or being pulled

 over bodily by other people.    There was panic and utter chaos at that end

 of the ground.    The situation was very confused, but many officers
    responded individually to identified needs, rendering assistance wherever

    they could.

    I remained there only a few seconds and during that time lost contact with

    members of my serial, the majority of whom were busying themselves tending

    the injured.     I quickly realised that I would be able to achieve very

    little if I remained on the track.      A lot of officers were standing looking

    at the scene in stunned disbelief and I attempted to motivate some of them.

    I approached several and ordered them to follow me.       Roughly six or seven

#   responded, although it was difficult to communicate above the din.       I noted

    that the main crush was in the southern section of the central pen and I

    decided to enter that pen from the tunnel at the rear, in an effort to

    disperse the fans by that route.      I ran back the way I had come and went

    immediately to the rear of the West Stand.       I saw that it was practically

    deserted in the enclosure behind the Stand at this time and I entered the

    tunnel   which   runs beneath the Stand giving access to the central pen of the

    terraces.     The situation was calm inside the tunnel and there was no egress

    of people.- The ones at the back were not.pushing, but merely trying to

    look over the tops of heads in front.        Three police officers were standing

    at the back of the crowd, two females and a male, who were totally unaware

    of the incident in progress.      I shouted for them to begin evacuation as a

    means of relieving the pressure on the bodies at the front.        I said;    There

    are dead bodies in there'.      I entered the crowd to the right of the central

    dividing railings and began moving individuals back down the tunnel behind.

    I was obliged to grab each person and haul them backwards, just shouting

     'Get out' to each one as I progressed towards the front.       Many were in deep

     shock and resisted me, pulling away and refusing to co-operate.       The crowd

     was not densely packed and I was able to move quite freely.        A large

     number were the worse for drink.      I w
                                   //




the body and spat upon during this period of time.      I remember liquid being

poured from the West Stand above me-, being showered about.     I continued to

move forwards and was aware of the other officers supporting m e , also

struggling with the crowd.    Among these were P.C. 1171 HORSFIELD who I saw

immediately behind me.   A number of young men were aggressive and I

remember several shouting 'Murderers' and comments such as 'You've got this

one wrong you bastards', and 'You've caused all this, it's your fault'.             I

remember seeing Superintendent GREENWOOD standing on the hoardings on the

perimeter track with a loud hailer, shouting for people to move back and

giving a pushing motion towards me with his hands over the top of the

fence.

I eventually reached the front where I saw several supporters tending the

dead and injured.   I was asked to help many individuals by these people.           I

heard shouts of 'Come on mate this kid's dying.     Help him.' and 'Give us a

hand hear.; Do something' .             i;„,

I saw a pile of bodies lying waist deep at the bottom of the terrace steps

against the wall.   Three or four people still alive were trapped up to         ,

their hips in, bodies.   I spent a long time with spectators trying to free

these pe.oplewithout.,,§;
                        ucc.es-s,,-&t .first. .Thebe'was vomit and mucus in •

people's hair and on their clothing.     There were shoes, coats, money,

Liverpool scarves, hats and paraphernalia scattered all around.      I gave

heart massage and mouth to mouth to two or three people on the steps, but

cannot remember any description or other details of them.      There were so

many in need of help, I felt so utterly inadequate.      I persisted in pulling

the limbs of dead and dying males and females from the pile, but it was

just like tangled, slippery spaghetti and difficult to get any sort of

purchase.   Other police officers were by this time climbing through the

small gate, over the bodies, to get inside.
                                   /2




I remember being joined by Inspector WOODWARD and others whose identities I

cannot remember.     I must emphasise that the actions of many spectators was

very heroic and sensible.     Several made commendable efforts to resuscitate

casualties and carried the dead and injured away.

I was concerned about one young boy with blonde hair, aged about 10 years,

who was lying with his face pressed against the wall, but who showed signs

of life.     I tried to work him free and cradled his head in my hands to

prevent him grazing his face on the wall.     He seemed to be breathing but

only with shallow panting breaths, although his skin was still pink in

colour.

I tugged at belts, clothing, arms and any other places where I could get a

firm grip.     I was assisted by other police officers and civilians.   The

bodies began coming free and I carried three or four back down the tunnel

into the rear enclosure with other policemen.     I also carried injured back

there.     I left them to return to the terraces as there was much work to be

done.    There was a lot of jostling and confusion and I lost my footing on

the steps, tripping over people and being pushed.

As time passed there was some success in breaking down the fences behind

the goal to the left of the pile of bodies.     Police personnel and civilians

did this by kicking and pulling the wire from its supports.     As this

opening appeared, bodies were handed out to others on the track, with a

comment as to whether I thought they were alive or dead.     Several times I

repeated 'This one's alive', 'This one's alive.     I finalluy managed to free

the 10 year old boy and passed him through the hole.     I remember shouting

 to the person I handed him to, 'This one's still alive'.    I lost contact

with him after that.     I remember sweating and my mouth being very dry.     The

 clothing under my anorak was wet with perspiration.

 I saw an ambulance drive round the perimete
                                  /   3




the gymnasium and stop on the pitch near the goal posts at the Leppings

Lane end.

Eventually the bodies were cleared from the terrace and I climbed out

through the hole, where I began tending to people who were lying on the

grass.   I attempted mouth to mouth and heart massage with some of the

bodies, but without any success.      I did not persist with any particular one

but went from one to the other trying to help other police officers.         I

assisted in loading hoardings which were being used as makeshift

stretchers.    I carried three or four bodies from that end of the field to

the other end where I laid them on the grass to be tended by ambulancemen

and firemen.    I remember one of these was a boy of about 12 years but I

cannot describe any of the people whom I carried.

I remember several Liverpool supporters on the pitch were still aggressive

and abusive, passing comments such as 'You've killed these people'.         Their

aggression was also directed towards the Nottingham Forest crowd.         Looking

around the ground I saw a large number of men and youths running towards

the Spion Kop shouting and swearing.      Others I saw climbing into the North

and South Stand of the pitch, where sporadic fighting broke out amongst

suppoerters.    For this reason I, believe ,t}iat :a .cordon of police officers,

was formed on the half-way line by Chief Superintendent Nesbit.

There appeared to be a lull in the activity on the field for a short time.

I had a drink from the groundsman who was carrying a bucket of water as my

throat was so dry and I was sweating profusely.         I remember speaking to

                              on the pitch.    I also spoke to and tended a

number of individuals who were wandering about the field in a dazed

condition, mostly Liverpool supporters.       I put my arms around some of them

in an effort to comfort them.

I was approached by a man who identified 1         ’"             J
                                                    / ^




officer from Merseyside.                  My recollection of his appearance is very poor

but he said he had lost his brother (who was also an off-duty Merseyside

policeman) on the terraces.                   He was extremely worried.           I escorted him to

the gymnasium.          This was, by now, being used as a temporary mortuary.                       I

asked him to remain outside whilst I went                        inside to make    enquiries on his

behalf.     I saw several bodies of deceased                     people being laid out on the

floor.    It was obvious to me that I would                      not be able to obtain any

positive information about his brother at this stage.                             I went back to him,

explained the situation and I then obtained a hot drink for him and sat

with him for a while.                   I then began to assist loading injured people from

hoards onto proper cots which I carried and wheeled with ambulancemen.                                  I

also assisted several walking patients to the emergency vehicles which were

arriving at the scene continually.

There was a debrief in the North Stand, where I joined my serial.                             I gave

them instructions on the compilation of their notes regarding the, incident

and then completed my debriefing sheet which I handed to Chief Inspector

BEAL.     We were then stood down.

I remember going back to                  t h e - gymnasium   and assisting several officers with

their duties. 'These included P.C. 420 DAVIES, P.C. 1171- HORSFIELD,, ____ ;•

--------- and'|                                     1 This concerned the handling of the

 corpses, loading them into body bags and recording property.                            I was not

 directly   i n v o l v e d   w i t h   any of the deceased for continuity purposes.            I           •

 finally retired from duty at about 6.00 p.m.
/^ /€
