                                                                        H o m e O ffic e
                                                                       QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                        LONDON SW1H9AT
PARLIAMENTARY UNDER
SECRETARY OF STATE
  Professor Phil Scraton                                          2_.Q=> March 1998
  Director
  Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
  Edge Hill University College                                   CC
  St Helens Road
  Ormskirk
  Lancashire L39 4QP


                                                                       h-S C^UU.clc^
                                      L                                      SCACLou^y
                                                                            P CAU^S.
                                                                            CiJcu,^
                                                                       K/
                                                                      <Kf
                                                                            OoUtUu"
                                                )
  CORONIAL PROCEDURE AND THE CONDUCT OF INQUESTS

  Thank you for your letter of 9 March with a copy of No Last Rights. You outlined
  possible ways to improve enquiries into deaths resulting from disasters.

  I have studied the recommendations contained in your work. Clearly there are
  difficulties where the inquest system, which is designed primarily to deal with
  single deaths in relatively straightforward circumstances, is faced with large scale
  multiple deaths in the complex and confused situation of a major disaster.

  Hillsborough brought this home. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's recent report
  made clear, the need for an inquest following the Taylor enquiry placed an
  unreasonable and unnecessary burden on the coroner. When the circumstances of
  the deaths have been fully investigated in the course of a public enquiry, we must
  seriously question the value of holding an inquest as well, especially when it
  largely serves merely to prolong the distress of the relatives of those who died.

  As you will no doubt be aware, the Home Office published last year the report of
  the Interdepartmental Working Group on Disasters and Inquests. This considered
  the problem of the overlap between inquests and judicial inquiries into major
  disasters. After considering various models, it concluded that the most
  satisfactory solution would be to enable inquests to be suspended where disasters
  were the subject of a public enquiry, and to resume them only in very exceptional
circumstances. This seems to us in principle to be the right solution, although I
have to say that there is no immediate legislative opportunity to give effect to the
recommendation.

I realise, of course, that disaster fatalities are not the only deaths in which the
circumstances may be controversial and the effectiveness of the present inquest
system is open to criticism. But we have no plans for major changes. What we do
aim to achieve are practical improvements for the families of the deceased while
continuing to work within the existing legal framework. I am confident that real
advances can be made on this basis.

It was good of you to write. I hope this brings you up to date on our thinking on
these important matters.




                       THE LORD WILLIAMS OF MOSTYN




5159lw
