From:   M J Moriarty                          cc:   Mr Yates
        27 April 1989                               Mr Hammond
                                                    Mr Watts



Mr Whallev


INQUIRY INTO HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER: LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT


You reminded me yesterday that, in the rush, no formal letters of
appointment had gone to Lord Justice Taylor or the assessors, and,
while recognising that no formal instrument in writing was
required, saw advantage now in something being put on the record.
We discussed the form it might take, and in the light of that I
have drafted the attached, on which I should welcome any comments.
My aim is to get it into the Home Secretary's box overnight -
though I suppose the weekend would do.


The reference to the 1921 Act is in the draft at your prompting,
and in the light of Lord Justice Taylor!s comments on the point at
his recent meeting with the Home Secretary.
  DRAFT LETTERS TO


  Mr Johnson
  Chief Constable
  Lancashire


  Prof. L Maunder
  Professor of Mechanical Engineering
^^Jniversity of Newcastle-upon-Tyne




  I am most grateful to you for agreeing to act as an assessor to
  the Inquiry into the Hillsborough stadium disaster.   I enclose a
  copy of a letter of appointment of the Inquiry which I have send
  to Lord Justice Taylor.
  DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE    SECRETARY OF STATE


  TO:


  The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor




1D k o w that a second assessor has been selected it is timely to write
  to you and both assessors confirming your appointment to carry out
  an Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.


  The terms of reference are as follows:


        "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
        football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
        recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
        safety at sports grounds.11


  You will be assisted by two assessors: Mr Brian Johnson QPM, Chief
  Constable of Lancashire; and Professor Leonard Maunder, OBE BStPhD
  Sc D FEng FIMechE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
  University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.


  This Inquiry has been set up as a Departmental Inquiry.    The
  option of establishing the Inquiry under the Tribunals and
  Inquiries Act 1921 has been considered but, at least for the
  present, set aside; it could be re-considered were you to form the
  view that your investigations were being seriously hampered by
  lack of the powers which the 1921 Act would confer.
No terminal date for the Inquiry has been set, but I have asked
that it should proceed with all possible speed.   The possibility
of your making one or more interim reports exists and, should you
judge that to be feasible and helpful, I should welcome it.


In conclusion, I renew my thanks to you, Mr Johnson and
Professor Maunder, to whom I am sending a copy of this letter, for
agreeing to undertake this urgent and important piece of public
pervice.
"N>   \




          &S
