From      F J Smith                      cc   Mr   Storr
          F8 Division                         Ms   Nicholson
          Ext 2952                            Mr   Boys Smith
                                              Mr   Turney
          18 October 1989                     Mr   Bolton
                                              Mr   Goddard
                                              Mr   Mould
                                              Mr   Osborne
                                              Mr   Pugh
                                              Mr   Gilbert
                                              Mr   Lidincrton

Ms Rex
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: PART II AND SCHEDULE 1 AMENDMENTS
This submission seeks formal approval for the very few
amendments we intend to put down for Report on Part II
(restriction orders) and Schedule 1 (relevant offences). This
is in line with the decisions already reached by Ministers.
The submission., does not relate to licensing issues...

Schedule I - relevant alcohol offences

2.   The main amendment is to widen the definition of relevant
football related offences concerning drink on journeys to or ,
from football matches. Currently this is limited to section 1
of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 -
paragraph (f) of Schedule 1. The attached amendments to
Schedule 1 would extend that to offences of drunkenness under
the Licensing Act 1872 and Criminal Justice Act 1967, and
drink driving under the Road Traffic Act 1988.

3.   Mr Lloyd asked for Mr Moynihan's agreement to this in his
letter of 9. October. We understand from DoE officials he is
unlikely to object. Subject to his agreement, are Ministers
content for the attached amendments to Schedule 1 to be
tabled, please?

Part II - Restriction Orders

4   . There is one very minor amendment on which we would seek
.Ministers agreement, to add 'in ordinary language* to the
requirement in Clause 15 to explain to an offender the effect
of a restriction order being made against him. DoE are tabling
a corresponding amendment to Part I, and Part II ought to be' '
kept in line.

5.       have an amendment in   reserve to extend the r>eriod of
notice for initial reporting    from 5 days to 14
(exceptionally). Ministers'     current preference is net to
tajDie it, unless forced into   doing so eg in response to an
Opposition amendment.

Letter to committee Members


6.    In Ki. Goddard's submission of 21 September we offered to
provide a draft letter from Mr Lloyd to all Committee members
explaining our amendments, c-iven the very limited (and pretty
much self-explanatory) amendments we now propose that would on
reflection seem unnecessary. A stronger reason against
writing is that we now understand that DoE do not intend to
write on their more substantial amendments, and a letter from
Mr ijloyd would draw attention to that without greatly
assisting the (former) Bill Committee.

7.   Is Mr Lloyd content not to write?

Part I — Membership Scheme


8.   Mr Moynihan would be grateful if Mr Lloyd would speak to
three Government amendments to Part I which recognise or
provide for admission to grounds of unauthorised spectators,
in an emergency. Lord Ferrers spoke on similar Part I issues
earlier? and emergencies are likely to involve the police and
safety and therefore touch on Home Office interests. May we
indicate to DoE that Mr Lloyd is content? The text of the
amendments is attached.
    Handling   and   Timing


    9.   As I mentioned, DoE would like to put down all Government
    amendments (that are ready) on Friday, joint.lv in Mr Lloyd's
    and Mr Moynihan's names.

    10. Are Ministers content with all these proposed
    arrangements, please?




                                            F J SMITH



1
                                                                               ANNEX




PROPOSED AMENDMENTS - FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

Schedule 1 (Home Office amendments^
Page 21, line 25 [Schedule            z: end insert—
       ‘( ) any o ifen ce unoer section 12 of the Licensing Ac: JST2 (persons found                   1872 c. 94.
             drunk in pucnc Places, etc.) o f oeing found drunk in z high wav or
             other public place com m itted whiie the accused was on z journey to or
             irom a designate-d football match being an o ffe n c e as-respects which
             the court makes a declaration o f relevance;
           ( ) any offence under section 91(1) of the Criminal justice Act 1967
                (disorderly behaviour w hiie drunk in a public place) committed in a
                highway or other public place while the accused was on a journey to or
                from a designated football match being an o ffen ce as respects which
                the court makes a declaration of relevance;’.

Page 21, line 33 [Schedule 1). at end insert—
           ‘( ) any offence under section 4 or 5 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (driving                1988 c.52.
                 etc. when under the in flu en ce of drink or drugs or with an alcohol
                 concentration a b o v e the prescribed limit) committed w hiie the accused
                 was on a jou rn ey to or from a designated       football match being an
                 offen ce as respects w h ich the court makes a declaration of relevance;'.



Part   II      (H o m e O f f i c e   am en d m en ts



  Page 13, line 19 [Clause 1 5 }, at end insert ‘in ordinary ianguage'.



Part   I     CDoE a m e n d m e n t ,    fo r   w h ic h   Mr L l o v d   is   in v ite d   to   sp eak


Page 5, line 15 [Clause 5}, after ‘that' insert            except in an em ergency,’.



 Page E, line 7 [Clause P), after ‘prove' insert ‘either that the spectators were
    admitted in an em ergency or1.



 Page 9, line 15 [Clause 10], after ‘that' insert \                  except    (in the case o f the
    procedures) in an e m e r g e n c y ,’.
