            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
            Room 1106
                                                                                                   CP
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line: 0171273 2512 Fax: 2007


Lynne Fox                                                              Our reference:

                                                                       Your reference:

-------------------------                                              Date:   October 1997




Thank you for your letter of 10 October 1997 enclosing a copy of your project ‘Hillsborough: The
Unaccepted T ruth’, which I have read with interest.

I was concerned at the suggestion that witnesses who gave evidence favourable to the fans were treated
differently from local residents or police. In your Chapter 3 part 2 under the heading ‘Licensees and
Locals’ you refer to the evidence of M r McGanley, a local resident who spoke favourably of the
behaviour of the Liverpool fans on 15 April 1989. I found some difficulty in tracing your references,
which I think are incorrect. Note 7 is Day 3 p71 and N ote 8 is Day 10 p65, Note 9 is Day 10 p52.

Because of the objections taken the witnesses returned to give evidence on Day 13 when the Coroner
read the transcript of the witnesses evidence to remind him of what he said. He then gave evidence of
his experience at a previous match on 11 February 1989 between Sheffield Wednesday and Manchester
United, the relevance of which is far from clear.

I have read the cross-examination, which seems to have been designed to distinguish between what he
actually said and the inferences or conclusions which he drew. A t Day 13 p95 the Coroner commented
that M r Payne ‘was perhaps a little bit sharper than perhaps he is most of the time but I am sure he was
not intending to be unfriendly’. Although it is not possible to detect a tone of voice from the
transcript, I cannot find anything improper or hostile in the questions asked by M r Payne (which
extended over only Vk pages of transcript), or anything which I, as a Judge would have taken exception
to ’.

I raise this matter with you because others have made the criticism that Liverpool supporters were
subjected to hostile or oppressive cross-examination or other discriminating treatment, and I am
anxious to see whether these criticisms are justified. If you have in mind any other examples which you
consider justify the criticism, I would be grateful if you would draw my attention to them, as you
obviously have made a careful study of the Inquest evidence.




                                                    1
L O R D JU STICE STUART-SMITH
