  HER m a .TF.STV'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKShIRE
  -------------Iw e s t d i s t r i c t ;
                                                  77
       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                     Before

DR. S. L. POPPER, LLB. B.MED.Sci. BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty*s Coroner)




                        At

                 The Town Hall,
                   Sheffield.

                        on

                25th March, 1991




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J. L. Harpham Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55 Queen Street, Sheffield, SI 2DX.
                                                            /         1

A
                qWF.NTY SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                       M O N D A Y . 25th MARCH 1991

        THE CORONER:      We are just carrying on as if nothing
B
    had happened, as if we had not had the weekend, but I

    would remind you that we are dealing with 95 inquests,

    that your task is to establish who the deceased was, when

    and where they died and how they died.             I am not repeating

    everything I have said on Thursday but again I have to

    remind you that questions of law are for me, questions of

    fact are for you.    When you consider the evidence you have

    to j^jigh the quality of it:      is it truthful, is it

    mistaken, is it untruthful, is it muddled, and you can

    judge this by, as X explained to you, demeanour,

    corroboration, possible bias.        There are lots of other

     things which might apply but in the end you have to decide

     how much you accept and how much you reject.

          I reminded you that the crucial thing is the evidence

     of the witnesses and not the questions from the lawyers,

    ■ bearing in mind that, of course, "yes" and "no" answers

     you do have to take into account what the questions were

     otherwise you cannot understand them.

          An important point to remember when you are thinking

     about the evidence is to try and think of the evidence as

     a whole - from the witness I mean - rather than specifics,

      and the point I am really driving at is this, that it is

      quite possible, and we have had lots of examples, to ask a
question in such a way that you get evidence in a

particular form, and then if you ask the question in a

different format you get the same response but in a

different way.   This is why it is so important to try and

sift the wheat from the tares and not allow yourself to be

led or misled by simply the question.   I will give you two

very simple examples. I don't want to waste too much time

on this but it is important that we have this clearly in

our heads, and I will give you two what I consider to be

non controversial examples.   One is Dr. Nicholson, and I

cannot recollect where the questioning came from at the

moment but he was asked about the blue gates, and one form

of question was, "Would you go along with the Fire Officer

when he says that it is all right to shut those blue gates

in certain circumstances?", and his reply was yes, he

would.   Subsequently he was asked a similar sort of

question but this time put in a slightly different format

with regard to what other people had said as to the risk,

and he also went along with that.   I don't complain about

that, it is just an illustration, and another one which is

perhaps even better, even less emotive, is the questions

which we have with Dr. Nicholls and how to interpret the

total number of people who had or did not have alcohol

within them, and you saw it very graphically demonstrated

that if you wanted to put it one way you could say two

thirds of the people had had a drink, and if you wished to

put it the other way and show that only one third, or not
even a third, sorry, 20 per cent were above the limit, and

he agreed with both and there was nothing wrong with that

either.     In fact, he was right to agree with both, but

this is the point, you have got to sort it out when you

think about it.

        The other thing that you have got to think about is

what is it that we are      trying todo?   I think I have

already said there are      three - Iwill remind you - there

are three possible conclusions which you are able to

consider.     The first one is unlawfully killed.   The second

one is accident/misadventure.     The third one is open.     The

first one, unlawfully killed, you have to be satisfied on

the evidence beyond reasonable doubt or so that you are

sure.     The second one, accident/misadventure, you have to

be satisfied on the balance of probability.     The third

one, an open verdict, you are in fact      saying that the

evidence is inadequate      to enableyou to reach a verdict of

the other two.

        I am not going to go through all the legal stuff

again in detail today, but I will again just remind you of

the cardinal points which Lord Justice Watkins made.         I

think they come to about seven and I will just remind you

of what those are.     What he said was that - in his case he

was dealing with a Police Officer in a particular

situation but anybody whose conduct you are considering -

anybody whose conduct you are considering, first of all
you have got to decide, did that person have a duty to

have regard to the health and welfare of the deceased?

Did he fail to do what in the circumstances he ought to

have done for the health and welfare of the deceased, or

did he act in such a way?   Was his failure a substantial

cause of the death of the deceased?   Next four:   was the

failure to act for the benefit of the health and welfare

of the deceased reckless?   An act of recklessness means

that he did or failed to do something where there was an

obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of the

deceased, to which that person whose conduct you are

considering, having regard to his duty, was indifferent or

that recognising the risk to be present he deliberately

chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it.    Next, it

should be emphasised that a failure to appreciate that

there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to

amount to recklessness, and you have to be satisfied,

before you can bring in such a verdict, that you can

attribute these ingredients to one single person, i.e.,

you must not add up the activities of different people.

Finally under no circumstances must you name the person

you are considering in respect of whom you decide this

applies.

     Of course, in thinking about this you have to take

 into account everything that applies, all the

circumstances, including the time, including the location,
including the event and so- on.   I think that is at this

stage enough reminder but just so that you have it more or

less in your mind.

     Now, I was just dealing with the outside, if I can

say, I was just beginning to work my way into the Ground,

and you will of course be aware that we spent an enormous

amount of time on this at the Inquest, but I do not think

that it is necessary for me to give you a blow by blow

account of everything that was said or done.    Basically,

in a nutshell, at some time between 2.17 and 2.30 - there

is a bit of a problem with the timing because the

recollection of most people is that it was about 2.30, or

2.25 but Mr. Murray's log, which was the handwritten one,

shows the request as coming through at 2.17 but in a sense

I don't think it matters too much.    At some time in the

afternoon Mr. Marshall, the Superintendent outside, after

consultation with Mr. Sykes, decided to request to have

Leppings Lane closed to traffic - not to pedestrians of

course - and the explanation that he gave us was that

 there were a lot of people there, he perceived that there

was some risk of injury because of traffic and collisions,

 and in addition to that it also enabled them to have a

 space where people could congregate presumably without

 danger.

                                  It was a most unusual ....
     It was a most unusual request to close Leppings Lane at

that time.    They did close it as a matter of routine when

crowds left but they did not, as a matter of routine, close

it on arrival.    So that was unusual.   In fact, it was one of

the unprecedented events which have been mooted before you.

We spent a lot of time discussing and questioning as to

whether this was a wise or unwise thing to do, whether in

fact it increased the flow rate and whether it would have

been better to have allowed the traffic to move and to, in

effect, act as a barrier and, therefore, cause a hindrance to

the people who were coming up and down Leppings Lane.

     I think this is one of those cases where we might say in

retrospect it would have been better to have had a road

traffic incident there and completely jam the road up but at

the time, and this is what is important     for you, I think if

anybody had said, "It does not matter if we have somebody          or

injured” that would, in my view - but it is in the end your

view - at the time knowing nothing of what was coming that

would have been an almost indefensible point of view.         In

fact, although we have spent a great deal of time on this, my

view is that it is hard to see how the closure of Leppings

Lane by itself can be causative.
      I find it difficult to even fit itinto a but      for

example.     Do you remember we talked about this, that and the

third thing, it would not have happened?     It depends.      You

could argue but for the closure of Leppings Lane but I think

 it is exceedingly difficult and if you cannot even get it

 into a but for then you have not even begun to think about
the other things that Lord Justice Watkins is talking about.

Certainly it would be virtually impossible, if I am right on

this, as a substantial cause and much less as an obvious and

serious risk of injury by the closure of Leppings Lane.

     The next thing we spent a great deal of time on was what

was happening around the turnstile area.    I was just pointing

out to you that there were some similarities between the

turnstile areas and the terracing, do you remember?     That is

when you felt ill and I do not blame    you for that.   You are

allowed to.   I do not think there is   any need to repeat it

apart from saying, be careful that you do not take analogies

too far because although there are similarities, there are

also dissimilarities.   It may just help when you think about

some of the events to compare the two situations but be

careful that you do not say, "It has happened and,therefore,

it must be the same somewhere else".
     A lot of time comparisons were made between 1988 and
1989 as to whether or not the perimeter gates were open or
shut at any particular point in time and certainly from Mr.

Creaser and possibly Mr. Marshall I think the impression I

got was that they had not really planned to use the perimeter

 gates as a mode of control into the turnstile area.

 Certainly from the photographic evidence it would appear in

 1988 the two outer leaves, if I can call them that, the
 centre gates on the Don side were shut and people were coming

 in through the third set whereas this year at least for a

 period of time there was some conflict about exactly what

 time these gates shut but I think it is pretty clear that for
some period of time all the gates were open and people were

actually able to get into the turnstile area proper through

more gates -
     Two things about this;     you have to decide whether it

actually makes a difference.     If there had not been very many

people what difference would it actually have made if they

had got in through three gates as opposed to one?        If there

were an awful lot then we will see in a minute what the

evidence is as to what happened when the gates were shut and

indeed this is in fact one of the points;     that the gates

were shut too late and it had two effects.     One was that it

frustrated the people who were outside who said,     "We have got

tickets",      we have had evidence from some witnesses who

actually say this, "We have tickets.     Why c a n ’t we get in?",

on the one hand, and on the other hand a crush had already

developed within the turnstile area which was creating

problems.
      Speaking for myself I do have some difficulty with the
 argument saying that if the gates had been shut earlier the
 frustration and the saying, "Why can’t we get in?" would not
 have arisen.     I cannot see, for myself, the logic of that
 argument.     Whereas it might be true for the people
 immediately outside the gate against whom you are shutting
 it, the ones who are coming behind would find simply exactly
 the same situation as if the gates had been shut twenty

 minutes earlier.
       The second thing about the gates is - and while I am on

 the gates I have already mentioned PC Scboley and Sergeant
                                                            '   10

applicable to them or they saw the opportunity and decided to

come in because time was pressing on.




                                   /The mounted Officers.
    'v
                                                                         11
. V.
V




                   The mounted Officers’on the whole gave very con­

             sistent accounts and in a nutshell what they said is

             they were trying to split the crowd, either by splitting
         B   them within the turnstile area and creating a gap between

             the back of the front of the crowd and the front of the

             back crowd and the perimeter gates being the divide, so

             to speak, and the objective was that the people within

              the turnstile area should be able to move back.

                   All the evidence that we have is that that did

              not in fact happen, that that gap was taken up by others

              who entered and even when the gap was in existence the

              people at the front were not keen to come back.   Not

              entirely surprising because the turnstiles were in front

              of them and the gap was behind them, but nevertheless it

              would have relieved the pressure situation at the front.

                    One Officer in particular I thought gave very

              interesting evidence as to the methodology of moving

              the crowd and that was P.C. Watson from Nottingham.

              What he said he was trying to do and what in fact the

             • people were trying to do is to use the horse as a Catalyst.

              If you can get some of the people to turn round and move

              back then you are not just using the pressure from one

              horse but you are also using the power of the people

              who are now going in the same direction as you are and

               if you are successful you then get a snowball effect

               and you can convert a forward momentum into a backward

               momentum.
     A great deal of time was also spent in discussing

whether or not the technique was sensible anyway and

it was put to many of these Officers, and indeed to

others, that the place to start is at the back and not at

the front and to peel off, I suppose would be the easiest

way of putting it, to peel people off back in order to

relieve the pressure.     It is a matter for you, and the

Officers to a certain extent agreed with that.
      I must confess that I found the argument difficult

to follow because whilst I can see its merit in a static

situation, if you have a continuously moving crowd in the

sense that people are joining it from the back, then

you either have to wait until you have the whole crowd

there and then start peeling, which seems to me to be not

a very good way of relieving pressure at the front, or

you may start at the back but eventually finish up in

 the middle, which is precisely where these Officers in

 fact finished up and if you remember they tried to come

 in from the side of the turnstile area and in the end

 they put a cordon across, so you had a cordon of Police

 horses, perimeter gates, turnstile area, turnstiles and

 so on.
          That cordon in the end did actually hold for a

 little while.     It was difficult to understand why it

 broke.     My impression was that people were coming under­

 neath it and were ducking under the horses.     We heard

 various witnesses including Mr. Bartholomew say that he

 saw that, but in addition to that the concertina gate
                                                                13




    had been opened, people were coming through, and the need

    for the cordon in that sense had disappeared because

    people left the scene by entering into the ground.
B         I think again with hindsight, and I don't want to

    waste much time on it, if the timing had been a little

    bit different we might not be sitting here today but it

    is no use thinking about what might have been.
          Now the next thing we will think about is what some

    or other of the supporters have said because at the moment

    I have merely talked about basically mounted Officers and

    Police.     You remember there were Merseyside Officers;

    there were Notts. Officers and there were South Yorkshire

    Officers.     It was a mix and I deliberately chose witnesses

    from all three groups so that we would have a mix.

           There were quite a lot of witnesses who did talk

     about what was going on.    Some described the situation

     as "no pushing at all", at the very most they would say

     they were being "pushed" but some would not even go as

     far as that.    They merely said it was just a big crowd

     and it was simply a completely natural crowd movement

     that caused the crushing, but there were some and I am

     not going to give you all because I need to sum and not

     summarise, as I told you, but there is one for instance,

     Mr. Barry, who actually recollects the remark     where

     somebody said:     "There is only one copper, let's rush

     the perimeter gate".
              There was Mr. Hilton.   He did not actually remember
anything about pushing but he remembers that the gate was

being used as a control at some time after 2.40.     He

said they were letting people through in batches.

      There was Mr. Hewstone, that is the Probation Officer

do you remember him, who did not like crowds because he

got stuck in one in Wembley.     He said it was even bigger.

He described not so much the pushing but the announcements

which you heard and the fact it did not seem to make

any difference to the situation.
      There was somebody called Mark Dawson who heard

appeals but he nevertheless went forward through the

perimeter gates.   He said up to the perimeter gate position

he need not have gone forward.     Once he got through it

was a different matter, he felt once he was within the

turnstile area things were more difficult.

      That in fact was one of the points that a lot of

people said and in fact a lot of the Police Officers

agreedwith this, that the people immediately against

out of the perimeter gate, the horses or the turnstile

areas could not help themselves.     They had got trapped,

so to speak, and whether or not they would have wished

to push or not to push was an academic exercise as far

as they were concerned.
      The question that you have to ask yourself I think

with regard to this ~ and as I say I have tried to

outline it briefly and without stressing one side too

strongly against the other ~ but one of the questions
                                                            15




that you have to ask yourself is this with regard to the

outside of the ground:
      (1)   whatever the situation might have been within

the turnstile area what was the reason for the crushing

at the perimeter gates?
      You will remember there were one or two witnesses

who were actually more concerned about the people outside

the perimeter gates than they were about the people within

the turnstile area, because whichever way you look at it

although of course you are going to have to describe

the geography, there is an inward movement, a funnelling

effect towards the perimeter gate, nevertheless Leppings

Lane and that outer area does in fact provide a considerable

amount of space where people could if they had wished

congregate, so you have got to ask yourself the question:

"Was it simply entirely movement of the people or was

there some pressure forward?"
      The second question   you need to ask yourself is:

"Is it right that the people could not have done anything

about it?   Was the forward movement such that they were

unable to remedy it themselves?"
       I have already said that nearly everybody agreed

 that a section were in that situation and indeed a lot

 of others said:   "Well I could not have done anything

 about it anyway" even the ones who were further back, but

 there is a little bit of evidence which you do have to

 take into account in assessing this issue, three bits
actually.    First of all you have got to consider the

geography.   Whatever might be said about the view of the

terraces through the tunnel, the view of the turnstile

jjgj from outside Leppings Lane which slopes slightly

downward, I had not noticed that actually until

Mr. McMahon came along and he said:    "It slopes downward

and I thought:    "What is he talking about?" but in fact

he was right, it does slope downward, and therefore

people outside have a relatively clear view of the turnstile

area.
        One has to ask oneself the question whether a

football crowd is so intrinsically different to any

other crowd of people that they are unable to assess the

issue as to whether or not they should stand, move back,

move to one side, and in fact we know lots of people did

actually do that, so they are not intrinsically different.

There may be some who are but I think it is probably fair

to say that they are not intrinsically different.
        Secondly, the argument that no movement was possible

because of the severe crushing has also got to be

examined and there are at least two witnesses and there

may be more, but there at least two witnesses who talk

 about what happened when the   communication about a

 possible kick-off was communicated to people close by.

 The first one was Elizabeth Wilson, she is one of the

 mounted Officers, she was outside further afield.

 She moved in because do you remember she was the one

 with the horse which was supposed to be new and they
                                                            17




did not want it in the crowd but it did not make any

difference, she finished up there anyway.    She said,

entirely incorrectly without authority:     Kick-off will

be postponed" and she said it created "an easing in the

situation" immediately around her which changed when

the roar within the ground was heard and all the previous

situation recurred.




                       Mr. Lloyd was another witness
     Mr. Lloyd was another witness whom we had.     He was

actually within the turnstile area and he said that a rumour

went through the crowd that kick-off would be delayed and

that eased the pressure to a certain extent for a short

period and then the rumour was countermanded, so to speak,

and the whole thing started up again.    There was another

witness who talked about a horse which misbehaved but I

think we can ignore that particular problem.

     The point about it is this:   you have to make up your

mind whether on the evidence it is right that this crowd was

in fact such that it could not have eased back.     The

evidence of nearly all the Officers was that the people at

the back could have eased off, so to speak, and I am talking

about the outside.   However, it is a very important point

because it goes to the issue as to whether or not this crowd

that was there was behaving in a manner which was

unexpected.   Mr. Marshall quite clearly said that you could

always expect lateness, but in addition to the unprecedented

decision to close Leppings Lane he also felt that the total

number who arrived were unprecedented.      In other words, a

larger number of latecomers came than one could reasonably

have expected on the one nand, and that their behaviour with

regard to entry was, as far as he and the South Yorkshire

Police were concerned, unprecedented too.
     I think there is no use beating about the bush.      One

has to grasp this nettle and think about it and sort it out

in your minds.

     You will remember that we heard from at least one

mounted Officer who described the match at Tranmere, I think

Tranmere Rovers, where he described only one or two

turnstiles working, people not getting in until four

o'clock.   In other words, an hour late, or so, and yet no

problems whatsoever.

     Now only did we have him, we also had one witness,

Mr. Grant, who also described problems which he had

experienced at Wembley, if you can remember.   On that

occasion he said two interesting things.   First of all, he

got in without having to show his ticket because the

turnstiles were free-wheeling, and he queued for an hour and

twenty minutes and was twenty minutes late in getting in.

     Like everything else in this account, everything has

got two edges.   On the one hand, those two examples - I

think the Tranmere Rover one was after the event so it may

not be a good example because of that, because people had

been alerted to the situation.   Nevertheless it illustrates

the possibility that you can get large crowds, and this is

what Mr. Marshall was saying and you have to decide whether

you believe him, indeed Mr. Mole said it as well.      He said,

"The mere fact there are large crowds in itself means

nothing.   You can have huge crowds with no problems at all.
                                                                 20



It is what is happening with the crowd and what effect that

is having on the situation."

     Everybody knows that everybody who goes to a football

match wants to be in by three o clock) or whatever time

kick- off is.      Everybody, whether man or woman who goes to

a football match or, indeed, anything you want to go to, you

know if you think you are going to be late you are goin^ to

get niggled and you may get very cross in fact.        You may

even shout.      It depends on you.     However, it does not

follow that everybody need necessarily decide that they are

going to press forward in order to get in on time.        The

problem of not getting in on time is missing part of a

match.      That is a relatively small price to pay as against

injury to others.

     It can also be remedied.         You cannot, of course, see

the match again, but as indeed in any contractual situation

if you feel the other side has not done its bit then you

reclaim your money or you sue for damages, you do whatever

you wish.      We are not in the business of sorting that out

but I merely mention that although one talks about the

problems of not getting people in, the only real problem is

that they are going to be late for a part of a match.

     There was one other witness who gave an interesting

account for the possibility of crushing and that was

Mr. Cully.      He described the fact that if you get a crush
situation in fact some people like that.     It is very

convenient for activities like pick-pocketing.

     Whilst I am on this subject we also heard from a whole

load of witness right at the beginning about people who had

discussed the possibility of getting in.     They said, "Oh,

we can get in."     Do you remember that one group at the

Matilda who said to the young lady, "Come with us, we can

get in."     Mr. Cully, I think, said you can alwaiys get in if

you have not got another ticket.

     We have got to be careful with that because we have

very little evidence as to what actually happened.        There

were one or two who did hear comments about, "I told you we

would get in without tickets."      That was Mr. Murray, I

think, heard something like that.     That is the father of

one of the boys who died.     I think there were one or two

others who heard such comments.

     You may feel that whatever may or may not have been in

the minds of people about whom we heard, the events on the

day probably swallowed up, if I can use that expression,

whatever plans or otherwise anybody might have nad and I

think from a practical point of view you can ignore that as

a feature.
                                                             22




        Up to now I have merely talked about the fact that

    there was crushing and how it was caused, and tried to

    draw your attention to some of the thoughts which you

B   might want to have on this.   The next question of course

    which arises is whether or not the condition out there was

    actually as bad as for instance Mr. Marshall thought.

    There is no doubt whatever, and we don't need to go over

    it in detail, Mr. Marshall was clearly of the opinion that

    if the gates were not opened he would have deaths and

    injuries outside and, in fact, there was at least one chap

    whom we had who hurt his shoulder. I don't consider that

    necessarily a very serious injury but he did hurt m s

    shoulder.    Mr. Marshall said in fact there were 37 people

    who had been hurt.    I am not suggesting for a minute that

    any of those were seriously hurt though there was one lad,

    and I think he is on the video, you can see him being

     passed across, who certainly Inspector Purdy was very

     worried about.   If you remember we went to a bit of pain

     to try and establish that this lad actually recovered

     because we did not want to think that he had been lost, so

     to speak.

          So Inspector Purdy clearly thought that something had

     to be done; Mr. Marshall thought that something had to be

     done; quite a lot of the Officers whose evidence we heard

     - Mr. Creaser, Mr. Mackay, various others (I am not sure

     about Mr. Mackay) - but there were various others who said
action had to be taken otherwise something serious would

go wrong out there.

        They were not the only ones because there were a

substantial number of supporters who took exactly the same

view.     There was a chap called Mr. Atkin.    He said he was

crushed outside the perimeter gates, in fact to such an

extent that he was having difficulty with his breathing.

There was a Mr. Edwards who was panic stricken and

frightened of being crushed.     He was, I think, within the

turnstile area.     Mr. Doyle, whom I might mention again

later on and whose account I thought had some

discrepancies in it, shall we say, but he said his brother

helped lift a lad out.     Mr. Gains thought that people

would get hurt.     Nicola Stewart was frightened in the

turnstile area and in fact she said that people were

actually trying to push back.     Mr. Ball said people were

distressed against the perimeter gates.        Mr. Richards said

people were very distressed in the turnstile area.        Mr.

Anderson was very distressed in the turnstile area, and

particularly his dad.     Stephanie Jones was hurt at the

gate.     In fact, we had a lot of difficulty with Stephanie,

if you can remember.     She was a very, very interesting and

very good witness.     The difficulty we had with her was

trying to work out what time this particular episode of

discomfort arose and precisely where, but in the end she

said it was definitely near the concertina gate "C".        Mr.
                                                            24



Rawlinson, he was not particularly worried about himself

but he was worried about a friend and some older people,

and as I say Inspector Purdy was very worried, and Mr.

Gould overheard a lady say that if something was not done

somebody would die.    That, of course, means nothing in a

way.   We also heard of people who were coming out of the

terrace saying, "It's murder in there".    That is a

colloquial expression and does not necessarily mean too

much but he did go on to say that he accepted that as a

correct comment.

       Richard Thompson, another witness, his view was that

if those gates had not been opened there would have been

more deaths outside than inside.    Who knows?   Do not jump

to that - that is a possibility - the only reason why I

adduce or remind you of these witnesses is because it may

help you to make an assessment as to the reasonableness or

otherwise of requesting the gates to be opened.

       So in a nutshell you have Police Officers, and

particularly Mr. Marshall, who assessed that the situation

was getting critical.    There is no doubt whatever from all

the evidence which you have heard that his requests became

more insistent, and indeed the Control Room described the

last one as a demand and some people described his voice

as being exceedingly agitated, shall we say, or words to

that effect.    There is no doubt that in his mind action

was needed and was needed urgently, and interestingly
Sergeant Higgins, who was on the inside but at Gate A made

exactly the same request two minutes later, and gave

exactly the same reasoning, so you may feel that on

balance the evidence does show that things were pretty

desperate outside the turnstile areas.

     We know that 95 people died on the terraces and we

also know that not a single person died outside the

 turnstile areas.   It is very easy to say well, there you

 are, that must have been the wrong decision because nobody

died there and 95 died inside, but you cannot do that

 because you do not actually know what would have happened

 if the gates had not been opened.      It may be that that is

 right, not a single person would have died.      It may be

 that Mr. Thompson is right, that we would be dealing with

 100, 120.   Who knows?   We don't know and you cannot with

 hindsight try and sort that out.     All you can do is put

 yourself as near as you can into the shoes of the people

 who were there on 15th April and say given that situation

 was that a reasonable thing to do?      Would a reasonably

' skilled Officer have done the same?     All the evidence

 would seem - not all but virtually all the evidence would

 seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open

 the gates was a reasonable one in the circumstances.

      We did explore the possibility as to whether people

 could have been diverted down the roadway, do you

 remember, and whether or not kick-off should be postponed
and I have already dealt with that so I don't want to go

over the kick-off side again, but very briefly, if you

think back to the photographs and the videos and so on you

will remember that there were actually lightweight

barriers blocking that roadway, just past the concertina

gate "C", and my impression of the evidence is that nobody

was actually pressing against this.   There was not a

pressure on those lightweight barriers in that position.

That means, I think, at least two things.   First of all

that you could hold that crowd with lightweight barriers,

provided that you were holding them at a place where they

did not want to go.   It is an important proviso but

nevertheless it is a fact, and indeed this is also

illustrated by the fact that the side roads were blocked

with nothing but lightweight barriers and one Policeman,

and Mrs. Hockenhull - that is the lady whose name I could

not remember, the carpenter - said that when a Policeman

came into her garden he was able to divert the fans to

stop them doing what they had been doing previously.

     So it was possible to use relatively small numbers to

achieve control, provided it was in the right place.     The

control at the perimeter gates, for instance, appeared a

totally different matter and I have already illustrated

and reminded you of some of the evidence there.   It is an

important point because it will reappear when we come to

think very, very briefly, and again we must not waste time
on what did not happen, but just briefly think about what

might have happened if the tunnel had been blocked off

with a lightweight barrier or a Policeman.     Mr. McMahon -

I have jumped a little bit - said one Officer could have

done it, to stand there in this way, and that would have

been it.   To a certain extent, and I will deal with it now

and then I have done it, your view of that will depend

upon whether you equate that tunnel entrance with the

perimeter gates, if I can put it like that, where you

might think that Mr. McMahon might be mistaken, or with

the side road where he might well have been right, and

this is where it is important not to draw the analogy of

the two areas too far, because whereas one could perhaps

justifiably argue that people outside the perimeter gate

were not in the Ground, and therefore that is why they

were pressing forward, certainly once they were in the

concourse area they were within the Ground, and it may

well be that if they had been diverted to a different

route they knew that they were going to get to the viewing

areas, they might have preferred and no doubt some would

have preferred to go down the tunnel, and I have got very

little doubt that some would have gone down.

     We know that is so because again we heard from Mr.

Cully, who had no right to be in the stands but he gave, I

thought, very honest and fair evidence.   You remember he

had gone down the tunnel, didn't like it, back out, up
into the stands, looked down, saw his son, got him to come

out and meet him in the concourse area, saw the concertina

gate "C" opened, realised that there were going to be a

lot of people come in and made a mad dash for the stairs,

and got there just as somebody was trying to close the

gates and he said, "I just pulled them open and went up".

     We also heard not dissimilar accounts from the

friends of Mr. McDonnell, who also decided that the stands

were better and who took the opportunity to go up when

people were not looking.   Unfortunately poor Mr. McDonnell

having got up came down again and we know that

unfortunately he lost his life.

     So things in the concourse area were not all

sweetness and light all the time for all the fans but it

is a matter for you to decide, insofar as it is necessary,

and it may not be terribly necessary because whatever the

rights and wrongs of the success of that operation would

have been the facts of the matter are that no order was

given.   I don't think anybody has suggested that an order

was given to divert fans in 1989.

     Mr. Marshall together with the people outside --     Mr.

Marshall's control was (1) to close Leppings Lane (b) to

seek further assistance, in the main from Mr. Buxton,    (c)

for mounted Officers to come.

                             I don't think Mr. Marshall ...
I do not think Mr. Marshall himself actually requested that
but that was arranged when it was realised that help was
needed and in addition     at least one or two serials were sent
round, namely Sergeant     Higgins, on     the inside        when it wa
realised that some help was needed.      Various other people did
intervene as well with suggestions about postponing kick-off
and so on but Mr. Marshall, having surveyed what he
considered to be a deteriorating situation, decided that the
only thing that could be done would be to request the opening

of the gates.
     He either requested three or four times, probably four
times because the chances are that people heard and they can
remember four and indeed that is more likely.        Indeed, Mr.
Marshall was not quite     sure but he     thought     he    did it fou
times.   Mr. Murray said it came   in      batches      of   two and th
quite possible.    We heard from the Control Room that the
first two requests that came through they were at about 14.47
and 14.48 we know that Gate C opened.      We know the people
outside the ground, in particular Inspector Purdy, thought it
was as a result of the request, the video evidence would seem
to indicate that it was opened as the result of an ejection.
Certainly the Officers who were involved in it, particularly
the Police Officers, took the view that the gate should be
shut again.     The ejection took place and several hundred

people entered.
     I think if Mr. Boardman is right some of these who
entered, entered because it was opportune to do so.          Others
entered because Mr. Purdy and one or two others invited them
                                                              • 30

to go in.    So that opening was a mix, if you like, of people
who should or should not come in.    It does not really matter
very much.    It is only a small number that came in and from a
practical point of view so far as we are concerned, it does
not matter tuppence whether the people came in through Gate C
at 14.48, 14.52 or even to a large extent 14.59, except the
59 ones, if they finished up on the terraces, particularly if
they died and got right through, managed to traverse the area
at considerable speed if you think about it.
        That is the interesting thing about Stephanie Jones
because she was seen outside at 14.54 on a photograph.        In
other words, that was two minutes after Gate C was already
open.     She insists that she was squashed against the gate
before it opened so that the only possibility for that would
be that she went in at 14.59 if her recollection and
allocation of the gate is right.     If she did go through at
14.59 we also have photographs of her by chance - and you
will see them on the compilation tape - outside Gate 3 on the
 terracing side before the matched finished which means that
 she and the two others who lost their lives, her brother and
 his girlfriend, which was very sad, would have traversed the
 whole of that space.    Two of them would have died and one of
 them would have managed to get out.    The other interesting
 thing about her comment on getting out - and I am jumping
 ahead a little bit - was that somebody just said, "Step this
 way, love", and she just walked out.    Yet we know that there
 were many, many others who regrettably were in such a state
 that they could not be got out, which is terribly sad.
     As I say, Superintendent Marshall had taken the view
that the only way to deal with this was to request the gates
to be opened.   Two requests.    Control Room said that they
could see the gate opening and shutting and the evidence from
the Officers, and you will have to assess this, of course, is
that they took it that that had sorted the problem out for
whatever reason.     Of course, it had not, certainly not as far
as Superintendent Marshall was concerned, which is why his
further requests came through.     They came through, as I say,
in a peremptory manner.    Mr. Duckenfield, having been
chivvied along by Mr. Murray, said "Open the gates".      In fact
Gate C was opened.
     The evidence seems to be that the request was in the
plural.   Of course, nobody knew the names.   Mr. Duckenfield
quite clearly said that and indeed, I would not have expected
him to know the number of the gates.     I do not know how many
gates there are around that stadium.    We do not know the
names of any of those.     I think we have heard of one other
gate, Gate 0, to -which there has been a reference but for all
I know there are dozens of other gates round this stadium,
none of which we know anything about.     It may not be
reasonable to think that anybody in the position of Police
Controller should have an encyclopaedic knowledge of the
names and numbers of every single gate on a huge structure
such as a stadium.    Clearly he knew there were gates at
Leppings Lane and he wanted them opened.
     Mr. Bichard and Mr. Goddard, strangely enough, although
they heard the plural, because the camera was focused on Gate
I


                                                                         32
        C, assumed that was the gate in mind and we know, of course,
        that was the gate which was definitely opened before Gate A.
        There is a bit of argument as to when Gate A was precisely
    B   opened but certainly if Mr. Bichard's evidence is to be
        believed then the request for its opening came through
        somewhat earlier than, I must admit, I had initially thought.
        I thought that the request was about a few moments before
        14.58 because that is the time when you see the Officers
        lined up on the video but Mr. Bichard, and indeed everybody
        in the Control Room, tended to say that that request was v^ry
        much nearer to 14.52, in fact about two minutes later, and he
        demonstrated to us on the compilation that he bases this on
        remembering panning across to the gate when the request came
        through and that particular pan, which we did see, I confess
        when I looked at the compilation tape I had totally
        discounted as a significant thing but if Mr. Bichard, PC
        Bichard, is right then the request was at 14.54 or there
        abouts but the opening was some time later because there was
        all this business about, "No, I am not opening it unless you

        get authority".
             That is it.    We will stop for ten or fifteen minutes.
        Is everything all right?    Are you all right?   Good.   Can I
        tell you what I am trying to do?    I am trying to finish the
        recitation or summarising of the evidence which we have dealt
        with in the last three and a half months definitely by lunch­
        time and then this afternoon we are going to go through the
        individual cases.    If we can start earlier than that we will

        but the way we are going, we will not.
                                                                    33
                        (Short Adi ournment)
     We will take the story up with the gates having been
opened and in particular Gate C.     That is the one which we
are most interested in.    The other gates played a part but
for practical purposes what matters is Gate C.       People
entered the concourse area.    I do not have to describe it.
You know it better than I do, I am sure, or at least as well
anyway.    You know, as well as X do, that there is a big
tunnel there with a big sign over it saying "standing".
There is a smaller sign to the right saying "standing" with
quite a wide roadway.     You have been there several times and
I    sure you have noticed that it actually is quite wide.
On the plan particularly and also on the model you do not
appreciate the wideness of it because of the overhang of the
stflnd but you do see it when you are there.      You have got the
little gap in the wall which did not seem to have anything

over it.
     Perhaps I could just say this, both in regard to the
concourse and in regard also to the turnstiles, I have not
mentioned the signing or ticketing or things of that nature.
I think there is not much doubt that there was some degree of
confusion as to where people should go.        In some respects it
    inevitable when you have large crowds. There will always
be some who go to the wrong place and the more people you
have the more of those sums that you have.        It did not help
that the lettering was A, C, B, and it did not help that in
turnstiles A to G you had another B, because you have to have
the A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and that when you got inside the
                                                                34
concourse area you had another B over the tunnel entrance.
It is, of course, quite true that fanswould not normally
expect to have the stud on which the B would be shown but      if
you happened to remember that you were supposed to come
through the B entrance and you come in and see a big B over
the tunnel then it may be that is where you would go.     In
fact, that would tend to take you, if that is right, to take
you towards Enclosure 4 rather than Enclosure 3 because the A
was over the Enclosure 3 side.    That might just have
happened, I do not know, possibly because there does seem to
be some differences in perception by the people who were
within the respective terraces.
     There is one other point whilst Ithink of perception -
I am backtracking a bit and forgive me - and that is that      the
same event can be seen and described in different ways by
different people and I take this simply as an example to show
you because I do not think this is a controversial point but
it is illustrative of how people see things, the same thing,
and describe them differently.    It may possibly help you when
thinking of some of the other things but what I want to draw
your attention to is the activities of the mounted Officers.
     The mounted Officers saw themselves as keeping control
or attempting to keep control and using the horses to create
gaps or wedges, or moving people backwards or forwards, or
whatever they thought was appropriate.    You can have a look
at the videos and decide whether that was in fact what they
were doing.   Whether they were successful or not is another
matter.   Mr. Murray, for instance, and I am only taking these
                                                                    35

    as a few instances, looked at the mounted Officers he saw and
    he said he thought that they were trying to keep order.       That
    fits in with what the Officer would have said.   Mr. Berry had
B   a similar sort of impression.   He thought that they were
    trying to calm the crowd.    There might have been some who
    said that the exact opposite was actually happening because
    there was one chap who said - I think it was Boardman - "The
    Officers were shouting and the people were shouting back or
    vice versa".   So that may not have been quite such a calming
    effect.   Mr. Watson is a mounted Officer and I have described

    to you what he was trying to do.
         Mr. Crawford I think saw the Officers riding
    aggressively into the crowd.     In fact, he was the chap I
    think who said, "The lady Policeman said, 'Don't do it, it
    will make it worse' but nevertheless he went on to ride into
    the crowd".    He I think inferentially at least did not

    approve of the method.
         Mr. Bridson described the gap which was created within
    the turnstile area and behind the perimeter gate which I have
    already mentioned and he described it as being lost because
    of the positioning of the horses.    There are no doubt more I
    could have chosen if I had wanted to but the same sort of
    activity was looked at by different people and seen in a
    slightly different light.    That is one of the big problems
    when taking evidence from anybody because we all see things
    from our own angle and from our particular point of view.

    Anyway back to the concourse.
                                                                   36




          Judging from the video it would appear that the
    entry into the concourse, certainly after the initial
    inrush - I will use that word, not in a critical sense
B   but it seems that is what you would expect, if you open
    a gate you are going to get an inflow - but after that
    it was substantial but-not headlong, it was that there

    were a lot of people coming in.
          The people within the concourse area and particularly
     the gatemen, they did not feel that they could interpose
     themselves into this crowd.     In fact Mr. Beadsley I
     think said he would have done if he had been ordered
     but he did not think that it was safe, in effect.
              That seemed to be the general feeling.   That may
     have been because there were such a lot of people coming
     in as opposed to a concerted rush forward because we
     spent a lot of time trying to elicit whether the people
     were being carried in one direction, whether they had
     space to move to one side and there was one chap, Mr. Dodd,
     who said he was more or less being carried.       There was
    ' one other young man, Mr. MacArthur who just followed
      the crowd.    There were several who followed the crowd
      but he seemed to have got into the stream and he had
      been told "Follow the crowd" and that is what he did.
      in fact he had got a Stand ticket if you remember and
      he finished on the terrace and there were a few like

      that.
               I originally thought that there would not be any
but there were a few but I- am not saying it was a significant
 number and in any case it may well have been balanced
 by all the terrace people who were up in the Stands but

 we don't know.
       Although as I say my impression from the overall

 evidence is that the entry was not violent   in the sense
 that there was a mad rush, nevertheless there were some
 people who appeared certainly to have lost shoes because
 you can't find shoes lying around if they don't come off
 feet, and the ones that I think I am more impressed with
 are the ones near Gate B because Gate C shoes, well I
 don't know, but the Gate B that was out of the way so to
 speak, it was not directly in line with anything really,
 but I would not make too much of it, there were just a
  lot of people who were entering at a much faster rate,
  as I have already explained to you than they would have
  done if they had come in through the turnstiles.   They
  were coming in through the turnstiles as well of course
  so   you had turnstile entry at a fast rate plus a large
- number coming in through Gate C and whether all went down
  the tunnel or not there seems to be very little doubt
  although a substantial number did go down the tunnel
  and if you just judge it from the number of witnesses
  whom we had-who said:   "We went down the tunnel" you will
  realise that virtually all did go down the tunnel.     Some
  of them came back out, not many, but some did but virtually
   all went down the tunnel, so I think evidentially that
      What puzzles me much more is what was going on in
the tunnel because we have heard accounts from people
who came through Gate C which completely, some of them
 said the tunnel was clear:     "I was just able to go through
 it and the exit was clear".     Others said:     "We could see
 people weeing down the side".     Others said:     "There is
 no question that anybody could possibly have stood to

 do that it was so full."
       Mr. McMahon and Mr. Tracey for instance they said

 the tunnel was full and that they had to shuffle down

 and that the exits   were   blocked.
       Mr. Richardson also said that the tunnel was full
 and there was a bit of pushing there.     The other two

 did not imply any pushing.
       Mr. Carroll, I am just      picking out one or two,
 he said:   "The tunnel was packed with people but able
 to walk and there was some slight two-way traffic .
       Mr. Cully seems to have managed to get down the
 tunnel.    He looked down, he did not like what he saw
' on the terraces, he turned round and went out.
        Mr. Lackey for example, he said the tunnel was
  clear and he could see the players on the pitch.
        Mr. H o 11inrake said the tunnel was clear but the

  exit was blocked and he actually said he had to push

  quite hard to get through.
        Mr. T.W. Lloyd, he said halfway down the tunnel
  there was an increase in pressure, he had to walk faster
                                                                 39




    because of the crowd which was coming in from behind
    him and then when he got to the exit he said it was like
    walking into a brick wall, he was pushed forward he says
B   by the pressure from the people behind him.
          Mr. Hewstone he went down the tunnel and he said
    thg exit was blocked, he decided he was not going to
    go in, he just stood there.     He was the chap who saw
    a small group of people make what sounds like a
    fairly forceful entry into the terracing but we don't
    know which side they went into, five or six he said made
    a little run and went through and he also saw somebody
    bring a child out but he said nobody appeared to take
    very much notice of that and then he left the tunnel

    and finished up somewhere else.
          There was Mr. Crawford.     He was actually told not
    to go down the tunnel.   The only man I think or witness
    whom we had who actually said that somebody told him not
    to go down on the day because it was full.     I think it
    was just another fan who said it but he made a personal
     assessment, looked down, decided it was okay and went.

     I don't complain about that.
           So I think the position with regard to the tunnel
     to me is rather confusing.     It may be it differed from
     minute to minute because after all we are talking about
     what, altogether a 12 minute period if you start at
     14.48 or if you start at 14.52 you are talking about an
     eight minute period, so that may be the reason why different

     people saw different aspects of the tunnel.
      The exiting from the' tunnel is also interesting.
There was Mr. Mullin for instance.     I think he said he

"sidled out".
      Mr. Richardson I have already mentioned.     He said

that he did some pushing.
      Mr. Builis gave a very graphic description.     He
said it was like a "stream of lava" that he seemed to

see coming out of the tunnel mouth.
      Mr. Hughes, that is Mr. Grier's friend, Stuart
Thompson's friend, he was sitting on that little wall

 and he said he was knocked off it, off his perch by the

 crowds of people coming in, not "crowds"    numbers I think

 would be a better word, so I find as I say the evidence

 regarding the tunnel, I am not going to say unsatisfactory

 because it is not a question of being satisfactory or

 unsatisfactory, I just find it very difficult to reconcile

 all the accounts which we have had.
       I now want to turn to the terraces themselves.

 You will have noticed that I have managed to speak for
• I don't know how long and I have not referred to a single
  •C' number yet I think or have I?    Anyway, I certainly
  have not referred to very many but I will refer to a
  couple now.   That is because I have not got particularly
  Mr. Russell's skills with regard to the photographs, but
  be that as it may I do want to refer to a couple which
  I found helpful and that is 536 and 537.     They are the
  plans which Miss Goodall prepared where the witnesses
were, the location of plan-s, which in fact I initially
thought would be only of interest but I have found them
very useful because they do actually give you a nice
overview of where people were within the terraces.     They
are not, I was going to say not entirely accurate, that
is not fair, they are entirely accurate I am sure, but
because we followed the convention of always taking the
second position, in one case at least, for example
Mr. Hughes, I have already referred to him.   If you
look for Mr. Hughes you won't find him where I said he
was because that was not his second position, it was
in fact his third, but you will have all the numbers so

if you need to check you will be able to look it up if

it became necessary.

      Now if we look then at the pens and if we have* a

 look at Pen 4 first of all, I think we had around 26
witnesses in that pen, not that many deaths but we did

 have a reasonable number of witnesses.
       If you listened to the people in Pen 3 nearly
 all of them referred to "surges", sometimes one or two
 surges, strong surges.   There were quite a few people in
 Pen 4 who did not refer to surges or where the surges

 were not such a significant feature.
       This is simply an impression which I have got.

 I have got the impression that may be there was a

 difference in the movement within the crowd in those

 two pens.   Whether that is because the barrier did not
break in Pen 4 I don't know, but if that were so then it
can't be the whole explanation because the barrier was
fairly far down and if it had broke it would only have
broken once, whereas we had quite a lot of evidence of

more than that.
         I have tried to look through at some of these
witnesses whom we had and in summary although quite a
lot of witnesses described discomfort at an earlier stage
than what I am now going to tell you, the vast majority
of the witnesses in that pen indicated that they did
not become distressed until the players came on to the
pitch or after and in fact while     I am on that subject
that is exactly the same in Pen 3.     There are a few
exceptions but the vast majority of the witnesses
describe distress where things had gone wrong and some­
thing had to be done after the players came on the

pitch.




                           The difficulty of course
                                                               43




     The difficulty, of course, as you know, has been to try

and pin people down to when it happened and a lot of people,

particularly in their statements, used times.     They said

that it was at this time or that time, but, of course, if

you d o n ’t actually look at your watch you do not know what

time it is.

     Also, and this is one of these illustrations which I

have already given you like Mr. Nicholl.     The responses

depended very often on the form of the questioning so I will

give you one illustration.     Alison Bennett, she came with

her friend David Lowe and some others and she was one of the

ones who had Spion Kop tickets, but that is neither here nor

there, not for what I am going to say now, because there is

no suggestion that she entered improperly.      She presented

her ticket at the turnstile and then she was allowed

through.      Whether she should have been is another matter,

but she was.

     She, in response to some questioning, said that tne pen

was as full as she had ever experienced it at 2.30 and yet

in response to other questions she described the condition

at 14.50 as normal;     14.50 was the time when she said her

friend Julie, who was less experienced, decided to move

away, but she was quite content to stay.      In fact she

started off by saying 14.50, then she said it was as full as

she had ever experienced it at 2.30 and then upon further
                                                                44



examination by somebody further down the line, she said it

was normal up to 14.50 and then it changed suddenly.

     I am not complaining about this girl in any way.         I am

merely using her evidence as an illustration of the

difficulty of being absolutely sure when people are

referring to times.

     Those who were able to locate it to players coming out,
kick-off, of course are better because we know what time

that happened.

     Now as I say, I do not want to spend too much on

individual cases, although I can do, but I do not think it

is going to help us, but there are one or two whom I think

one ought to mention.    Take Robert Knowles, this was the

gentleman who came in through Gate C with two boys.       He was

a very interesting witness I thought in many ways.       He

entered pen 4, having come in through Gate C.          It was

full but he did not think that was in itself unusual but

because he had the boys he wanted to go forward and he

worked his way down to the front.     He says that right at

the front there was a gap near the fencing and he was able

to walk, as I understood his evidence, more or less

unimpeded up to where the radial fence was, or almost up to

the radial fence.     He took up his position there.     Located

the boys.   He was not right against the fence because he

felt he wanted to be back a step or two, and he was
perfectly satisfied with his position when the players were

already on the pitch and he said so quite clearly.

     He then says that just after kick-off things became

tight.      He was not distressed but for some reason which he

was not able to put into words he realised something was not

right.      He got the boys out and put them over the front and

they eventually were put back into pen 5.      He went on to

say that as far as he was concerned up to kick-off in his

position that pen was not abnormal.

     Mr. Spearritt who I think is here and who, of course,

unfortunately lost his lad Adam, as you will no doubt

remember.      He too was in the front only he was nearer to

the gate.      He had not walked, if you like, quite as far as

Mr. Knowles.      He too when he first got down there which was

just before the players came on the pitch, had described

there was a gap down there and that he was able to take up

his position and that he was able to converse with his lad.

Then he remembers the players coming out of the tunnel.

His evidence was very graphic and very moving, as you will

remember.      It was as if a vice came down at that very

point.      Up to that time he had just had time to make some

comment to the lad about Hanson playing - one of the players

- and then that was it.      Things had changed so fast, as far

as he was concerned.      You will remember he told us how he

turned the boy round.      How he saw a Police Officer fairly

close to him.      How he called and said would he please open
                                                               46




the gates.     I think he said, "My lovely boy is dying."      He

said the Officer took no notice of him, or at least appeared

not to take any notice of him.    He thinks Adam by then had

lost consciousness and certainly he did.     He was very, very

ill himself.     He did not see the gate open so we do not

actually know exactly when he lost consciousness, but if the

pathologists are to be believed, it does not take very long

to lose consciousness.

     Within that short period of time there was a completely

dramatic change in that front area.

     We also know that in fact that gate was opened around

14.59.   We can say that with reasonable confidence because

we have photographs of Sergeant Swift at the gate and in

fact on one of those where he has seen somebody has

identified himself as well.      If you remember one of the

witnesses said, "My friend is outside and I am just coming

out, or possibly I am out."

     Yet despite the fact that he was so close to that gate,

whatever evidence there is, and there isn't very much, it

does not look as if Adam actually got out straight away.

You remember we did call PC Harratt.      He was the chap who

said he thought he saw him being passed from pen 4 across

into pen 3 and then out.      I must admit I hadn t realised

that he had not handled him.      I thought he had actually

held him, but he hadn't, he merely saw him.      Although he

felt reasonably confident it was Adam, bearing in mind the
A                                                                       47




    circumstances he could just as easily have been mistaken.

    It is very difficult to say.
B           Mr. Spearritt, of course, felt that if the gate had

    been opened that much sooner when he called, then maybe Adam

    and he would have been able to get out and survive.

    That may be or may not be so, we don’t know, because the

    facts are that they did not get out of that gate straight

    away.      One has to ask the question why was that and the

    answer must surely be that other people were getting out at

    that time and for some reason or other they had got

    displaced.

            Mr. Anderson and Mr. Mullee, they were half way down

    the terrace.      They weren't quite so far forward.     They

    described, particularly Mr. Mullee, I think, that pressure

    started building up at 14.45 with a crush from about 2.50

    onward.      Be careful with the times.     When I give you times

    always treat them with caution.

            He then went on to say that Mr. Anderson, senior, that

    is the gentleman who died, appeared to be really distressed

    when the players were on the field.        He did not actually

    see the players on the field.      Hejust heard the noise           and

    he made the deduction.      He may or     may not be right.

            Geoffrey Bridson, do you remember him?      He was in

     there at 14.40 and he said he was not apprehensive.           At

     14.45 he thought the conditions were about      like 1988.         When

     the players came out he was one of       the few people who
                                                                 .48




actually looked at his watch.         He said he tried to set his

stopwatch.    It is just his habit.       He said he could not do

^   because he could not get his arm up at that time when the

players came out.     He was in     fact able to do it

subsequently, so he must have       been able to manoeuvre himself

and he set his watch and he was, despite that condition,

prepared to watch the match.       In fact he said he was not

worried until kick-off.     He thought the track officers

would have been    aware of the crushing, but if in fact he was

not concerned until kick-off      we know from the photographs

which I have already referred to that at that time activity

was already taking place at the gate.

      Now I have reminded you     how dangerous it is to rely on

the photographs and particularly you remember the shots

which showed the gates being open at .59, .01, .03, .05.

Just because they happen to be open at those times does not

necessarily mean that they were not closed in between, but I

think with regard to gate 4 we do not just have to rely on

the photographs.     We have also got the evidence of

PC Hooson, Sosnowski - do you remember the lady - and

Sergeant Swift and also the witness who had come out and to

whom I have already referred.

      Mr. Perry describes conditions at 14.45 like sardines,

but not significantly bad until the players were on the

field.    He said the crush was quite normal when it

initiated, but it just did not relax.        That was in fact
what a lot of people said.      When they were talking of

surges it was more in pen 3 than in pen 4, they said what

was different was that the surge went forward and never went

back.     That was what converted what would have been an

acceptable forward movement to something which, of course,

was totally unacceptable and which led to tragedy.

        He described Police Officers putting people back into

the pen - Mr. Perry.      He was asked how it happened and he

said that it was more by signals - hand signals - and people

went back.      That, you may feel, is not somebody being

pushed back into the pen.      If I say, "Get off,   and you get

off, that is hardly being pushed back.      He did say that he

saw one Officer tapping somebody's hand at about ten past or

quarter past three.      He also said there weren't many people

on the pitch.      You have seen the photographs and you know

what it was like at ten past and quarter past three.

        I treat with considerable suspicion, and I ought to

tell you, anybody who says that people were being pushed

back into the pens at ten past or quarter past three.

        There is another chap, Mr. Wright, who was up in the

North Stand.      He said at quarter past people were being

pushed back into the pen.     Nothing is impossible, but I find

that difficult to reconcile with the video evidence which we

have seen.
    Taking Mr. Perry again as an example, he very readily

agreed that he was too far back to see what was actually

going on, nor could he hear the conversations.




                 While I am on this
    While I am on this topic I will see if I can find it

- I am skipping into another pen, namely Pen 3 - Mr.

Abbott also, he describes a person being pulled out and

falling back into the pen.     What he said was that the

people who were trying to pull him out did not succeed and

all they got was his jacket.      The jacket came off and he

fell into the pen.   Now, the question that you have to ask

yourselves is this, when people describe people being put

back into the pen, certainly later on, is it possible they

were seeing incidents of this nature?     I am not saying

that is the full explanation but it is a possibility.

     Mr. Latham, that is another witness, he also

describes people being passed to the railings, not being

able to get over them and dropping back, and he went on to

say it is not at all uncommon for people to be passed

forward when they faint in a football situation.     The

point I am trying to make is the same that I was making

with the mounted Officers, you have got to think about the

quality of the evidence and whether or not, in all the

circumstances, to what extent you accept it or not as the

case may be.

     There was another witness who also said that people

were coming over the top, the Police were having none of

it and were putting them back, and when eventually I asked

how many people I think he said that there was one.        When

eventually one explored it a bit further it turned out
that he was on the outside'looking in, he had already got

onto the pitch, and it was not somebody going over the

fence but somebody being apparently pushed back through

the gate.     We have heard an awful lot about the problems

with people at the gate, so his perception, interpretation

and so on, has to be understood and looked at in the light

of all the evidence, not just his.

     While I am on that, there is one     more, Sergeant

Swift.   Do you remember him, the bald headed man?    We pick

on this poor man because he is bald headed and everybody-

can recognise him, but he describes the situation where he

was dealing with people and he said that there was one

chap who was in a panic and kept on coming back and in the

end he said that he had to hit him because he was getting

in his way.     That is hardly what we would normally expect.

It may be perfectly understandable in the circumstances

but to an observer not quite right, and indeed somebody

actually said, I think about Sergeant Swift or certainly

an Officer, he was calling people names, quite rude names,

'but again, I think it was Sergeant Swift, he said it was

at a time when the rescue was in being, there were

photographers there and the crowd were very angry.      Who

 knows who that remark might have been    addressed to, and   in

 any case even if it were addressed to    the fans, the remark

 in that situation is hardly likely to have caused or
contributed to the death of anybody, although it may not

have been a very wise thing to do or say.

     In Pen 4, as I say, my impression is if you look at

the plans that first of all there were far fewer people

who died, secondly some of them I think were further back,

and that is why I think there was a slight difference --

and that may be for the reason which I have said to you,

it may be that people were actually heading towards Pen 4

because of the ---   I don't know that is sheer guesswork

and hardly worth mentioning, but whatever the situation it

was clearly very, very full in that pen.

     There was another chap - I am picking out all the

ones who tended to say things were worse early because it

is important that we don't overlook those - and that was

Mr. Langley.   He said that distress was at 2.40 but he

linked it to when people were climbing up into the stands.

Now, we c a n ’t be absolutely sure what time people began to

climb into the stands because of course, as you know, the

cameras did not follow that scene the whole time - I wish

'they had - there is a gap so we don't know, but he did

look at at least one exhibit, C344, which is timed at

around that time, and he agreed that that was not what he

was describing as the condition in which he was in.     In

fact, it was Mr. Langley who referred to the Officer,

Sergeant Swift, swearing at somebody and I have already

dealt with that.
     I think that gives you a reminder and a summary of

the sort of situation and what it was like in Pen 4, and

there were, of course, others.   There was Mr. Gray.   I

will just mention him because he said that he felt the

surge but again he associated it with players being on the

pitch and he was one of the people who subsequently tried

to resuscitate John McBrien but not within the pen.    I

could give you plenty of other people who were there, as X

say there were a lot, but I think you have got the

picture.

     Pen 3, we had many, many more witnesses in Pen 3.

That was partly because there were many, many more deaths.

In fact, not partly, mainly because of that, and on the

whole as I say the position is exactly the same.     If you

take - I think there were about 60 of them in this pen -

the vast majority place discomfort, not discomfort,

distress when the players come onto the pitch or later.       I

am not talking about some who said that they were squashed

and in discomfort but nearly all of those who said that

-was not --   they were quite prepared to put up with it.

It was something which they had experienced before, quite

often it would settle at kick-off, and it happened at big

matches particularly if you were in that area.

     So we have got to draw a very clear distinction

between those two features and it is exceedingly important

because it goes to one of the root questions which you
 have to decide, namely at what point could - assuming

 somebody had looked at the terrace - could anybody have

 realistically noted that there was serious overcrowding

 with the terrace, and if you accept -- and as I say

 questions of fact are entirely for you, when you go in

 there you can say, "That's rubbish, we know what these

 witnesses said", but if you accept that I have summed the

 evidence of the witnesses in the pen correctly, then the

 distressing situation did not occur until the players came

 out onto the pitch or later, or from there onward.

      I have already mentioned Stephanie and the fact of

 her apparent relatively fast traversing of the pen and

 there were several other people who did the same.     Mr.

 Carroll, he describes the situation at kick-off, like

 Anfield on a full Kop.     He did actually look for a safer

 place, he said, but all he wanted to do was get in front

 of a barrier.   Mr. Lackey, he was the gentleman who cane

 on the train without a ticket actually and who was

 surprised that nobody had searched him, but of course he

- was on a football special and Mr. France told us that they

 did not see any point in searching that particular crowd

 because they all looked and were indeed exceedingly well

 behaved and perfectly proper in every sense of the word.

 He said he felt safe at kick-off, it was not any worse

 than on other occasions.     He remembers people shouting; he

 remembers two openings of the gate; and he also remembers
Police shouting for people to go back.      He also

recollects, as indeed one or two others in Pen 3, people

coining over the tops of people's heads towards the front,

and he says that the people coining over the     top, - this is

not a quotation but the sense was that      they had the

strength to do it.     There was somebody   else who made a

very telling remark, that the ones who      were not shouting

were the ones who were in trouble.     I think that was Mr.

Latham - I am pretty sure it was Mr. Latham.

       You heard from Anthony Grier and Simon Hughes.      They

were very interesting witnesses.     They were friends of

Stuart Thompson.     They were the ones who were climbing up

on the barrier and enjoying themselves.     I say nothing

more about that, it was a lovely afternoon and it was an

exciting match.    Anthony said that up to kick-off it

appeared that he was quite content with the situation.        He

was spun round at kick-off but he was quite prepared to

settle down to watch the match at that time.      He did go on

to say that for a time he was set as if in concrete, even

-though he was fairly far back.    It then eased off, and he

was an interesting witness because what he did, he then

went forward, could see the scene, that there were

problems, decided very rightly not to go towards the front

to get out, decided to go backward which I approve of, so

to speak - not that it matters whether I approve of it or

not.    The thing that I found interesting about him was
 that first of all he said that when he was asked by a

 Police Constable, and a Police Constable must of course by

 then already have been within the pen, whatever time that

 might have been, to leave he refused, and he decided that

 he would rather go up into the stands because he did not

 want to miss the match.     His explanation was, "If I go now

 I won't be let back in".

      Now, that was his perception of the situation and he

 was within that very pen.     The match must have ceased by

 then because we know that no Police Officer got in - at

 least, when I say we know, there is no evidence that we

 have heard that any Police Officer was within the terrace

 before the match finished.     Sergeant Morgan was one of the

 earliest and although he felt he got in quite quickly,

 there is visual evidence which shows him on the playing

 area at 9-minutes-past.     He thought he was much faster

 than in fact he was but I expect Mr. Russell found the

 photograph in which he is shown, so he must have got into

 the terrace after that and yet this lad still wanted to

-s tay.




                                Quite a lot of the people
Quite a lot of people got pulled up into the stand, I do not
know why, just convenient.     There were some like Mr. Twidale
who told us that they were helping people up into the stand
and people did not want to go up into Pen 2.       The gate was
there where he was.     It was quite close and visible and for
some reason they still would not go.       So you had some people
who, even within the pen and even relatively late in the day,
had not appreciated the enormity of the situation which was
developing in front of their very eyes.
        Of course, they were not responsible for the people cr
anything like that and I am not in any way wishing to pick on
this lad or indeed any of the others and say, "It is their
fault".     I am not saying that at all.   What I am saying is
that when you think about the evidence you must realise how
difficult it is for people within that area not to have
appreciated what was going on and late in the day.       He was an
honest witness and a very important witness for us because he
confirms what some of the Officers say, namely that when they
came in they had some difficulty in persuading people to

move.
        His friend, Simon Hughes, did not find it quite as
comfortable as Mr. Grier.     He was the one who was sitting on
the perch whom I have already mentioned who got knocked off
and who on this plan, C.536, you will find not on the perch
but somewhere else.     Shall we stop until half past?   We will
do another half hour and then we will stop for lunch.
Somebody has got to remind me because I do not look at my
watch and the time just flies.
                                                                       59
                        (Short Adjournment)
    Again, as I say, I have told you of a good number and I
am not going to refer to them all by name because you have
heard the evidence.     I will just pick two or three more just
as samples and as reminders.    One is Gary Oyitch.     He was the
friend of Marie McCabe and Inger Shah and he was right at the
front if you recollect.    He remember the players being
announced.   That is not the same as the players coming out.
He remembered discussing it with Inger.       From then onwards
there was a tight crush.
     The other interesting thing he said was the surges.          He
described three surges.    Do you remember that?     That is why I
remind you about him.     He said the first surge he got up on
to the little wall and a fan behind him told him to get off.
At that point things may not have been quite as dramatic as
they obviously became.     The second surge he got off on his
own but there was a third surge and it never relaxed.       He
then lost consciousness and was rescued fortunately.       He
remembered, he said, a Policeman patting his face through the
wiring but poor Inger and Marie, of course, not only did they
lose their lives but they had the misfortune of being
photographed at great length because they were right at the

front.
     Mr. Watson had been to a League match in January and on
that occasion he remembered that there was a diversion at the
tunnel and he felt at 2.20/2.25 the crowd was large and he
commented to his friends that the Police would probably be
taking action quite soon to divert fans.       He did go on to say
                                                                  60

that things did not really become tense until the players
came out.    He also said it had not entered his head to leave
the pen.    He described people being lifted up between 14.50
and 3 o'clock but he said it had not occurred to him to leave
the pen at that time.     Be very cautious with timing.   This is
a time.     I am not saying it is wrong but I am just advising

you to be cautious.
     Mr. Duckworth was near the front as well.     He was next
to Mr. Baron.     He was the gentleman who received the oxygen.
Mr. Gillam came along and gave it to him.     It is an event
which we can easily remember. He recollects a beach ball
being knocked about and there was some surging then but he
was not particularly worried.     Interestingly he said he saw
two girls who were crying and they were taken out by the
Police and after that two or three other people were not
allowed out.     He went on to say in his view the Police could
not realise quite what the situation was that was going on

within the pen.
     He remembers the gate, because he was quite near the
gate, opening between the players coming out and kick-off.
We will come back to the gates in a moment.     He also
remembers that people were coming out of the gate initially
under their own steam and he made the interesting comment
that opening that gate actually created more problems so far
as he was concerned because people were coming towards him
though he did agree, in his position, the only way out would

have been forward.
t

                                                                       ■    61
              Mr. Southgate thought that the pen was quite full
         between 2.30 and 2.45    It was full at 2.50 and from 2.55
         onwards it was too full.     He remembers a surge at around
    Bj   kick-off time he thought, possibly around kick-off time, and
         that was when his friend, Philip Hammond, was unfortunately
         swept away.   Philip was another very young lad who
         unfortunately died.
              Mr. Glover went with his brother and he was actually out
         of the pen at 15.02.    That is a correct time from 15.03 on
         the photograph.   So he was out quite early and he could see
         his brother which made his account so poignant and so sad
         because he could see him.    He was in the same position as
         everybody else who was outside.    They could not get in.     He
         remembers coming out in what he described as the second
         opening of the little Gate 3.     He also remembers that people
         were calling out for help and he also recollected that there
         was an Officer there and he appeared to be using his radio
         and appeared to be asking for instructions.
              Mr. Ball was there with his son Kester and he remembers
         the players being on the pitch and that it was very tight.
         He said, "It solidified at kick-off".     He feared for his
         life. As it happens, he thought his son would be      okay
         because he was a tall lad.     Unfortunately he proved to be in
         error.   Mr. Horrocks was there with his brother, who also
         lost his life, and his friend Nicholas Stewart.     He said
         again the players were on the pitch and it was not too bad.
         He said it was like Anfield and he expected it to settle.          He
         said he was breathless but he said he had been in that
                                                                   62
situation before and he did not panic.       Of course, we know
how bad it was because his brother died.
     Mr. Smith said he entered at 14.30 to 14.35 and he
thought at that time the pen was fuller than he would have
expected.     You can contrast this actually with a chap called
Mr. A. Brown who at 2.25 - and again be careful with the
times - said he expected more people to be in the pen than
there were.     So one chap says it is not full enough and the
other chap says it is fuller than it ought to be.      I think
Mr. Smith placed his distress time at 2.45 to 2.50 but he did
see the beach ball at which time it was being patted about
and we know what time that was because we have got it on the

video.
     Mr. Skarratt was another gentleman at the back.       He was
a Fire Officer.     He came near the end.    He was a Liverpool
supporter.     He just happened to be a fireman and he entered
he said after the match started.     He was able to move forward
at that point.     It was not comfortable.    He took a few paces
in and then went back towards the little wall at the back and
then he started helping people up into the stands.        He saw
Officers within the terrace at the back within three to five
minutes of taking up that position but again be careful with
timing.     It is very risky to say, "They must have been in
before the match finished" because you could interpret that
as meaning that but apart from this there is no evidence at
all that that actually happened.     I am not saying they were
particularly late either.     He also said he could see people
being pushed back.     It was difficult to make out what he
I


                                                                         63
        actually meant, whether it was signalling, whether it was
        pushing or whether it was touching of hands.
             I will just mention one other person in this group and
    £   that was Mr. Fearns who deals with Carl Lewis.     He was
        adamant that there was a big surge before the players came on
        to the pitch but he does say until 14.45 or so      everything
        seemed to be okay.     Healso said that he remembers the little
        gate opening momentarily before the surge but no one got out
        and the Police closed it.
             Interestingly enough, although the timing may not be
        right, you will remember I read the statement of PC Smith, he
        does actually refer toan opening where nobody got out and he
        closed the gate and sowhether this is the one or not I do
        not really know.     The opening of these gates are not easy, as
        I am sure you will appreciate.    You will also remember that
        this was the witness who told us that poor Carl Lewis did not
        like the big crowds and had gone away to see whether he could
        swap his ticket so that he would not have to come on the
        terracing.   For reasons which I do not entirely understand he
        said that they went actually deliberately into the centre
        pens because that is where they were going to meet with Paul
        if he did not manage to do a swap.    Youngsters will do and
        agree things which are sometimes a little bit inexplicable,
        at least to people like me.
             Now I want to turn for a few minutes to the gates.     Tliat
        is basically all I want to tell you about what people said
        within the pens.     In a nutshell, the crucial thing to
        understand is that there were some who appeared not to be
(

    A
                                                                            64
        distressed at all throughout all of this.     It is strange but
        they are isolated and do not make too much of that.       There
        were some who were obviously distressed a little bit earlier
    B   than others.      There was one other group I forgot to mention
        and I will come back to that.    The majority appeared to be
        distressed around the time when the players came out or a
        little bit thereafter.
             I wanted     to just mention, because we spent a      lot oftime
        and correctly,     on the Hicks girls in particular. I just wish
        to mention three of the witnesses who     were there.There was
        Mr. P. Hand.     He says that he saw oneof the girls     who
        appeared to him to have fainted and this was before the
        players came out but she seemed to revive.     He then said that
        they tried to     call to the Police to get the girls      out but in
        fact they didnot want to go.    Then he describes,     like a lot
        of other people, this big surge which came after the players
        came out and which did not go back.
             There were two friends, Mr. Fortune and Mr. Rex, and
        they are the ones who came from Bristol.     We went through
        them a little bit more briskly because I did not want to
        bring them back all that way.    I think we got everything we
        needed from them.    Mr. Fortune confirmed that he saw the
        beach ball and at that time there wasno problems.       There was
        a tightness when the players came outjust like everybody but
        he had noticed that one of the Hicks girls, he had seen her a
        bit earlier, she appeared to have been crying and that they,
        Mr. Fortune and Mr. Rex, had actually moved.     If you remember
        they had been in the pen behind the goal and there was a lot
I


                                                                         65
         of surging and buffeting which they did not like and they
         moved over towards the right in order to get into what was a
         quieter spot.   I had always thought Pens 3 and 4 were behind
    BI   the goal but clearly I was wrong because within the pens
         there are areas which are behind the goal as opposed to areas
         a bit more to one side.   So he had moved to one side and so
         had the girls and, as I understood it, they were actually
         looking for quieter areas, if I can use that term, within the
         centre enclosures.   Mr. Rex said at about quarter to, 14.45,
         he noticed that one of the girls, he thought the older one,
         was holding up her younger sister.   She looked either as if
         he she had fainted or was distressed.   Then he says that the
         crush was severe just before the players came out.




                                         /In addition to all....
      In addition to all the people in the pens we also
had a look at these from within the ground but from
outside, you know we had got people looking in and I
am not again, for the same reason, taking you through
every one but the first one we had was Mr. Wright.     Do
you remember he was the chap in the, actually I said
the North Terrace, he wasn't, he was in the North-West
ipgj-^ce in the cor ner,   almost opposite the Police Control
Box in exactly the same spot, and his evidence was that
he got up; that the-match was in play; that he looked
at the terrace centre pens and said:     "Wish I was there -
      At the time I thought to myself:     "Well so be it"
but the more I think about it the more I wonder about
his timing because the evidence which we have gleaned
from others is that at 2 or 3-minutes-past, which is
when he said it was, there was already a lot of activity
both at the gates, the perimeter fence, and on the
perimeter track, so it may be that he was actually earlier.
      He is another one of these witnesses who said he
.saw people being pushed back at quarter-past and that
is the other reason why I am a little bit more doubtful
about his timings but I am not doubtful about what he
felt he saw, it is just a question of when he felt he

would have liked to have been there.
      The interesting point about him is of course that
he is looking at the terrace from almost the same spot
 as the Police Control Box, in fact the point where most
                                                               67




of these photographs were which we have spent ages looking
at, 3 - 6A and that series, and quite correctly it was
pointed out he had no responsibility for monitoring.    It
was not his task to make assessments, but he did make the
assessment that as far as he was concerned he would have
baai quite content to have gone into that crowd at the point

in time when he assessed it.
      Mr. Devonside looked in.    His son of course was lost
and I was quite impressed with Mr. Devonside's evidence
because I thought it came over exactly as it had been.
He had gone to enjoy the match.    He wanted to be there,
I think the words he used was to "savour the atmosphere"
and by and large he did not say "I saw disaster staring
me in the face" at that particular point.    He said:   "It
looked a bit tight" but he paid no particular attention
but when kick-off occurred he said something to the effect
as “if all hell had broken loose".    He did not quite use
 those words but that was I think the sense and people were
 being pulled out and people were coming out.   So that

 was Mr. Devonside from the North Stand.
       We have heard from Mr. Hamilton who was in the
 North Stand but who actually saw nothing.   That was
 significant.   He did not notice anything until after the

 match had stopped.
       We heard from Mr. and Mrs. Steele who were up in
 the West Stand.   Mr. Steele was sitting down and it is
 for you to decide how much one can actually see sitting
 down because you have been round, but Mrs. Steele told
us quite clearly that she was standing up and of course

standing up you do get a better view than sitting down.

My recollection of Mrs. Steele's evidence is that she

really became alerted to the problem at around the sort of

time which I have been discussing and she also refers to

somebody who was pulled out and who came in and said:

■Ijt is murder down there" or words to that effect/ but

interestingly he then went and sat down.        Now whether

that means that it was murder down there, which it was,

no it wasn't, I mustn't use that word, people died so

he was right in saying it was absolutely dreadful but

whether he was just using a colloquial expression

which we all -tend to do when we say things are bad, but

he had not appreciated quite how bad it was because his

next action was to go and find himself a seat to sit down.

      I have mentioned Inspector Bullis already.        He

looked dbwi and he   saw   this "river" as he called it, of

people.   It is interesting because he said he looked

down at about quarter-to; everything seemed okay; he was

then distracted by other events on the terrace; he then

looked again, could see that something was not right;

tried the radio; signalled to the Track Officers; left

the scene to go down and go in through the back.

       We then move round and we come to Dr. Flenley and

Mr. Hicks.
       Dr. Flenley - and these were very close to the

Police Control Box - Dr. Flenley's evidence, his main

concern was not the terrace, his main concern was the
Stand.    He said he was worried about the Stand collapsing
because so many people were going into it.      He did think
the terrace was crowded and at one point he felt that he
had a better view because he was further back, do you
remember, but he then did agree that people nearer to the
terrace, I am not talking about necessarily people in
Pen 3 but those in Pen 2, would have had exactly the same
view at least of the people being pulled up and you will
also remember, I have also reminded you what Mr. Goodman
said, what his assessment was of some of the people who
had been pulled up, but certainly he appreciated that

the terraces were crowded.
         Mr. Hicks was very very close to him actually.    I

think that is another one of those coincidences which

surrounded if you like Mr. Hicks, because we did not

actually know Dr. Flenley until after the event.

         Mr. Hicks of course has had a very heavy burden
because not only did he lose two daughters; not only did
he actually find them on the pitch, but in addition of
 course he has also been very active with the other
 families    and so he has no doubt shared some of their
 burdens and griefs and I am very conscious of this, but
 it is only right to   say   I am a little bit worried about
 his timings because the spread of his timings was from
 2.35 which was the earliest time that I have been able
 to find him mentioned and which he in fact mentioned at
 this Inquest, to 6-minutes-past which was the time that
he gave in the first statement he made on the night of

the 15th April 1989.
      Now of course Mr. Hicks quite rightly explained to

you that on that night he had had a pretty hard day,

and I think that is an understatement, but nevertheless

we have done in many cases referred people to their

statements on the basis of the nearer the event the more

likely it is to be accurate and also we have to bear in

mind when that statement was given nobody knew, at least

I did not know that the match had finished at 6-mmutes-past.

It may be this was known to people who were at the ground,

I don't know.   It may be that Mr. Hicks did know that, I

don't know, but it certainly was not as prominent in our

minds, in my mind, because we only found out later when

we started reviewing the videos and so on.
      He did explain to us that his best estimate he

 thought was what he gave to Lord Justice Taylor when

 he sat down later on and tried to work it out and I think,

 if I remember rightly, that was about 10-to, or thereabouts.

       The other thing is Mr. Hicks gave very graphic

 descriptions of people he could see distressed, parti­

 cularly an elderly gentleman in grey, I think.   He also

 told us when he eventually left his position, he was

 going towards the pen and then he saw his daughter being

 taken across and he back-tracked and went out through

 the little gate.
       It is very difficult to know because we have seen
plenty of witnesses who had great difficulty with rememberinc
the exact points in time, but you will have to decide
whether in fact Mr. Hicks saw that gentleman whom he
describes from the position where he was, which is what
he said, or whether perhaps bearing in mind that those
pens were full of people, not as full as the centre pens
but they still had, we know that the strip along Pen 2
alongside Pen 3 was 0.5 per metre, five people in 10 square
metres which was the capacity loading.   You will have to

make up your mind about that.
      In fact it is right to say that Mr. Hicks is the

man who gives the earliest time, as I have already

indicated, of anybody for serious distress.

      We heard from Mr. Motson.   He was up on top of the
South Stand and the fascinating thing about him is he
spotted that there was something unusual but what he
spotted was the discrepancy between the outer and the
centre pens and what he noted was that the outer pens
were empty.    He did not notice that the inner pens were
overcrowded.   What he wanted was that all of them should
 look like Pens 3 and 4 and that is why he would not refer
 to "full capacity".   That is a very important point
because if that is right, if that is what they should
 have looked like, then to another observer they may also

 not have looked overcrowded.
       Mr. Curry who was in the same sort of location

 but lower down, he says that when he sat down he got
his binoculars out. and had a look and remember we got a
pair to try and match so that you could have a look.
He said that he had spotted, I think he said at about
quarter-to, quite early in fact, that a corner, or the
part of Pen 3 looked crowded, he could see that the
people were looking behind them and he made a comment
to the man next to him, he said:   "I think there are
going to be problems over there" or words to that effect.
      He went on to say that things did seem to take
a sudden turn for the worse when the players came out
and he also looked at several photographs and at the sort
of time which he mentioned and he agreed that those photo­
graphs did not appear to give the same impact that he had
seen but he qualified it by saying he was not looking at
that part of the pen, he had been looking at the corner
next to Pen 2, that little   triangle near the front.
      There is a witness who did notice what he considered

to be some problems at a relatively early stage in the

proceedings and certainly in a particularly localised

area but he also noticed that there was some dramatic

change at about the time the players came out.




                        We heard from Mr. Wells
                                                                 73



     We have heard from Mr. Wells and Mr. Gillam and

Mr. Eason.   They were at the Spion Kop, at the two corners,

and they were looking across.       We also heard from another

gentleman who was an ambulanceman who was in the catering

department, earning some extra money I suppose.      He looked

down at about kick-off time.      He went in and said, "Don't

bother to hurry.      They will have to postpone the match,"

because he could see the people coming over.      It was only

subsequently that he realised there were injuries.      He

said, "I saw them carrying injuries."      He used an unusual

turn of phrase.

     Mr. Eason, who was the ambulance man, and again who had

no particular duties - I am not suggesting that for a moment

- but he noticed things around kick-off time and he walked

down to have a look to see what was going on.      He went down

to the gate 4 area.      When he got down there some time after

he still - and now I think the situation changes because he

is now going down as a man to look whether help is needed.

After all, he is ambulance chap.      He can assess injuries.

He made a very interesting observation that even when he got

down there, there were people on the pitch and they were

walking about, he did not see any serious problems.      When

he was challenged with one of the photographs he said,       I

don't see anybody particularly seriously injured walking

around out there."      Of course it all changed within a very,

very short time.      I think it is significant, and one of the
                                                               74



witnesses whose evidence you do have to take into account,

that here was a man, and Gillam and Wells to a certain

extent as well, who had injury, if you like, in mind, as

opposed to anything else and their evidence seems to be that

it wasn't immediately apparent to them and even with

Mr. Eason, when he got relatively close.      Of course it did

not take long after that for him to twig but we are only

talking in many cases about minutes or maybe even seconds.

You must remember that.      All this time sequence is very,

very quick.   Look how long it is taking me to do this

summing-up.   I thought I would almost have finished by now

so time is a difficult thing to estimate.

     Lunch time now though.      I can estimate that!

                   (Luncheon adjournment)

     I want to turn for a few minutes to the gaces

themselves, gates 3 and 4.

     Before I deal with the gates I have to mention the

barrier, this barrier in pen 3, I had overlooked that.         1

did try and call a number of witnesses who appeared to have

been close to the barrier which broke.      You may think that

if you compare the two pens, as I have already said the

barrier that broke is the one very big difference between

pen 3 and pen 4 and also the barrier which was removed up at

the top, 144, was another difference.
     My personal feeling was that that barrier, although it

may have made the inflow of people that much easier into the

terracing, indirectly may perhaps have led to the barrier

124.A breaking.    I am not entirely convinced - I would have

thought it was pretty tenuous because the most direct

barrier which should have broken was the one immediately

below it - if you remember there was a very long stretch

down - and that one did not break, fortunately.        It seems

to me that the breaking of the barrier almost certainly must

have - even from the point of view of "how" - played a very

important part in the disparity in the number of deaths

between pens 3 and 4.      Also if you consider the

distribution of the people who died you will recollect that

a very substantial number were in the vicinity of that

barrier that broke and in the vicinity of the gates, so

there is   a double aspect there.    Also, if   you thinkback to

what Mr.   Greenwood said, he said it     looked      to him asif

there was a longitudinal    cut across    the pen;    peoplein

front of   that barrier in a terrible     state,      people further

back, in his judgment, not so bad.

     The problem, of course, is trying to decide when the

barrier broke.    It has proved to be a very difficult

problem to sort out.    I think at one point one might have

felt it must have been when Beardsley hit the crossbar which

would have put it at about five minutes past.        However, I
think in the light of some of the evidence it would be

difficult to support that point of view.

     If I can just remind you of one or two of the people

who said something.     Mr. Moore said he was not sure but it

was sometime after kick-off.     I am just summarising it, of

course.   Mr. R. J. Thomas said he felt a sudden forward

movement and he was against a barrier.      He identified

himself on the pitch at four minutes past three.      If in

fact the barrier broke and he was against it as it would

sound, then it must have broken before Beardsley hit the

crossbar because you cannot be on the pitch and against the

barrier at one and the same time.     Of course, this assumes

that his identification is correct.

     Mr. Gains,   the young man who spoke so fast, he could

not remember the kick-off but he does remember that tne

barrier went so he is not much use to us from the point o:

view of establishing a time.

     Mr. Hollinrake described how the barrier went but did

not help us much on timing.     He recollects that it "gave"

initially, and then it suddenly went.     He fell forward and

presumably so did others as well.

     Just as an aside, it is, of course, possible that this

sudden "give", and people losing their balance and going

forward, may have been part and parcel of the surge that

went forward and did not come back.      It cannot be the whole

explanation because there were also people in pen 4 who
talked about surges coming forward and not coming back like

Mr. Knowles, so it cannot be the explanation but it may have

been a contributory factor to the people who were further

forward.

     Mr. Smith similarly described the barriers giving

slowly and then collapsing totally.     That fits in very well

with what Dr. Nicholson was saying about complicated stuff,

if you remember, that if you have a bow on that bar, he said

the legs have got to be standing.     You cannot bend the bar

unless you have got the supports and it is only when - you

know, once you put the bend in, the barrier must have gone

after that.

     Mr. Abbott identified himself on the terrace at two

minutes past three.   At the point when he did that he said

he was not against the barrier, but he was making his way

towards it.   He thought he got to it within the next minute

or so and the exhibit number on which this is seen is C.440.

     Mr. Griffiths who was a witness who had come with John

McBrien if you can remember, he also was near the barrier.

He associated it with Mr. Beardsley's shot, but

Mr. Griffiths' timing evidence I think left quite a bit to

be desired.   Again I make no criticism of this.      I know it

sounds as if I am being critical.     I am not.    If I had

been in their shoes I would not have known A from B,

certainly not as far as time is concerned, I'm sure.
     If you then look at these people.   We have got two

witnesses who identify themselves on photographs with times.

One is Abbott at 15.02 in the pen but not against the

barrier.   The other one is Thomas on the pitch at 15.04.




               If those identifications are
If those identifications are right and we are satisfied

with the timings, then the barrier must have gone in that

two minute time interval, in other words sometime into the

match but before the end and before Mr. Beardsley hit the

crossbar.   It is important because it fixes, I think, a

time at which the situation in Pen 3 at least probably

became totally irretrievable because of the inevitable

collapse of people forward onto each other and the

compaction which, from all the evidence which we have

heard, then occurred, and it also helps us to a certain

extent with regard to sorting out the pathological

evidence.   So that, I think, is all that I need to tell

you - all that I can tell you - with regard to the

barrier.    I have already dealt with other aspects relating

to it earlier.

       I now want to talk briefly on the gates and we will

start with Gate 3.    We were fortunate with regard to this

gate because we actually were able to find about four

people who appeared to have been right in or at the gate,

namely Mr. Sephton, Mr. Singleton, young Mr. Case and his

dad.    You will remember that basically the accounts were

all very, very similar, that they had taken up their

positions early, they had not moved from it.    Mr.

 Singleton said that everything was okay until 14.50 or

 thereabouts, then pushing began.   It got really bad at

 kick-off - it fits in with the accounts of nearly
                                                              80




everybody slss ~ he was worried but not for his life, he

said, just before the gate sprung open.      The upshot of the

accounts, particularly when you couple it with the

accounts of P.C. Cooper and P.C. Taylor was that the gate

sprang open as opposed to being opened.      The design of the

lock, it was not designed to spring open, it just happened

to do it because as Dr. Eastwood explained to us it was a

specially designed quick release lock, and if you get the

angle slightly wrong it will open perhaps a little bit

quicker than you planned, but that was a good thing as it

happens in this particular instance.

     On the first opening the Police Officers said that

more than two or three came out and they quite clearly

said that when they came out they caught      them, so to

speak, and put them back, and that is exactly what the

lads said as well except that they did not remember

anybody coming out other than themselves.      The evidence

from the Police Officers was that there was no complaint

made about being put in and the Police Officers said that

they did 'not have any particular difficulty getting them

back, so to speak, and shutting the gate.      The lads agreed

 that there was no complaint but they did say that it was a

 bit more   difficult to get them back in.

      The   second thing that was said, and   this is why I

 think Gate 3 is relatively straightforward, the gate then

 opened a second time and although there was slight
variation, was it 10 seconds, 20 seconds, 30 seconds, a

minute, the substance of the evidence was that there was a

very short time interval between the two openings and

furthermore none of them said that the gate was shut after

that time.    It is true that they were walking away but

they were asked as to whether they looked back - I am

talking about the lads now, and also Mr. Case senior.      I

wanted Mr. Case to come because his son had referred to

the fact that when they came back in he suddenly turned to

his dad and said, "I have got to get out of here, dad", or

words to that effect, and he tried to speak to the Officer

on the pitch.    The Officer, the son said, said something

like, "It will sort itself out", and he also was observed

to be using his radio.

        My understanding of what Mr. Smith said, when we

read his statement, was that basically he does not

actually dispute the evidence which we have heard from the

lads.    The only substantial difference is that he thought

that the gate had opened three times and the lads only

remembered it as twice.

        The one person's evidence that I did find very

difficult to reconcile was Sergeant Green.     I knew that it

was difficult to reconcile his evidence but I thought it

was right that you should hear it.     He was the chap who

said he was in the gym - not Sergeant Swift's team - and

he was told to go, in fact he said to go to Gate A at
Leppings Lane and told to go across the pitch because it

was quicker.   I find that a bit strange because if you

look at the plan, to get to Gate A from the gym, it cannot

be the quickest way to go across the outside because you

have to come all the way round to the South Stand and then

back across past Gate C, past Gate B and round to Gate A,

and in addition to this his evidence was that when he got

to Gate C --   he describes walking round and the states of

the pens.   He says that Pen 6 was sparsely populated, Pen

4 he didn't notice anything particularly distressful about

the fans, then he got to Gates 4 and 5 and I suppose the

most interesting thing about his evidence is that he said

he met P.C. Illingworth.   As he was coming down P.C.

Illingworth was going the opposite way, and he did not

speak to him because it appeared to him that he was

preoccupied.   He then got to Gate 3 and having looked at

it decided it ought to be opened, and in fact opened it

and people came out.   He said in his view the people who

came out at the initial stage were not seriously injured,

though one of the girls was distressed.

     The difficulty is fitting it in with the evidence of

the other Officers, and there were three of them.     They

were all part of Sergeant Swift's serial and they had all

walked down past the North Stand.   Sergeant Swift stopped

at the corner and they were spacing themselves out along

the perimeter track.   They all, of course, had to walk
                                                          83



past Pen 4 and none of these three, Cooper, Taylor or

Packer stopped at that location.   They got to Gate 3 and

P.C. Cooper describes how the gate burst open and how the

fans came out but were put back which fits in precisely

with what the lads said, and then he said within 30

seconds of this he could see that the fans were

distressed, the gate was opened - the lads said it burst

open - and people came out initially on their own and then

of course we know that after that things got very, very

much more difficult at that gate, and he confirms that he

was not told to do it, he just did it on his own

initiative.




                                          P.C. Taylor
                                                                    84
     PC Taylor of the same serial said very much the same.
At the first opening he did notice any distress but very,
very quickly after that the gate opened.      He did not hear any
screams in the same way as PC Hooson said when he was up at
Gate 4.   PC Taylor said at the time he could not see any
reason why he should not put the lads, or the fans, who came
out on that first opening back although, of course, in
retrospect he wished he had not done so.      That I am afraid
is, of course, something which we all do and not just when we
are dealing with minor matters.   We say, "If only we had not
done this, that or the third thing".   He said from arrival
time to closure and re-opening it could be measured in
seconds though he had no real concept of time.
     I have already mentioned one of the fans and I have just
noticed Sephton also mentions three surges like Mr. Oyitch
and he said the third one was the one that did not relax.
Mr. Sephton was interesting because he got out, was put back
in, came out again and then, having left the scene, returned
to collect his coat.   Do you remember him?     I could not
understand how he did it but you could get it because of a
little gap and he was able to pull it through.     The other
interesting thing is that when he got back after this
interval so far as he could see there had not been very much

change in people’s appearances.
     Inspector Bullas, whom I have already mentioned, said
when he looked down and saw people coming in he did look down
and could see people coming in.   He realised something had to
be done and he did try and signal to the track Officer.        He
said he did not think he had managed to communicate with him.
That is right, he approached the pen but he was not sure
whether he had understood what he was trying to tell him.
     I   have      mentioned Mr. Glover.He was out at two minutes
past or there abouts.       There was a Mr. Mullin who got out
relatively early and he said he was one of the first people
to get   into     Pen 1.   He finished up, certainly if the       markin
on the   plan     are right, very closeto where Mr. Hicks and Dr.
Flenley had been.      Whether they were still there or not, it
is difficult to say.       He felt pretty confident he was the
first one out but that is probably unlikely actually bearing
in mind that the lads were right up against the pen.        He, as
I say, took up his position in Pen 1 and he remembers he was
told that Beardsley had hit the crossbar.      He remembers the
Officer going on to the pitch and he also remembers shouts
towards the Control Box but it was very difficult to sort his
timings out because he also related them to Mr. Kelly
attending.      Mr. Kelly did not attend until well after the
match had ended.
     Gate 4 we also had quite a lot of people who were able
to say something about the situation.      I have already
mentioned Mr. Spearritt and I am not going to repeat that.           I
had high hopes, if I can put it like that, of the young
footballers, Mr. Lycett and Mr. Dickenson, because it was
clear that they were very near to Pen 4 and Pen 5 but if you
remember the evidence it was difficult to reconcile the
evidence with everything else we have heard because it
appeared that they had not noticed anything at all either at
                                                                • 86
the pen or even later on.     So what they saw and what they did
not see I have tended in my mind to discount because I was
unable to fit their evidence easily into what we know from
videos, photographs and the evidence of all the people in the
pens.
       I take Mr. Lycett just as an example.    He did notice
that there were relatively few people in Pen 6.      Pen 4 was
tight.    He did not think much of it, he said, and he was a
bit surprised that people had not spread.      He heard and saw
nothing unusual when the match had kicked off.     He did not
see any gates open.     He did not see Sergeant Swift.   He did
hear one call for help from a lady.     He stayed where he was
until the match was over and then he left for the North
Stand.    We have seen all the photographs and it is very
surprising it did not impinge on his consciousness.
       Mr. Dickenson did not see Sergeant Swift either and he
did not see anybody walk towards Pen 6.     He did see a bit of
the match, Mr. Dickenson, because he saw the crossbar being
hit.     That may be the reason he did not notice anything
hecause he was looking the other way.
       Mr. Ellis was the freelance photographer.    I again had
high hopes for him but one of the problems was that although
he identified the track Officer he identified him by the
wrong Christian name.     He called him John Illingworth, if you
remember.     So it is difficult to know actually and he only
knew him as John I seem to recollect-     We know that PC
Illingworth was the track Officer in that part of the ground
because he told us so himself but whether he has just got the
                                                               • 87

name wrong it is difficult to say.      His evidence again I
found somewhat confusing.     He did seem to say at around kick-
off he could hear noises from the pens which included screams
and he saw girls pressed against the fence.       We are talking
about Pen 4, of course.      He also saw people clambering over
and he remembers that initially PC Illingworth and may be
others were pushing and signalling people to get back into
the pen.     He went on to say he was not at all surprised by
■^iiis -   It is what he would have expected.    On the other hand,
he did recognise that the noise, the cries, was different.




                                    /He tried.
      He tried if you remember to reconcile these two
things and I think his explanation was that the people
who were coming over appeared to him to be perfectly
okay and that actually - except for one lad who was
vomiting - and that fits in with Mr. Eason's accounts

as well at the initial stage.
       He did not realise the disaster had occurred until
the players had definitely left the pitch and just so
that we get it right Mr. Illingworth's names are
David Alfred and not John.   I thought at one stage his
middle name might have been John.
       Now we have already mentioned Sergeant Swift and
his Serial and we picked the first three because what
they were doing was they were walking in crocodile

fashion.
       Sergeant Swift had been at the Midland Station with

his Serial.   They had come across on a coach; they had
driven past Leppings Lane; they had noticed the crowds
there but they had gone on to the gymnasium and I don t
make any criticism of them for that because they were in
a coach and they were being taken to where they were

supposed to be going.
       They had barely got in.   "We got in" he said

"between 10-to and 5-to" when they were told to go

on to the pitch.
       His intention having assessed the situation I think

was that this was probably an overspill, that people

should be relocated in Pen 6.
         He did not himself - I am talking about Sergeant
Swift    - open the gate.   That seems to have been done

by P.C. Hooson and P.C. Sosnowski.
         Their evidence was when they first walked past
the pen the players were clearly on the pitch, they were
not initially alarmed and the crowd as far as they could
see did not appear distressed but then there was a surge
which did not retreat.      In fact P.C. Sosnowski said when
she first saw the surge she thought this was just the
normal thing that would happen.      It was the fact that
it did not go back - and remember this is the Pen 4

surge.
         Mr. Spearritt said he did not feel a surge, he

just felt this vice like feeling but this could have

been a moment or two later.      We don't know when Mr. Spearritt

actually lost consciousness.
         We know that Mr. Hooson said he was not sure
whether he ought to open the gate because he knew one
 needed authority but he explained to us I think very
 clearly that that was not a matter which occupied his
 mind for long.    He saw the need and he decided he would
 go ahead and do whatever he thought was right.
          We know from the photographs that activity was

 taking place at that pen at 14.59 or thereabouts.
          I have already told you that the timings, of course

 we keep on adjusting them, you know one minute this way

 or that way, but we have not got seconds so we don't

 know exactly what time but it is the best we can do.
      All of these Officers are quite clear that when

they got there the gates were shut.    None of them,

Hooson; Sosnowski; Swift; Packer, all of them said the

gates were shut.
       Mr. Illingworth was the official Track Officer

and you heard how he had gone off to have a meal at
about 2.    There was some delay for various reasons and
then he heard that there were some problems in the
Leppings Lane end on the radio and decided to come back
to take up his position and he arrived, he said, at
about 10-to.     The teams at that time, he said, were not
on the pitch, so it must have been before 6-minutes-to.
He spoke to P.C. Helliwell he told us and his attention

was drawn to some problems at Pen 6 and indeed on C511,

time 14.54 you can see him and he is in fact at Pen 6.

       His account is he started going back to Pen 4,
he heard cries of distress which were quite clear to his
that people needed help and he says that he in fact
opened the gates and the first person out was somebody who
had hurt his leg and other people then came out.       It
was his intention to escort them towards Pen 6 and 7
 and he says that he opened the gates and as far as
 he was concerned he never shut them, but of course you

 can't be standing at all the gates.
           It is a matter for you to assess his evidence but

 it is on the face of it difficult to reconcile with
 Mr. Hooson, Mr. Swift and Mrs. Sosnowski’s and indeed
Sergeant Swift because they said at about l-minute-to-3

the gates were not open and indeed he was not able to

reconcile it either, X mean P.C. Illingworth.

          You will also remember that Sergeant Green

refers to him as hurrying in fact towards Pen 4 but from

the opposite direction and on the last video which we

looked at, I think you can actually see him moving backward

and forward between the pens but at a rather.later time

than he has indicated in his statement.
          Now his timing is probably just as bad as everybody

else's.     The one thing that can be said with any certainty

is that he was at Pen 6 when the players came out and that

fits in with his account that he was told there were

problems up in the Stands and indeed he looks as if

he is looking up.
          If that is so then it is quite possible that the

escorting and so on which he talks about occurred at some

time somewhat later than what he describes.
          He also said that he could not remember any other

Officers there but he is not the only witness whom we

heard who could not remember what on video and photographic

evidence would seem to be self-evident and I just instance

one name and it is Mr. Doyle who also could not see any

Officers and he could not see the gate open and yet there

is clear photographic evidence of him standing on the

 fence next to Officers next to an open gate, Gate 3.

          I don’t blame him for that.   Don't get me wrong.
                                                              92




He remembers like most of us the bits which are important

to him or to me or to you and it is for you to piece it

together and to sort it out.
       Now the real issue is that one has to - while we

are on these Gate Officers - is to consider whether or

not what was happening and in considering this matter you

have to take into account that there is no evidence that

they were aware of the fact that Gate C had been opened and

that there was an influx of people on to the concourse

and from the concourse towards the terracing and probably

a substantial number through the tunnel.




                         They had no part in that decision
    They had no part in that decision and they were not

involved in it in any way.

    You have got to take into account what the evidence of

the supporters within the terraces is, which I have already

recounted to you and which I am not going to repeat.     You

have got to take into account the fact that certainly as far

as PC Illingworth was concerned he was distracted to a

certain extent by what was going on on the stands in pen 6.

You have got to take into account the overall time that was

available for assessment, decision and action.

     A lot has been said with regard, indeed, to everybody,

that there was nothing specific in the Operation Order about

monitoring the pens for overcrowding and we have already

discussed that earlier.      However, I do want to draw your

attention to the fact that all these Officers whom we have

mentioned, particularly the Sergeants of the Serials and,

indeed, there are others, there is PC McGuinness and PC Best

and so on.   They all in fact acted within a very short

period of time of their arriving on the scene and they all

acted independently and they all acted with a view to

opening gates in order to relieve whatever the situation was

and however it had been caused.

     As far as those Officers certainly are concerned - I am

talking about the ones who came along - there cannot, in my

view, be any question that their conduct can be called into

question in any way.
                                                               .94



      As far as the track Officers are concerned, the

position as far as I can see it seems to me to be as

follows.     Whether or not they acted as fast as they might

have done is exceedingly difficult to be absolutely sure

about.      However, the time interval, as I have already

indicated to you, if you accept all the rest of the

evidence, within which they had to act and the circumstances

within which they had to act, was relatively short.       It

seems to me it would be exceedingly difficult for you to

come to the view that these Officers had acted recklessly in

regard to their duties to the people who were standing

opposite them within the terrace.     You remember what the

definition of that is.     There must be an obvious and

serious risk of injury.     Namely, first, that the act or

omission which they performed causing an obvious and serious

risk of injury and two, if you were to take that view, and I

suggest here that it may be difficult to take that view

bearing in mind you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable

doubt, you would also have to be satisfied that their state

of mind was either they were indifferent to the risk or that

they recognised the risk but nevertheless went on to take

it.      I think you may have very substantial difficulties in

reaching those conclusions with regard to these Officers.

      I think that is all I need to remind you of with regard

to the gates.      We will break now for ten minutes.

                       (Short adjournment)
                                                            .95



     In a moment or two I am going to turn to the Control

Room staff, but before I do so I want to dispose of, if that

is the right expression, of Mr. Mackrell, to a certain

extent Mr. Lock, and Superintendent Greenwood.

     I have already dealt to a large extent with the

evidence relating to Mr. Mackrell and the relationship of

the club to the Officers' Working Party, the Police, various

people, and you will remember that I dealt with that.     In

fact you will also remember that I dealt with the situation

of those people who were not at the ground in relation to

your consideration of the first verdict and the fact that

you should not - and this will make your life easier - need

to work your way through these various people such as, for

instance, Sheffield City Council or Dr. Eastwood.

     Now the club, to a large extent, is in exactly the same

position, but they were, of course, present on the day

because it was their ground and that is why I need to deal

with it.

     You would only be able to consider the club if (l)

Mr. Mackrell was the embodiment of the company, which I have

described to you;   and (2) if his acts or omissions were of

such a nature as to enable you to consider the possibility

that he had acted recklessly and therefore a verdict in

respect of some or all of the people of unlawfully killed

might be considered as a result of his acts or omissions,

assuming, of course, that you have got to the fact that
there was a duty to act and that he failed and that whatever

he did or did not do was a substantial cause of the death.

     Now my understanding of the evidence in relation to

Mr. Mackrell on the day is that he did not - and I do not

mean this unkindly - he did not feature until about three

o'clock, or perhaps a little bit earlier, when he met Mr.

Lock and he was told that people had got through the

concertina gate.     I fact Mr. Lock was on his way to find

out what was going on and Mr. Mackrell apparently said to

him, "Leave it to me, I will go and sort it out.       The

exact time when this happened is difficult, but if you

remember Mr. Locked remembered while he was giving evidence

that he remembered Mr. Clough coming out.     This was on his

first exiting on to the field because Mr. Loc< came out

twice.      Of course we know from other evidence, mainly as a

result of Superintendent Greenwood that Mr. Clough and the

videos came out just before kick-off.

     There are quite a lot of discrepancies between him and

Mr. Lock in the sense that Mr. Mackrell says he walked

round, could not really see anything, chatted to the gatemen

and then went to the Control Box to find out what had

happened.      Mr. Mackrell says he met him a second time.    It

is very difficult to fit that second meeting in if

Mr. Mackrell's evidence is spot on, unless that second

meeting was at some considerably later period of time.
        It seems to me, therefore, that whatever involvement,

or otherwise, Mr. Mackrell may have had on the day, it was

minimal, or, to put it another way, it was after the events

had occurred, whatever those events were, which had caused,

led or contributed to the disaster.      I am sure he was very

busy before that doing things which needed to be done in the

normal running of a big football match in seeing to the

people who were there, making sure that everything

administratively worked right, but he did not seem to fulfil

or perform any function in relation to crowd control,

opening of gates, supervision of terraces or anything like

that.

        As I have already indicated to you, although I have no

doubt there is plenty of room for criticism of the club in

respect of signing, or lack of it, and various other

matters, they did seem to be in the situation where they nad

(a) instructed a professional engineer of competence to

advise and help them, (b) they had arrangements with tne

Police in order to try and police the matches and (c) they

were caught by the Officers’ Working Party, which had

inspections and gave advice and directions as to what they

should do.      There was no evidence that I could see that

they substantially failed in these regards to such an extent

that their failure could be described as falling within the

definition which we have already considered several times.

In other words, their earlier conduct, as I have said there
may well be ground for criticisms in certain respects, but

it is one thing to have a ground for criticism, it is

another to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a

person has been reckless.    Even more important, you have

oot to be satisfied that those acts or inactions were

causative, substantially causative, of the deaths.

     As I say, the club is behind, if that is the right

word, Mr. Mackrell.    If one cannot be satisfied that there

is evidence on which one could find that his acts or

omissions could be such as to enable a reasonable jury

properly directed to find a verdict of unlawfully killed in

respect of any one or more of the deceased and by definition

it cannot be found against the club.

     Therefore, I think it is right and proper that I should

direct you that as far as the corporations are concerned,

that would be Sheffield City, Eastwood and Co., and

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic., that you should not

'consider them as parties in respect of whose conduct you

need to weight whether or not a verdict of unlawfully killed

is applicable in respect of any one of the deceased.

     Nov let's turn to Superintendent Greenwood.

Superintendent Greenwood was, of course, one of the senior

match Commanders.     He was responsible for the inside of the

ground.   We have already dealt with some of the history

that he told us about 1931 and I am not going to weary you

with a detailed recitation of his evidence, but the
substance of it is this, that he, having given appropriate

instructions - well, having given instructions to staff, he

busied himself within the stadium.     One of the areas which

concerned him particularly was the Kop, because of the

potential of segregation problems which was based upon

previous experience.    He told us that as far as he was

concerned he perambulated the ground at twenty minutes to

three, or thereabouts, or perhaps a little bit earlier.     He

certainly had got, he said, to Leppings Lane, inside of

course, the terraces, at about quarter to, that he had

spoken to PC Helliwell, that at that point in time there was

nothing on the terraces which had alerted his attention,

that he had continued round the ground round the North

Stand, had finished up at the Kop, was considering doing

something about some problem there and then realised that

the players were about to come on to the field and that his

position, which is where he had wanted to be anyway, was at

the players' tunnel and then he went there.




               You know that in fact
You know that in fact he was identified on video at just

before kick-off when Mr. Clough comes out, and he is seen

looking in towards --- well, you did not see the video so

you don't know this but he is at that position at one-

minute- to-3 .

     He then told us that shortly thereafter his attention

was attracted to Leppings Lane Terraces.   He went over and

as you will remember there was a whole series of

photographs in which he is traced, from about 2-minutes-

past to about 6-minutes-past, doing various things in and

around the terracing, and in particular Gate 3.    He was

quite clear in his evidence that when he first got there

he still thought the position was retrievable if he could

have only got the people in, shall we say, the three

quarters of the pen - if you divide the pen into four

segments like HSE did, Dr. Nicholson - then his evidence

is that the first quarter was the area - in fact, I think

he said six or seven steps, in fact it is a bit more was

where the real problem was, that if he could have got

people to move back he thought it was retrievable.

Whether he is right in that, of course, is another

question, bearing in mind that the barrier might well have

broken by then, though of course that was something which

he could not have known because it would have not been

something which was visible to him.
    He did not send people straight round into the back

of the terrace and it may be that we can sit now and

consider that, as to whether that was, in fact --    maybe

it would have been a better policy.   His objective was to

try and get people to move back and it was clear from the

evidence of quite a lot of the fans that they understood

that, they knew that the Police wanted them to move back.

Quite a lot I think felt that they could not move back and

others, there was at least one who said he did not

understand why he should move back, but whatever the ins

and outs of the comprehension the message was conveyed, it

was just that for whatever reason it was not actioned.

     He told us very sadly that things in fact went from

bad to worse and he realised after a few moments that the

game had to be stopped and that there was a major crisis.

A lot of criticism I think has been made as to whether or

not he had organised a conveyor belt system to get people

in and out of the gate, whether he should have done this,

that or the third thing with regard to the rescue but even

if you were to take the view ——— and that in fact things

were not organised until a witness whom we have not

actually heard but who has sort of lurked around in the

background, namely Chief Superintendent Nesbit, turned up

and got things organised.

     You have heard the evidence, you can make your own

judgment and assessment on that, but I do just want to say
this, that passage of time sometimes makes organisation

easier and what may be possible at 12 or 15 minutes-past-3

may not necessarily have been possible at 2 or 3-minutes-

pas t-3.

       That is the first thing and the second thing is that

if you come upon a situation which was horrific in the

extreme, not just for the poor families who have lost

relatives but also for a lot of people who were injured, a

lot of people who were not injured - I am talking about

the fans now, the people within the pen - but also

horrific in the extreme for the people who were engaged in

the rescue activity, it is not always quite as easy as we

imagine to think on your feet and come up with the

absolute best solution.

       So we have to be careful, but even if you were to

take the view that there was some failure in this regard,

and perhaps I should just mention one of the interesting

things about Mr. Greenwood was that he did not assess the

crowd density, certainly in the three quarters of the pen,

I will call it, as significantly different from what he

had seen earlier, and yet we know almost certainly that it

was.    All we need to do is look at photographs and we can

see it, but even if he made a complete error of judgment

with regard to densities, and it would seem as if he must

have done bearing in mind what we have now seen, there is

not a shred of evidence that he was aware of the situation
outside in Leppings Lane or the opening of the gates, or

that he had been informed of that by anyone.       Radio was on

talk-through, that is true, so he could have heard what

was being said but    we also heard that there was a great

deal of noise.   We   heard that he told us that he    did not

hear it and we have heard no evidence to suggest       that

that, in fact, was    not so.

     There was one other item of evidence, of course, and

that is the question of whether or not he was on the

Police Control Box steps.       You will remember that this was

the evidence of Mr. Hicks.       He said he saw an Officer with

gold braid cap, light coloured jacket, standing on the

steps at about - I can't remember the exact time but well

before kick-off - about 10-to, I think he said it was -

who surveyed the scene for three, four minutes and then

left, and that he, Mr. Hicks, had attempted to attract

this Officer's attention.       This Officer had said nothing

to him, whoever this Officer might have been.         There was

another one, an Inspector later on, when there was some

exchange of conversations, but the first Officer said

nothing.

     Mr. Hicks at that time did not know, of course, who

this Officer was but subsequently, in fact, he told us on

around 30th May, that is about six weeks later, he

happened to walk round a corner and he saw Mr. Greenwood,

and he said, "That's the chap".       I think it is right to
say that Mr. Hicks' evidence has hardened with regard to

the identification.     He feels more confident today than he

did in 1989.

     Apart from that there is no evidence that

Superintendent Greenwood was in or near the Control Box.

All the people in the Control Box who were asked all said

they did not see him there.     He did not wear a gold

braided cap.   Mr. Hicks explained that that might have

been the sunlight on the silver.     He certainly did not

wear a fawn coloured anorak and it is difficult to see how

he could have been on the steps at the time when Mr. Hicks

says, if he was at the players' tunnel at the time when

the players came out, and it certainly would have meant

that Mr. Greenwood would not have done his walk round, if

that is the right word, Leppings Lane, North Stand, Spion

Kop, players' tunnel.     That would have been impossible.

     I have carefully considered this and I feel that it

would be unwise and in fact incorrect for you to rely on

Mr. Hicks' identification of Superintendent Greenwood.       I

am quite sure that Mr. Hicks is genuine in what he says

but given what I have indicated to you and the total lack

of other substantial evidence which in any way supports

it, and the risk of relying upon identification evidence

which in itself has admitted flaws in it, because Mr.

Hicks quite clearly agrees that on the photographic

evidence he is not wearing a fawn coloured anorak, it is a
                                                          105



standard Police issue job which is either black or dark

blue, so on that basis I do not think that you can rely on

it, and in the light of what I have told you with regard

to the rest of the evidence I think it is only right that

I should say that when you come to consider persons whose

conduct you may wish to take into consideration as to the

possibility of unlawfully killed, Superintendent Greenwood

is somebody else whom you must exclude from your

consideration because no reasonable Jury in my view,

properly directed, could possibly come to the conclusion

that he acted in a manner recklessly and that a verdict

can be found on the basis of the evidence which you have

heard.

     I should just pause here, because there is a risk and

I have considered this at great length and it has given me

a considerable amount of concern, that when I go through

these various people and say exclude him, do not think

about him, exclude the companies, exclude Dr. Eastwood,

exclude so and so, you may get the impression that if I do

not say exclude "x" and " y " I am actually saying you must

find a verdict of unlawfully killed in respect of the

people whom I have not excluded.   I have to deal with that

now and I am going to deal with that now because it is

necessary for you to understand your role and my role in

this.
    Although questions of fact are for you, as I have

already said, questions of law are for me and oddly enough

the question of whether or not there is any evidence which

a reasonable jury properly directed could reach a

particular verdict on is a question of law for me, and

that is why I am doing it this way, but I am conscious

that there are maybe in some of the cases where there are

issues which you can consider.   If I had not thought that

I would have withdrawn the verdict completely from you,

but that is not the same as saying that is the verdict you

have to bring in, because if it were, and this is the

point, in any court where a judge does not withdraw a case

from the jury, because what I am doing is what any judge

would do in circumstances like this, in any case where a

judge does not withdraw the verdict from the jury, the

jury would have to bring in a guilty verdict if this was a

criminal trial, and you know as well as I do that is not

the case.   All it means is that there is something that

you can think about.   You have to think about it, you have

to apply the criteria which I have already told you -

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, single person, obvious

and serious risk, indifference, recognising and decision

to take it - I am doing it in shorthand as quickly as I

can, but I will repeat it for you tomorrow.    So I neither

direct you one way or the other with regard to the

verdict.    I may express a view in some cases but in the
                                                        107



end those which I leave with you are your decision and you

take whatever decision you want.   Is that clear?




                                   Because of the way
     Because of the way I have done it, in some ways, of
course, we have already covered quite a bit of what happens
up in the Control Room.     You will remember we heard from four
people up in the Control Room, namely Mr. Murray, Mr.
Duckenfield, Mr. Goddard and Mr. Bichard.     Just to remind
you, Mr. Duckenfield was in overall command and Mr. Murray
was the Controller.    He had been in the job for about a year.
Mr. Duckenfield had taken over from Mr. Mole three weeks or
so before the match.    He had not been appointed as Chief •
Superintendent of the Division because he was an expert at
football matches but because presumably people thought he was
good at commanding a Division.
     Perhaps we ought to start with Mr. Duckenfield so that
we can deal with it.    Mr. Duckenfield had had a number of
conversations with one or two I suppose I ought to say, with
Mr. Mole before he left.    We have heard both from Mr. Mole
and Mr. Jackson that they felt he was perfectly competent to
perform this role.     Mr. Duckenfield described himself as a
generalist which is perhaps the correct description for a man
in his position.     Mr. Mole had specifically selected his
support team and had allocated Mr. Marshall to the outside,
Mr. Greenwood to the inside and, of course, Mr. Murray to the
Control Room, plus the existing staff.
     Mr. Duckenfield had not got a detailed knowledge of the
Green Guide or the ground but he did have his staff and he
also had the understanding from Mr. Mole and others that the
                                                                109

plan which he was operating and the Operational Order which
he was following was one which had been used in the past
which was in standard form and which had not presented any
difficulties.    He knew, or at least he was not told anything
to the contrary, that no one from all these people whom we
have already mentioned, the Officer Working Party and so on,
had raised any serious objection to the method of policing
which had been employed in the two previous Semi Finals.
     He was aware of the Safety Certificate though I do not
think he knew the details but he was, you may feel, justified
in taking the view that the staff he had were sound and
adequate, the ground itself was safe - reasonably safe to use
Mr. Eastwood’s words - for the purpose for which it was
designed and that the capacity of the ground was in
accordance with the Safety Certificate.     All things being
equal should not present any particular problems.     He also
knew the allocation and segregation was exactly the same as

in the previous year.
     He had, you may feel, no reason to assume that the
turnstiles, for instance, would not cope.     Indeed, I would go
further and say that as Police Controller he probably had no
duty to satisfy himself on every item relating to the running
of the match.    You may remember we spent quite a bit of time
cross-examining him as to the details of his knowledge
regarding, say the signing, and whether he knew there was
this sign or that sign and whether he knew the precise
locations of the gates in relation to tunnels and other
facilities.     It is a matter for you but I was not terribly
impressed with that line of thinking because it does not seeai
to me that the person in charge of a particular operation
must, and indeed can be expected to, have detailed knowledge
of whatever it is that he running.    If you think about it
that must be so.   I cannot imagine that some of the chief
executives or chairmen of large companies could answer and
tell you precisely what the set up is in relation to even
major plants or factories or things for which they may well
carry the ultimate responsibility.
     The fact that Mr. Duckenfield went round the ground and
did not know the detail of the signing; that it had
•standing’ here and not 'standing' over there, whatever it
might be, neither surprises me nor, for that matter, worries
me and in fact I would have been amazed if he had answered
differently ie that he did know.
     The second point about that is that he did quite clearly
agree that there was a tunnel off the concourse.    I suppose
that is not really surprising.     The fact that he did not
relate it to an exit gate and its geographical location again
you may feel is not surprising.    There was nothing to alert
him, and nobody had so far as one can tell, that an exit gate
might be used as an entry point and even if he had applied
his mind to the issue of the turnstiles he still would not
necessarily have applied his mind to the exit gates.     He
probably did not even know precisely where the exit gates
were.   He certainly did not know their names and there is no

reason why he should have done.
                                                              Ill
    We have looked at the Leppings Lane end with a
microscope for four months and we know the gates and
locations like the back of our hands but I would be surprised
if you could tell me the names and locations of the gates on
the Spion Kop.   I certainly could not because it has been of
no interest to us.   That is not a criticism of you or me but
it is a point which you have to take into account when you
consider the sort of knowledge that you would expect from an
overall Commander of a particular location.
     I am talking about the general points now but the second
point is that there has been a great deal of criticism made
of the fact that the Operational Order which he adopted,
which he signed and which he accepted, did not for instance
include specific references to the monitoring of the pens or
indeed to the distribution of the fans within the pens.    I am
not entirely clear that if the Operational Order had by
chance included the sentence "and you shall also monitor the
pens" in addition to the expressions regarding public order
matters, would that in itself - and this is the question you
need to ask yourself - have made any difference whatsoever to

this disaster?
    As I have already indicated to you, apart from one
Officer, Inspector Crawford, who said it was not in the
Operational Order, none of the other Officers made any
attempt to say, "I didn’t do this, that or the third thing
because it was not in the Operational Order".   On the
contrary, nearly all of them took the view that (a) they were
Police Officers and would act on their initiative and (b) the
safety of the public was one of the primary functions of an

Officer and in fact Mr. Lock said this crystal clearly and he

is an ex-superintendent as we know.

     The second point that arises is that there is no doubt
he gave a briefing.   We have heard from many of the Officers
who were there and we heard him read a section of that
briefing to us and you may recollect there was clear
reference to the importance - in fact he used the words
paramount importance X think, but even if he did not — there
was certainly a strong reference to the safety of the
spectators.   It is clear if you think of Mr. Sykes and others

that that had come across.

     The question you need to ask yourselves is, would it
have come across any more strongly if, instead of using the
word 'safety' he had used the word 'monitor' the pens or the
fans or what have you?   In fact you could argue that it would
be weaker because the word 'safety' is a wider word, or you
may think it is but it is a matter for you entirely this and
not for me.   You have to consider whether the addition of
extra words in themselves would have made any significant
difference to this disaster and you have also got to consider
whether in fact his briefing was not of such a nature that it
made it clear to the 800 odd Officers whom he was addressing
that in addition to their public order functions safety was a

matter of great importance.
     A third point while we are on this, and I have already
alluded to it merely with regard to the opening of the gates,

that one of the points which was put to not only Mr.
                                                                 113
Duckenfield but in fact to many others was that Police

training was focused,   if that is the right word, on public

order issues and that consequently safety matters were less

important.   Therefore, when a safety issue arose on the pen

the reaction was, pitch invasion, rather than overspill,    if

you like, putting it very simply.

     I think there is some justification in that and indeed
Mr. Marshall dealt with it at one stage when this was put and
he said, "Yes, it is quite true but why do we need 800 odd
Police Officers" - which is more than a third of the total
Police Force for the whole of South Yorkshire never mind
Sheffield - "and why do we need that many Police Officers to
police one football match if it is not in fact a public order
problem that we are combatting and if it is not in fact th-t
the history of football matches regrettably has been such
that public order aspects do feature very prominently in our
thinking?"    So I think that is true. In other words,   that
there is perhaps an immediacy to public order matters which
the Police applied their mind to and, in fact, you would
expect them to because that is their function, their primary
function.    They do have this other role which they have said
and which I think you may feel you can accept that public
order and safety often go hand in hand and if they saw a
safety situation they would respond.
     As I have said a moment ago, if you look at the - and
this may be the best example of it - situation on the field,
at the perimeter track, six Police Officers and perhaps more
turned up and all responded to a safety situation as they saw
                                                              114
it.   They may not have realised how many deaths they were
going to deal with but they could see that some action needed
to be taken and also it is only fair to say that Mr. Marshall
did when he took the decision, rightly or wrongly, that the
gates had to be opened because he felt that lives were at
stake.




                                /You have also heard.
                                                                115




       You have also heard, and again I am going to deal
with this now at this stage, that there was a conversation
in the Control Room at some point in fact later on where
Mr. Kelly was present and where Mr. Duckenfield is
reported, Mr. Bichard reports it and Mr. Jackson half
reports it, that there was some reference to the fact
that the gates had "burst open".      This was obviously a
matter of great moment to establish this particular fact.
       I had considerable difficulties about this matter

and X spent quite a bit of time considering whether or
not I ought to allow the question to be asked at all-
because it is perfectly clear to me, and I hope it will
be clear to you, that whatever he may have said with
regard to "gates bursting open" and whether that is right
or wrong and whether or not he added any qualifications
and assume for a moment that he added none, Mr. Bichard
did not say he did not add any, he said:      "I heard a
snippet   and   I remember that but I don't remember anything
else" but let us assume for a minute that he added no
further qualifications that that is all he said at that
time at the point in time when he already knew that the

main openings had been authorised.
          It seems perfectly plain to me and it may well seem
plain to you that even on that assumption, that statement
did not cause anybody's death because by the time it was
made the dye, if I can use that term, had been cast, so
 the inclusion of that statement does not enable you to

 decide how the people died.      So why did I allow it?
                                                              116




Why did I allow this particular question to be asked?
The answer is because I was in the end persuaded that it
did go to the issue to what extent you can accept his
account of events.      In other words it goes to establishing
whether or not the quality of his evidence is one which

 you wish to believe.
        Now there are two points about this.       You could say,
 and I am proceeding on the assumption that that was not
 right, incorrect, and that is all that was said because
 I want to deal with it at its highest level rather than
 ••Yes, but may be he added something else and he may have
 been telling the story and the only thing I have remember
 was this little bit."     We will assume for the purposes

 of this                -v.ai- in
            summing-up 4that      fact that
                               in ract tnauis not so,   that that

 was a statement which was not true at the time.
           TWO things about it.   First of all because a person

 does not tell the truth at position B does not necessarily
  mean that he has also lied at position A and therefore
  although it is obviously a very serious matter and you
■ have to weigh and consider the evidence very carefully
  and you may need to look very carefully to see whether
  there is any corroboration and whether the accounts of
  what happened before are consistent with what you know
  from other sources which is one of the reasons why I have
  sort of gone round the houses to get to this position,

  at the end of the day you may come to the view that:
   "Yes, okay even given that, I am still satisfied that
   the rest of the account is substantially correct
you could of course come to the view that we cannot

accept it.     That is a matter which you have to decide

and in thinking about this of course you also have to

put yourself into the situation in which he was at the

time    both    before the disaster, during the disaster

and after the disaster when this conversation is

supposed to have taken place.

         Now I have dealt with this at some length because

I think it is necessary that we grasp this nfettle and
understand what it does not do and what it does do,

and I hope I have been reasonably clear.

         Now then I have already dealt with his account,

his briefing, and I d o n ’t need to repeat what I have

said with regard to that.

         He took up a position in the Control    Room which

is not the position which Mr. Mole would have taken up.

Mr. Mole would have popped in as far as I can make his

e/idence out but he would not have been there continuously

but he was and Mr. Murray described it as a "classical

position" and you may feel in itself the fact that he

did not roam quite so much as Mr. Mole that that may

not necessarily be a significant thing.

         He recollects the request for the closure of

the    road and he said and indeed Mr. Goddard   supported

him    in this, this was clearly within the ambit of

Superintendent Marshall's authority and although he

said:    "I wonder why he wants it closing?" he did not
feel it was right to countermand it.      He could not see
around the corner anyway on their videos, so it was also
clear there was some conversation regarding the number
of people outside at around 2.30 and he of course had no
experience of the number of people who could come in and he
turned to Mr. Murray and asked him:      "What do you think?"
and Mr. Murray said:     "We can get them in".   Mr. Goddard
when giving his evidence said that he did not disagree
with that.
          They didn't in fact use the data which was available
from the Club to work out how many people had come in and
how many people had not come in, they did it shall we say
by eye.
          Mr. Lock did have the data.   Certainly he had it
at 14.48 because he was in the Club Room and when
P.C. Guest according to Mr. Lock said:     "The gate has
burst open" or something like that "People have come in",
one of the things that Mr. Lock did was to see how many
people still had to come in and I think he thought there
were about 4,500 spaces at that point in time.
          It is quite clear from the evidence of Mr. Lock
that that at that time did not cause him any particular
concern so if the data had been utilised in the Control
Room, certainly it made no difference to Mr. Lock's
immediate appreciation.
          In fact if you look at Mr. Lock's timings, if
he found out at 14.48 that something had happened, which
                                                              1]




he would have done, or a few moments later, he did not
get on to the pitch initially he said when the players
came out, but if his subsequent recollection is right
that in fact he was still there when Mr. Clough was there
that would have been quite a few minutes later, you can
work it out for yourself and on his way to the pitch
in order to find out what had gone wrong or what was
happening he took quite a long detour I imagine, I have
not tried to retrace his steps, but he certainly spent
some time doing various other things and you may take
the view at that time he did not perceive the situation
as one of creating an obvious and serious risk of injury
to anyone, though quite correctly he felt that one had to
go and find out what was going on.     Nor did he feel that
he had to interfere and ring up.     He could have done.
This is an interesting point.   He decided to go and look.
He had a 'phone to ring through to the Control Room,
I presume.   I did not ask him that question but if you
can ring from the Control Room to the Club Room then one
imagines you can do it the other way round but he did
not do that, he decided to look at it on his own.
       The reason why I say this is if Mr. Lock who
had had experience in the Control Room as a Controller
for years before he was appointed to the Club, who had
the figures in front of him, he didn't of course at that
point know how they were distributed on the terrace
because you know where the Control Room is, it is inside
you can't see outside, but in itself those numbers did
not cause him at that point in time any apparent anxiety.

       Apart from saying:     "Can they get in?" they also

talked about postponing the kick-off and I have already

dealt with that so I am not going to repeat it.     You will

remember what I said about this.
       There are some discrepancies in the evidence between

Mr. Goddard, Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield, but the

substance of the evidence is very similar.

       The next thing that appears to have happened is that

they noticed Mr. Bichard had put the camera on to the

Leppings Lane area and they noticed that the crowd had

got denser and that there was a Police horse which was

enclosed.     Mr. Duckenfield did not give any orders to

 send in reinforcements     but it was in fact done probably

 by Mr. Goddard who asked Sergeant Soresby to send some

 extra staff and arrangements were also made for a Serial

 to go to Leppings Lane.     This is Sergeant Higgins'

 Serial.
           It stuck, if I can put that word at Gate A,

 because by the time Sergeant Higgins got there he perceived

 the need but there did not appear to be any evidence that

 it had been sent to Gate A.
           There was some activity taken subsequently to put

 Serials at the North Stand once it was realised that

 Gate A was open or was about to open and I think

 Mr. Duckenfield accepted that this was done and the

  evidence is that he accepted and the others in the Control
Room accepted it as well - as I understood their evidence
- that there was a fear that if you allowed people who
did not have tickets into a seated area you could have

problems.
          No Serials were sent to Leppings Lane terracing
and you should bear that in mind but you should also
bear in mind that the terraces are standing areas; that
the system which Mr. Duckenfield understood he was operating
was a "find your own level" system and that he had had
at that point no suggestion that that system had not

worked.
          We know of course that in 1988 there was some
diversion but the evidence which we have heard from all
the senior Officers apart from Mr. Creaser who did in
fact know of systems of diversion in certain circumstances
though not in a semi-final because he went off to check
what system they were going to use, was that they had
not anticipated having to divert people from the tunnel

mouth.
          There was unfortunately a break-down in communication.

It is extraordinary in circumstances like this that not
only do you have crowds outside and difficulties in
Leppings Lane, inside you have a break-down in radio

communication.
          Why that should happen, why things seem to go
wrong when they do go wrong in groups I don't know, but
 the fact remains that there were problems outside, there
 were radio problems inside and I have no doubt whatever

 it made life more difficult.
                                        The ne;:t thing ....
    The next thing that happened was that the message was

received from Superintendent Marshall saying, "Open the

gates," or words to that effect.      That was at 14.47 or

thereabouts.   PC Buxton had turned up in the meantime

outside and that was known in the Control Room, though they

did not in fact implement it.      That was one of the examples

where talk-through actually worked.

    The message came through, "Open the gates," and shortly

thereafter Gate C did open and a number of people came in.

Mr. Bichard quite clearly said that when he saw it he said,

"They have burst open the gates," and that was his

assessment of that situation at the time.      In fact he was

wrong because although it was not opened under authority, it

was opened by a Police Officer to effect an ejection.

     Now we have already dealt with the people coming in so

I do not need to repeat all that for you, but that was his

impression of it and that may be one of those situations

where, if you like, the "conditioning", the anticipation of

the sort of things which are likely to occur, may have led

to a misjudgment of the situation.      It is a matter for you

to make up your mind about that.

     In any event the position was retrieved.      We do not

know what went through Mr. Duckenfield's mind at this

stage...   Well, we do, actually because he said that he had

assumed that having retrieved the situation, that no further

action was required.
    The next thing that happened was that Mr. Marshall came

through in very much more peremptory tones and said, "Open

the gates or else."    Mr. Duckenfield no doubt was in an

exceedingly difficult position at that point.    I do not

think anybody would want to have been in his shoes.     He, I

think, hesitated and it was Mr. Murray who in fact jogged

him and said, "Take a decision."    He did not use those

words but that was the sense and Mr. Duckenfield said, "Open

the gates."

     As I said, it seems quite clear that that was done in

the plural, but certainly Mr. Bichard and Mr. Goddard, maybe

because of the focusing of the camera, assumed that it was

only in relation to Gate C.   It is interesting that.

     Shortly thereafter a further request came through from

Sergeant Higgins in almost the same terms - strange that.

I find that strange.   We had, as I said, quite a lot of

discussion as to when that came through and how many minutes

had elapsed, but if you accept PC Bichard's evidence with

regard to the panning, and we have seen it on the

compilation tape, and that request came through shortly

after the formal opening of Gate C at 14.52.    There was a

delay then before Gate A was opened, but in a way it is not

terribly relevant to our account.

     Mr. Duckenfield's evidence is, as I have already

explained to you, you make up your mind how far you believe

him, that having been faced with this decision his objective
                                                              124



in opening the gates was to save life.      If Mr. Marshall is

to be believed, and there is nothing to say he should not

be, then that is precisely what they were attempting to do

with regard to the people on the outside.

     It is quite clear from the evidence nobody has made the

slightest suggestion that Messrs. Duckenfield, Murray, or,

indeed, anybody else, gave any orders to any Serial or

anybody in the concourse area to divert fans away from the

tunnel.

     Mr. Duckenfield's account basically is that firstly he

took view that the concourse was larger than the turnstile
area and therefore people would have room to expand.

Secondly he knew there were three routes, although he did

not know   their detail and he certainly did not know their

signing,   on tothe terraces.     He expected   that the people,

if they were as badly distressed as it would appear that

they were from the message, would need to recover

themselves, sort themselves out and then distribute

themselves across the terracing.

     He also said that his attention was focused upon

Leppings Lane;   firstly upon Gate C and then he was taken up

with the   issue of Gate A.     The first time he realised that

anything   was happening on the terraces was when he saw the

gate open and people climbing over.      There was some

discussion as to whether he told Mr. McRobbie to go down and

sort out what the Policewoman did or whether McRobbie
initiated the conversation, but there was clearly at that

point some assessment that something needed to be done.          It

was also seem that Mr. Duckenfield said, "I did not know

what had had happened."   He certainly did not associate the

entry - at least that is my understanding of his evidence -

the entry through the gates with what appeared to him to be

a pitch invasion.

     Mr. Duckenfield, of course, was supported by Mr. Murray

whose job it was to control the ground.    He was entitled to

assume, I think, that people in Mr. Murray's position would

take appropriate action in the light of developments.

Indeed, I think he was right to assume that people further

afield would keep him informed as to what was happening,

with a view to enabling him to take decisions.

     That does not mean, of course, he can then sit back and

say, "Well, I do nothing unless I am   told."      He is able,   of

course, as Commander to initiate his   own action, but I think

there is a balance which has to be struck between doin~ it

all yourself and working within the framework that has been

set up and which you have understood is a system that has

worked satisfactorily.

     Now what about the assessment of the terraces, because

this is may be the single most important - well, it is a

very important factor which you have   to weigh.

Mr. Marshall was questioned at great   length on whether or

not it might be obvious that diversion of people coming on
I


                                                                       126



        to the concourse was necessary.     Apart from the fact that

        perhaps we should not have used the word "obvious", because
    B
        obvious, as you have discovered, is a rather specialised

        word almost.   It is supposed to be an ordinary English

        word, but one has to give it its due weight.      Be that as it

        may, Mr. Marshall illustrated just as many other people did,

        like Dr. Nicholson, that it depended how you asked a

        question, because when he was asked on the one hand whether

        prior to the day there had been a suggestion that this

        happened or, indeed, when he requested the gates to be

        opened had he thought there was any immediate danger to
    D
        people entering, he said that no, he had not.      This was

        partly because he thought the terraces would be empty

        judging by the number of people outside;    partly because he

        knew there was a   big concourse inside;   partly because he

        assumed if there   wasany action that needed to be taken it

        would be taken by the Control Room staff;     and partly

        because it was not his responsibility to deal with what was

        going on inside and he had his work cut out coping with the

        difficulties outside.

             He was asked about the obviousness of diversion and his

        reply was that if it was noted that the pen was overcrowded

        then it might well be obvious that you needed to divert

        people away from   it.   That is why I have said the issue of

        what was seen in   the pen is so important and that is why I

        have spent such a long time today recounting to you what




    H
some of the fans have said, apart from what other people

have said in relation to the pens.

     The sum total of the evidence from the Control Room,

that is Mr. Duckenfield, Mr. Murray, Mr. Goddard and

Mr. Bichard, was that none of them had noticed any problems

with the pens until people came over or the gates were

opened.    In other words, shall we say in round terms, three

o'clock.

     This was partly because their attention was focused on

what was happening outside Leppings Lane, though I think

certainly Mr. Goddard said he did glance around and he had

noticed nothing unusual.

     We have spent a lot of time discussing the

discrepancies in the fillings, that there was very much more

space at the side, shall we say, particularly in pen 6 than

there was in the centre.    You have seen the photographs

which were taken from both ends.     The 1988 photographs, of

course, are not directly in point because they were taken in

1988, but at least they show the sort of view which one

might get across the terraces from the Police 'Room towards

pen 6.     You also heard Sergeant Goddard who said that in

fact the front of the pens is quite difficult to see because

of the angles.

     You have heard, and I have recounted to you, the views

of people around the stadium who looked at the pens.     You

can make your own assessment as to what they felt the state
of the pens were at any particular point in time.   However,

the evidence is, I think, reasonably clear that at eight

minutes to, which is the time when Gate C was opened, and we

just need to look at that photograph, and the centre pens

certainly were not empty but they were not necessarily so

full and, indeed, they had been playing with beach balls and

various other things in those pens very shortly before that.

You have got to add to that the evidence of the fans who

were in the pens themselves which I have already tried to

recount to you.




              So you have two problems
                                                          129



     So you have two problems:   one, would a prudent

observer have noted at the point in time when the gates

were opened that those pens were so full or so over full

that diversion was something which had to be taken; and

secondly, of course, would the connection, would a

reasonably prudent, skilled Police Officer in the shoes,

if you like, of Mr. Duckenfield or indeed Mr. Murray, have

connected the need, the opening of the gate, diversion of

the tunnel, and conditions on the pen?

     I think perhaps it is time to stop and we will carry

on tomorrow at 9.30.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until the

             following morning at 9.30 a.m.)
  her   MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST DISTRICT)



          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                       Before

DR. S. L. POPPER, LLB. B.MED.Sci. BM, B S , MRCGP

              (Her_ Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

                   The Town Hall,
                     Sheffield.

                         on

                  26th March, 1991




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




        From the Notes of J. L. Harpham Ltd. 9
             Official Shorthand Writers,
         55 Queen Street, Sheffield, SI 2DX.
                  SEVENTY EIGHTH DAY *S PROCEEDINGS
                      TUESDAY. 2-6th MARCH 1991
    THE CORONER:      We have been thinking, as you know, about
the Control Room staff and I have been talking to you about
that yesterday.     I want to just briefly remind you about Mr.
Murray because although we have talked about them in bits and
pieces I just want to remind you of him.      There were, of
course, four people in the Control Room but the two who we
are considering particularly are the two senior people,
namely Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray.      I do not need to
remind you of all the details but at around 2.30 or there
abouts Mr. Murray told us that they had looked out.        They had
seen a crowd outside Leppings Lane.      When I say they looked
out I mean they looked on the screens and he was satisfied at
that time that that crowd, and indeed the people who would be

following would be able to get in.
     He also confirmed, as we already know, that they had
some discussion regarding delaying kick-off and I have told
you enough about that without going over it again.        He had
another look out - he may well have done others but the one
he remembers - at about 14.40 when Mr.'Bichard pointed out to
him there was a horse which was surrounded by people.        At
that time arrangements were made for assistance to be given
by Sergeant Goddard who had noticed it and decided that more
help was needed.      He activated some assistance.    In fact, it
was Sergeant Higgins and we also know about Sergeant Soresby.
      He then gave us an account of the radio going down and
 the effect that that had on the whole system.        You will
remember he was asked quite, a lot about that.    In fact you
asked whether there had been previous radio problems, can you
remember?   He said, "Yes, there had in the previous year".
It was not anything like this.   It was music which they were
listening to and on this particular year they had tried to
combat that by having a radio engineer on site, so to speak,
and indeed he knew they were having trouble and turned up
before they could actually call him which seemed as if at
least the radio engineer aspect was working.     Nevertheless it
dad, according to them, cause a considerable amount of

disruption.
     Then he reminded us that tannoy messages were sent out
and we have discussed those as well.   Inspector Bennett came
through and wanted more help and they sent an extra lot of
people who I think, though I am not absolutely sure, may have
included Sergeant Green.   Do you remember he was the chap who

said he came round the front?
     He then said at about quarter to, to contact Mr. Lock
because he thought that the turnstiles were working slowly
but for some reason did not get through and in any event,
whatever the reason did not make contact. He then recounted
the request from Mr. Marshall which we know quite a bit
about.   His recollection is that there were four and they
came in batches of two.    The first one was around 14.47.      He
said, as indeed several other people in the Control Room,
that he saw the gate open.    He said he thought it had
relieved the situation.    At some time before 14.52 - it had
to be before 14.52 because the gate opened at 14.52 - the
request must have been earlier.   It may only have been
fractionally earlier but at some point earlier than that a
further request came through from Mr. Marshall, this time in
rather more peremptory terms, and there seems to be very
little dispute between any of the people in the Control Hoom.
He turned to Mr. Duckenfield and said, "Are we going to open
the gates?” or words to that effect and the request was
couched, as we already know, in terms that if action was not

taken somebody would die.
     Shortly thereafter Sergeant Higgins came through with a
similar request and do you remember he spent a lot of time
trying to work out when this request came through.      Was it
shortly after, was it in fact six minutes later, and you can
actually see the Officers lined up.     It depends.   If you
accept PC Bichard's evidence that in fact you can tie it by
the pan, which I have already alluded to earlier, then it
would fit in with shortly after that.      He also recollects the
request from PC Buxton about postponing the kick-off and I
dealt with that earlier when I told you that Sergeant Goddard
actually said that it was too late because the players were
on the pitch, or words to that effect.      He approbated it ar.d
said, "I didn't countermand it.   I could have done so if I
had wished.   I in fact agreed with it".
     His evidence is that he did not know that in 1988 any
diversion on the concourse had taken place with regard to the
central tunnel and as far as he is concerned - and this is
what he told us - he believed the ground to be safe, the
system under which he was operating was safe, and that it had
worked satisfactorily in 1987 and 1988.   He also told us in
addition to being the Controller and, therefore, if you like,
the communicator and disseminator, the receiver and
disseminator of information really through his staff and
also, of course, a man of rank who was in a position to take
decisions, he saw his role as including advising Mr.
Duckenfield, particularly in the light of the fact that Mr.
Duckenfield was a newcomer up this particular point.
     He confirmed for us that there was no specific reference
to monitoring for overcrowding but his understanding was that
the serials would do this as a matter of course.   He was
quite open with regard to what was going through his mind
when the Gate C was opened and that was it did not cross his
mind to close the tunnel.   He went on to say that entry was
into the concourse and he expected the people to disperse
from there.   He did not expect that they would all go through
the tunnel.   His primary concern, he said, was to relieve
pressure, to avoid injury, and he went on to say that nothing

else was obvious to him.
     Nothing of significance was noted on the terraces so far
as his evidence is concerned.   He said, "I didn't see
anything that attracted my attention to the terraces until I
noticed that the gates were open and people were coming out
on to the pitch".   Then he told us, as indeed nearly
everybody else did, the fact that Inspector McRobbie, the
Inspector who was really just there to learn, went down to
see why the lady Police Officer was not opening the gates and
he also said it was not at all unusual for fans to have to be
redistributed.
     I have dealt with Mr. Duckenfield to a large extent

already but I will just remind you again in this sort of
serial way.    Mr. Duckenfield basically said that he operated
on the assumptions that (a) the ground was safe, (b) the
system of policing which he was employing and the operational
plan was one which was satisfactory and had worked in
previous years and (c) that he had a team of Officers who
were experienced and supportive.
     If I just pick him up, so to speak, from the time that
Superintendent Marshall made his first request, he
recollected that and he said, very much like Mr. Murray, that

when the gate was opened and 150 to 200 people came in he
took it, if I can use that word, that the situation had been
resolved.     The second request then came; the inference from
that is that the second request came as a new matter, so to
speak, and he realised that these requests were of an
unprecedented nature and to open the gates, in his words,
would destroy the whole of the planning.     It may, therefore,
not be entirely surprising if he hesitated for a period.       It
is clear that Mr. Murray, by the time this request came
through and also from the tones of Mr. Marshall, felt that a
decision had to be taken, yes or no so to speak, and he
turned to Mr. Duckenfield and in fact said, "Are we going to
open the gates?" or words to this effect.
     You have to remember that if you look at it;     forget
that 95 people died for a moment.     If you look at the request
                                                                6

as it came from a Superintendent who was outside who said,

"Unless you open the gate people are going to die", Mr.

Duckenfield had very little option in fact other than to say,

"Yes" to it.   To have said "No" to that request, and if

people then had died - of course, we do not know whether they

would but if they had died he would have been I think in an

exceedingly difficult position.




                          /So although it was his decision.
                                                               7




So although it was his decision he was in a position where
he may not actually have had much option about it.
      Having said "Open the gates" he was then faced with
a further request to open another gate, Gate A; did not
know where it was of course and I have already dealt with
all that so I am not going to repeat it, but that was
actioned partly, in fact Sergeant Goddard said that he
actioned it because having heard the instruction     to open
the gates there was not really any further need for
farther authorisation, it was merely a matter of saying:

"Yes, go ahead and do it".
      I have already reminded you earlier that he was
aware that there was a large concourse; he was aware that
there was a tunnel leading off it? he was aware that there
were other routes off it, but he   was not aware     ofthe
detailed geography according to    his evidence and I have
dealt with that yesterday if you   can remember.
      He went on to say that when he gave that        order his
aim was to save life and I think he used the expression

 that he was "consumed" by this decision.
      He too did not notice anything, according to his
 evidence, with regard to the terracing of any moment
 until he saw that the gate was open on the perimeter
 fence and then we are back on the story with Mr. McRobbie
 and the opening of Gate 1 and we know that this was around
 3 o'clock because there are photographs which you have
 seen of Inspector McRobbie down outside that gate and so on.
     He explained to us that he expected to receive

support from Officers both on the track and on the West

Stand and that they would report overcrowding to him if

they noted it.
      He also told us that on the day he was not aware

of the difficulties which fans might have in moving

from one area on that terrace to another because of the

radial fences.
      We now know, because we have gone through it at

great length, that those gates at the back are not
visible - I think we can say that quite clearly - are
not visible when you have terraces full of people.
They may not even be visible when the terraces are not
that full of people, but what I think he is really
telling us is that he was operating on an assumption
 that the terraces were being treated as a whole, as
 one unit and at the time, on the day, he was not aware
 - I am telling you what he is saying in brief - he was
 not aware of the difficulties which people might have

 in seeing and indeed getting to these gates.
       He also told us that mere disparity in numbers

 as such would not be a matter for concern.     Disparity

 plus something yes, mere disparity no.

       He was relying upon the fact that the system
 which he was using had worked in the past; that as
 far as he knew there had been no distribution problems
 in 1988 or 1987.   When I say "distribution” I mean
                                                              9




distribution of fans on the terraces, and that was the

basic premise.
      He was quite clear from his evidence that he had

no plan prepared to deal with the issue of maldistribution

if it arose.     His explanation for that was that he would

expect if a situation arose, and he would not expect it

to arise given all the presuppositions which I have already

told you about, he would expect Officers to respond to

a "developing situation", was the terra he used.

      He did not accept that there was on the day, as

far as he was concerned, an obvious risk to people when

the gates were opened and he also reminded us that the

time interval in which he had to take various decisions

was short, certainly short as far as he was concerned.

      We heard from Sergeant Goddard and P.C. Bichard

and substantially on timings there are discrepancies as

to who actually initiated the call, you know was it

Murray, was it Duckerifield, Sergeant Goddard, but the

 stories coincide more or less with regard to timings.

       In particular they too say that they had not

 noticed anything about the pens until people started

 coming over the top or coming out through the gates

 and they in common indeed with Mr. Duckenfield and

 Mr. Murray had not associated the opening of the gate

 with the situation that presented itself on the

 terraces.
       Sergeant Goddard told us that if he thought that
there was an obvious risk then he would certainly have
said something about it and he also told us that he

did not link Gate C with the tunnel.
      On the other hand he said he was not actually
asked to make that association and that is actually a
very important point by one of these two Officers.
They were in the Control Room but they were not in
charge, they were not taking the decisions, they were
e£fecters.     They were effecters who had a considerable
amount of experience but they were not carrying the

responsibility for the match.
      P.C. Bichard with regard to the terracing I have
already mentioned, he did not notice anything until
people started coming over and his interpretation of
it was that it was a pitch invasion and he based it
upon the fact that it looked exactly the same as
 occurred in 1988.    Different time admittedly, he
 quite clearly said that, but it looked the same,
 people were coming over.    He said:   That is a pitch
 invasion".    He may also have been influenced by the
 fact that when the 14.48 opening occurred he described
 it as "the fans having burst through the gates".     We
 don't know.     It is very difficult to put yourself into
 other people's minds, but whatever the connections were
 that is how he saw it and he did not connect the tunnel,
 as I have already said, with people coming over.
       He said that he was fully occupied with Leppings

 Lane and the problems - by that I mean the outside
area — and the problems associated with its resolution.
      He also said - and this I think was an interesting
comment - he said in his view there was room within the
ground.   If there had been no room within the ground
then his thinking might have been different.




                       Now that is a very risky
     Now that is a very risky bit of evidence because we

don't actually know what he would have thought in a

different situation so be careful.      Do not make too much of

that.

     I also want to mention Mr. Jackson very, very briefly.

Mr. Jackson was the Assistant Chief Constable and the most

senior officer on duty that day.      His responsibility was in

respect of the whole of South Yorkshire, not specifically

for the match and he had no direct duties in relation to

that match.     He did attend and it appears to me that he

attended as a guest, although he might well have been

pleased (a) to see the match and (b) to be there because it

was a big event anyway.

     His evidence was that he had signed the Operation Order

when it was presented to him.      He had seen nothing untoward

in it and we have already heard from lots of people that it

substantially followed previous patterns so that isn't

entirely surprising.

        He also confirmed, as indeed Mr. Mole and Mr. Lock,

that he was quite satisfied that Mr. Duckenfield was a

competent Police Officer, suitable to be a Divisional

Commander and as such in charge of an event such as a

football match.

        He did visit the Control Room at about two o'clock, or

something like that, and there was some talk but it sounded
                                                                13



to me as if it was more, "Hello.     Everything OK?" and then

he went off.

      He then disappeared, if I can use that word, and I do

not complain about this because he had no responsibilities

with regard to the match.      He disappeared and took his seat

in due course in the directors' box.      He says he never

noticed anything about Leppings Lane terraces because he was

not really looking at them, but shortly after kick-off he

did notice there was something wrong and once he realised

that people were coming over the top he got up and went to

the Control Box.

      It was he who had to authorise Operational Support and

he did so at ten past.      It was requested somewhat earlier

than that and there is some conflict of evidence as to who

actually requested it.      Was it Mr. Duckenfield or was it

Mr. Jackson?    Mr. Duckenfield thought that he had requested

it.    Mr. Bichard thought it was Mr. Jackson who had

requested it.

      Whether that is right or not, the Control Room clearly

had not understood that it was Mr. Jackson who had requested

it because they came back and said, "Needs ACC approval."

Well, of course, he was there so it was not too difficult to

give it.
                                                             14



     I do not think very much turns on that as to who

precisely said Operational Support.   They were both there,

Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Jackson.

     Mr. Jackson explained to you and, indeed, to all of us,

the methodology of command in disaster situations and the

reason why he did not kick Mr. Duckenfield out of the way

and take over control of the disaster as such.

    Bearing in mind that he did have wider

responsibilities, namely South Yorkshire, and of course

there was no guarantee that something else might not happen

which might divert him, you may feel that that is a

reasonable way of setting about the control structure.

     He, in common with nearly everybody else, said that as

far as he was concerned, although he did not have any

detailed knowledge of the ground, he had always taken it to

be safe for the purpose for which it was intended.

     He also said that although there was nothing specific

about safety in each individual Serial bits about the

Operational Order, he would have expected Officers to have

that in their minds.

     I have merely mentioned Mr. Jackson so you can see I

have not forgotten him, so to speak, and because he happened

to be there.   However, his part in the decision making

process on that day, when it did begin to become actual was

well after all crucial decisions had already been taken,
                                                               15



opening gates, even calling ambulances, was about the same

time as Operational Support had been requested.

     The last person whom I want to mention, and I have

mentioned him on many occasions, but I just want to draw it

together a little bit, is Superintendent Marshall.

Superintendent Marshall of course wasn't in the Control Box

at all.   He was outside.     I am not going to repeat what I

spent a couple of hours on yesterday about what was

happening outside, the activities of the fans, the

activities of the mounted officers, the activities of other

people who were around.     You can remember that I am sure.

It must be clear in your mind.      You have heard it often

enough.

     Mr. Marshall did two things which I think he accepted

were unprecedented.    Well, that is not quite right.     He

did one thing which was unprecedented and that was he closed

Leppings Lane early.

     I have already gone over that and given you some

guidance as to what I consider the significance of that

particular activity in relation to the disaster.      If you

remember I said I had grave doubts whether it would even

fall into the "but for" category:     "But for the closing of

Leppings Lane did X number of people die?"      Even if it did

you might have considerable difficulty in fitting that

decision into the definition of recklessness which I have
                                                             16



already given to you and which I will be repeating in a

little while.

       The second thing he did was...   He told us that until

about 2.30 or perhaps even a few minutes after that, there

were a lot of people there but that in itself did not worry

him.     He was not worried by the number of people but at

some point he said, and indeed others said, that he and the

Police Force were overwhelmed.     Having assessed the

situation he decided that action had to be taken to relieve

the pressure at the front because if that did not happen he

foresaw injury and, indeed, towards the end he foresaw

death.     He therefore initiated the request for the gates to

be opened.

       Other people, of course, were there as well, as we

know, because PC Buxton was doing things, Inspector Bennett

up at the top, Mr. Purdy, Mr. Hand-Davis with his horses,

the Nottinghamshire people who came up, there was quite a

lot of other activity, but his activity in the main was

directed at, as he saw it, relieving the pressure at the

front.

       We have spent a lot of time thinking about alternatives

that he could have employed.     Should he have chosen A

instead of B?     Should he have postponed kick-off?     Should

he have sent people down that side road behind the South

Stand?
                                                         17



     Superintendent Marshall explained to us that he did not

do it and he gave us some reasons.   It is difficult to know

whether all those reasons went through his mind on the day.

I suspect they did not.




            The long and the short of it
The long and the short of it is that he felt the only way

to deal with the situation was to open the gates even

though this was, if acceded to, another unprecedented act.

     You have to be very careful.   Simply because somebody

can say that there were alternatives does not mean that an

action which somebody has taken becomes wrong, or that it

immediately falls into the category of causing an obvious

and serious risk of injury.   Just because there are ways

of doing things better - assuming for a minute that you

thought they could be done better and Mr. Marshall did not

agree that they could - he never thought that he could get

the people down the road and he did not even, in evidence

he said, even in retrospect he did not really think that

postponing the kick-off would have been   the solution.   He

may be wrong in that but that was his view.

     He put through the requests and he   put them through

in a peremptory manner towards the end.    If you are

satisfied, and we have gone through all   the evidence

already about how other people had assessed it, that there

was a serious risk - or indeed that there was a risk to

life and limb - then you may find it difficult to say that

to remedy that was something, a step which should not have

been taken, because the corollary to that, of course, that

if you say well I can see a risk to life and injury but it

breaches our operational plan and therefore we will not do

it, if you think that through you realise that is not
really a tenable situation, particularly when somebody

dies.

     You have also got to remember with regard to Mr.

Marshall that he did not, in fact, open the gates and this

I think is a very important point.     He could have opened

the gates in my judgment, because he was a Superintendent

and although the gates opened from the inside, so he was

physically unable to do it because he was on the outside,

it may well be that if he had gone up to the gate, banged

on it and said, "Open that gate", both the Stewards and

the junior Officers inside would have done what he told

them but he did not do that.     He radioed through and

wanted it authorised and he wanted it done from the

inside, if you like, through Control.

        Now that is a very important point when you come to

think about Mr. Marshall because if you agree with that

then of course he certainly did not do an act, and in fact

it may be difficult even to see an omission, and it may

also be difficult to fit him into some of the other

categories of the legal definition because if his request

was in order to avoid injury you may have some difficulty

in saying that was a breach of duty, or that was a failure

to care for the health and welfare of the people who he

was looking at.

        On the other hand, as I have already pointed out to

you, by putting the request through and particularly
putting it through in the peremptory manner in which he

did he put the people in the Control Room into an

exceedingly difficult situation, for the reasons which I

have explained to you, and just in passing this is where

one of the problems comes up because you cannot aggregate

- you remember this is one of the points in what Lord

Justice Watkins said - you cannot add together the acts or

omissions of different people and say take this one, and

this one, and this one, and this one and add them all

together, then this is bad, this is reckless.     You can't

do it.   Each person stands on his own so it may be that

you may get different people who, if you look at them

individually, have maybe been negligent, they may even

have been incompetent but it is not sufficient.     You have

got to be able to fit them into the definition of

reckless, and you have to do it taking into account all

the evidence, including their explanations.

     So what we have then is, in fact, three unprecedented

things, I think, in relation to this event.     The first one

was the closure of Leppings Lane.   The second was the

evidence of the Officers and it is a matter for you to

decide what weight you put on this in the light of all the

evidence, that the arrival of the crowd in the numbers in

which they did and in the manner in which they did created

an unprecedented situation outside the turnstiles, and in

a sense you may feel that that is so because there is no
                                                             21



evidence that this sort of problem had ever arisen before.

Mr. McGauley told us about a huge crowd.     Do you remember,

he was the chap who lived in Wadsley Lane with his little

baby?    He said there was a big crowd there.   His view was

they would never get in.     Unfortunately he did not stop to

watch and secondly he had never been to a football match

for ten years, so it is very difficult to put too much

weight on his assessment.    He did get into the Ground; the

match was not postponed; the only thing he remembered that

people (a) were escorted round, you know, transferred,

relocated, and (b) that people were climbing up into the

stands sometime during the match.    So he did make that

reference to it but it is not one which I think you can

build very much on.    In fact, I don't think you can build

anything on it in the light of his limited knowledge.        I

am sure his observation was right that there were a lot of

people there but whether he was right that they would not

get in was another matter.     If he had stopped there and

watched it would be different but he did not, he said he

was only there for seconds or a minute, a short time

anyway.

        If you then boil - if I can use that word - all this

down and see what is it really that we are talking about,

you have, I think, you may feel that the chain of

causation is the presence of a large crowd, and I don't

think that you can exclude the fans on a "but for" - but
for the presence of the fans in that location in that

condition the disaster would not have happened.   That is

the first one.   The second one is the opening of the gates

- but for the opening of the gates.   The third point is

but for the entry of the fans in substantial numbers on to

the central terraces the disaster would not have happened,

and but for the fact that these terraces became, I think

one can't get away with it, they became overcrowded

because Dr. Nicholson counted it and they clearly were

overcrowded, this disaster did not happen.   And it depends

to a certain extent where you draw the line but in a final

analysis you may feel that the real apex of the problem is

the issue of whether or not there was such a failure in

not diverting the fans from the tunnel that you can

classify that as creating an obvious and serious risk of

injury.




                             It is not quite as simple
     It is not quite as simple as that because when you are
considering the issue you have also got to take into account,
and this is in fact the evidence of certainly Mr. Duckenfield
and the evidence of quite a lot of other people, as to
whether or not one could;   whether it was obvious that the
entry of the fans on to the terraces would be in such a
manner as to lead to the overcrowding.    So there are two
aspects to it.   There is the closure of the tunnel and the
entry of the fans.    You will know, because I have already
told you, that it is perfectly possible to have more than one
substantial cause.    So they are not mutually exclusive.     You
may feel that the two things both applied and that both were

substantial causes.
     The real difficulty is deciding whether or not -
assuming for a minute that the person whose conduct you are
considering, and really for practical purposes I am now
thinking of the two Officers in the Control Room, and they
have to be taken separately, remember that, you cannot
aggregate their acts - whether or not the situation on that
day in the circumstances in they were, with the knowledge
they had, created an obvious and serious risk of injury and
whether they were, on the one hand, indifferent to this risk
or whether they recognised the risk and they deliberately

went ahead and took it.
     There is another possibility and indeed it is implicit
in some of the explanations that Mr. Duckenfield gave us,
namely that they recognised the situation but thought they
had dealt with it in the sense that he took the view that
once they were in the concourse there was space, they would
recover, and that there was no particular risk.     Of course,
it all hinges, as I said to you yesterday, on     whether or not;
what the assessment, if any, of the    pens were because if the
pens were either not observed or were observed and not noted
to be abnormal then that might help you in deciding whether
or not there was an obvious and serious risk to the people

involved.
     One of the big problems, of course, is that whenever you
think about this, and when everybody thinks about it, one has
to ask the question, "Obvious and serious to who?".     You have
heard the Officers say, "It wasn't obvious to us" and if you
believe      you might say that that is the end of the matter
and it may be but you might - wouldit have been obvious       to
somebody else?   This I find quite a   difficult problem in
deciding how to explain this to you because it would be quite
wrong to say that, if this were a trial say, somebody had
been guilty of manslaughter - which it is not by the way, it
is not a trial - on the basis of what somebody else might
have thought because you try people on the basis of their
thinking and knowledge and not on the basis of what somebody

else might think.
     Where do these other people fit in, the other
experienced, skilled, professionals of average ability as I
describe them, the reasonably skilled Policemen?      I think
they fit in in this way;   that you measure the understanding
of the Officer or Officers or person or persons whose conduct
you are calling into question by what somebody else of
reasonable skill and experience would have recognised.       Then
you assess whether in the light of that judgment the
perception of the Officer in question or the person in
question was so defective that it can be described as giving
rise to an obvious and serious risk.     This is a rather
difficult and complicated concept but I think that is the way
to approach it because otherwise you are in danger of
substituting other people's ideas into the person's, whose
conduct you are considering, mind.     What you are trying tc
establish is whether in fact what he was thinking had some

substance.
     I am getting to the end of this.     Is there any evidence
of what either Officer might or might not have thought?       I
draw your attention to one or two and the first one — and
these are not in any particular order - is Mr. Hand-Davis.
He is the mounted Inspector.   Do you remember?    He saw Gate A
open and a lot of people go in but it would appear that he
thought to himself, "Where on earth are they going?"        There
you have an Officer who did apparently think straight away
that people were going through a gate, "Where are they
heading for?".   You know the geography, of course, is
slightly different between Gate A and Gate C but be that as
it may he realised that a problem might arise if you let a
lot of people in through a gate and indeed Mr. Cobb realised

that as well but he is not a Police Officer.
     What did he do?   He went round to the Control Box,
surveyed the scene and decided it was a pitch invasion.        He
was very sorry, as you know, when he was here giving
                                                                 26

evidence.   He said it was a matter of regret to him that he
had come to that conclusion.     Although he had recognised that
there may be a problem with the people going in, when he got
round, what he saw and what he thought was a pitch invasion.
In fact, he left the scene and took his mounted Officers to
the location where he thought it would be needed in order to
cope with that very situation.
     Mr. Marshall;   I have already mentioned him to you and
his opinion and view that if overcrowding was noted on the
pens then a diversion might have to be effected which would
                                                                      i
have to be taken into account.    Mr. Goddard and Mr. Bichard I
                                                                      I
                                                                      I
am not going to repeat for you because I have only just told
you about them but their evidence is that they did not make
the connection.   They did not see anything on the terraces
and they did not link the gate with the tunnel and that is,
of course, an important point when you are considering the
                                                                      j
question.
     Mr. Lock, who is an ex-Police Officer knew about the
closure of Leppings Lane, the road I mean, and was not
particularly concerned about that even though it was not
something that had happened before.     He had no prior
knowledge that the possibility of disaster could occur.     So
far as he was concerned the ground was safe and so far as he
was concerned the terraces could be treated as a whole though             j

in his days he was aware that there was a system of diverting

fans but, of course, he had never done a Semi Final.
Nevertheless he had an assumption that if need be fans would

be diverted.
                                                              •   27
     I think one of the most interesting pointers of Mr.

Lock's evidence is that first of all when he learned the gate
was opened, and I have already alluded to this, he did not
sort of rush out instantly.    It took him quite a while to get
from where he had learned of the first incident to the pitch.
Nor was he alarmed by the fact that there were 4,500 spaces
still to come.    He then returned, if you remember, and he
discovered the gates had been opened in a more substantial
manner and even then, when he had got back on to the pitch,
and even though he had already previously noted a disparity
in the filling of the pens, he still thought that it was a
pitch invasion.    That was his first reaction to the
situation.   As I have already said he was not particularly
worried about the numbers.    The numbers were, of course, as I
have already said, huge, but you have to put them in relation
to the totals and forget about the Nottingham people because
it is a bit misleading if you do that.    Just think about the

terracing and the West Terrace.
     Yesterday I mentioned Mr. Mackrell and I said that he
busied himself in various activities.    In fact, he was on the
field from time to time and he had noted the disparity as
well and that had not given him any cause for concern either
but, of course, I am not blaming him in any way for that.         As
far as he was concerned he had other duties to perform but
the point I am making is that he had seen it.    He was a
senior man in the company and he did not think it was
necessary to take any further action.    He also told us, which
is pretty obvious, that this particular event on the 15th
                                                                   28
April turned out to be unique and hopefully never ever to be
repeated, not only at Hillsborough but anywhere.    There had
been no previous suggestion from anyone that overcrowding of
such a nature could arise or occur or that anybody had
contemplated the possibility of death resulting.    Finally he
also told us so far as he was concerned the terraces were
treated as a whole.
     Chief Superintendent Mole was not, of course, there on
the day.   Well, he was but not until about five o'clock.        The
Operational Order basically was his.    I do not think he
designed it from scratch but the one that was being used w~s
the one that he had employed and that he had approved.      He
told us he was not aware of any diversion from the tunnel.
He also told us that in Semi Finals the terraces were treated
as a whole.   He explained all about sequential fillings but
on the Semi Finals the terracing was treated as a whole.
He had no problems in the previous years and he would have
expected his Officers to monitor and respond to any
situations which arose.
     In passing I think it is probably right to say that
there must have been some breakdown in communication - if Mr.
Lock is right and Mr. Mole is right - at some point at senior
Officer level as to what occurred on the concourse with
regard to the tunnel.     He said that prior to the 15th April
nothing had occurred in his view which could have alerted the
Police to the situation which presented itself at 14.52,
and this is an important point because what he is talking
about is the situation outside, and this, as I have already
                                                          29




mentioned to you, cannot be ignored when you come to

assess the reactions inside.

       He   felt that if he had been in that situation

he would    have done the same, he would have sought to

reduce the pressure on the outside and for what it

was worth he thought the decision to open the gates

was correct and he also said, interestingly enough,

that if people were in as bad a state as one would

deduce from those comments, that he would have

expected them to seek to recover within the concourse

area   and then to disperse.

       He   told us that he had never had any difficulties

with regard to the signing, but then of course he

had never had 2,000 people or so come in suddenly,

relatively suddenly through a gate.

       He like most of the Officers said that he

would have expected his Officers to use their

initiative, report matters and respond to situations.

       He told us that he would not have been alarmed

by disparity on its own at 14.50.

       He also expressed the view that he would have

expected people to use their commonsense when

entering an enclosed confined space like a tunnel

and not to rush down it, because I have already

told you that the tunnel and what was happening - he

was not there so he does not actually know the manner

of progress of people - and I have already alluded
                                                                30




to you that the manner of progress of people down the

tunnel is very difficult to assess but if Mr. Bullis is

right, if Mr. Hughes is right and even if you consider

that there were quite a lot of the deceased who came in

relatively late and who finished up fairly far forward,

there must have been some pressure taking people forward

into the terracing.
        His view was that his plan had been tried and tested

and was satisfactory but he conceded that opening the gate

did present and create a different situation.    His baseline

on which he operated was that the stadium was safe? that

the radial fences were there to sort out the problem

which had occurred in 1981.
        So there you have a number of people, none of whom

of course had had an experience identical or similar

to what had happened at Hillsborough and this is of course

a problem because you are not likely to find anybody be

they experienced or not who had that situation, and you

therefore in a few moments, well fairly soon when you will

be retiring, will have to try and weigh and sort out what

you make of the story? what you make of the explanations;

what you make of the law; what you make of the assessment

 that other people have made of the situation as it was,

 and in thinking about it you have to take into account all

 the evidence including all the explanations the people

 whose conduct you are calling into question have given

 you.
                                                                 31


A

           You have to take into account, well you must

    decide whether this was an unprecedented situation indeed.

    You have to decide whether the response which was made
B
    was governed to a certain extent by the actions or inter­

    actions of other people and whether in the final analysis

    having satisfied yourself that there was a duty of care;

    that   there was a failure; that there was a substantial,

    whatever it is you are thinking was substantial and you

    may not of course even get past those points, but if you

    do you then have to decide whether the act or omission

    which you are considering was reckless, namely did it

    create an obvious and serious risk of injury and if the

    answer to that is "yes" you have got to go on and think:

    "Did the person whose act or omission we are considering,

    had he recognised it and said:       'I don't care, I am

    going out to take it' or was he indifferent to it?"

    The mere fact that he did not recognise it, I will read

     you the wording correctly in a moment, is not sufficient.

            The point   about that isnegligence on its own is

     not   the same as recklessness.   It is very important to

     have that distinction clearly in your mind.    The fact

     that people made mistakes; that they might be liable

     for civil damages; they may have made serious errors

     even, but they may even have been incompetent is not the

     same as saying that a person is being reckless within

     the meaning of the definition.
            I have stressed this at great length because it
is important that you should understand not only the

positive argument but the negative ones as well because

you need to take a correct decision in the light of the

evidence and of the law and as I have already said,

just two more things on this, you must not aggregate, you

must not add the activities of different people together.

You have got to be satisfied that what you are considering

is attributable to just one person.   There may be more

than one person who might fulfil the criteria but each

person stands on his own and under no circumstances, of

course, must you name anybody and in addition to that

you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on this

particular part of the conclusion.
       If the answer is that it falls on any of the grounds

 or that you cannot be satisfied beyond   reasonable doubt

 on any of the grounds then you move on to the next issue

 which is is this an accident or misadventure? was there

 an intentional act which had unintentional consequences

 or, we all know what the word "accident? means, was it a

 coming together of multitudinous bits which added up

 in the end to disaster and that you decide on the balance

 of probability and if you can’t decide on that you bring

 in an open verdict on the basis that there is insufficient

 evidence to enable you to reach a decision.
       Now I am not going to let you go yet.   I am going

  to stop for ten minutes and then I am very briefly going

  to go through each individual case and just remind you of
                                                           33




their names and the causes of death and possibly their

ages and things like that because I think it is exceedingly

important that we finish, apart from the final legal

direction, on what we are really here for, which is how

did these 95 individual people come to meet their death?

      We are not interested in who is responsible, we

are interested in how those people   died, so we will do

that after our break and then you can retire.
                    (Short adjournment)


      Now I am going to go through and remind you basically

of the people who you are going to be considering and

as I have already told you, you have to consider your

verdict in respect of each and every one so you are going

to finish up with a wad of inquests, 95 of them.

      What I am going to give you - I have already

explained this to you - I am going to give you pre-typed

ones with all the bits which are not controversial, so

to speak, and indeed the rest may not be controversial

either but matters which I thought I could help you with

and I am also going to give you blank forms so if you

don't want to use the typed versions you are free to do

whatever is more convenient for you.
      Do not insert the date when you are dealing with

 these and don't sign them until after I have heard the

verdict, okay, and the conclusion and then I will tell

 you what we do, how we are going to set about that when

 the time comes.
                                                            34




     Remember you are dealing with 95 individual

Inquests, individual people.   You apply your mind in respect

of each one of those persons and if you are considering

the possibility of unlawfully killed you work your way

through the people in respect of whom I have said that

you may consider the issue and some you may find take

longer than others.    It is up to you.   I am not giving

you any advice on that, you do whatever you want and

however you want it.
      At the end of the day you are bringing in a verdict

in respect of one of these people who died, not in

respect of anybody else, so each one has to be considered

individually, though of course you may find that some

because of their locations, you may be able to say:

"Well yes, there is a similarity there" but you still

have to think of each one.
      These are the blank ones.    I will put those there

now and in addition to the Inquisitions which I will be

 handing to you, I gave you a schedule which lists the

 names, the ages, the times of certifications, the doctors

 who certified and the date on which the interim Inquests

 were held when you heard the evidence in respect of those

 and we circulated that list to all the lawyers so you

 all know what it is that the jury have got.
       Right, I am not going to take you through the detail

 of what we call the summaries as to where the person was

 taken and you know who was involved because you have heard
                                                                                36




      The third person we heard about was Simon Bell.
       .    on the 15th August 1971 at Liverpool.
He was a Y.T.S. Trainee of 8 Moorside Road, Great Crosby,
Liverpool. He died of traumatic asphyxia.

        Th?hee2 2 „ n a y e! » 5 Wtn                   R tutty
E S n E l S T o f S f Oxford Road# Waterloo. Liverpool and he
died of 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.
         The next person was Christopher Edwards.                     He was
S t e e l ^ W o r k e r ^ f ‘ 24 ^ s \ o a d *   ^ ttlH itto n .'I S u lh   .
S             m     cause of death was 1(a) traumata asphyxia.
      The next was James Gary Aspinall. He was born on
    ni-h March 1971 at Liverpool. He was a CierK Dy
occupation of 2 Bakers Green Road, Huyton, Liverpoo .
His cause of death was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.




                                        Derrick George Godwin
                                                                          37
A

          Derrick George Godwin was born at Cirencester on the
     24th October, 1964.   He was an accounts clerk and lived at
     Parthia, 42 Hambridge Lane, Lechlade, Gloucestershire.  The
     cause of death was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.

B         Colin Andrew Hugh William Sefton was born on the 25th
     of March, 1966, at Liverpool.   he was a security officer of
     24 Tarlswood, Skelmersdale.   His cause of death was 1(a)
     traumatic asphyxia.
          David Hawley was born on the 26th of January, 1950 at
     Liverpool.   He was a diesel fitter of 64 Mayfield Avenue,
     Thatto Heath, St. H e l e n s M e r s e y s i d e . His cause of death
     was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.
          Martin Kenneth Wild was born on the 15th
     Stockport.   He was a printing worker of 55 Jubilee Street,
     New Mills, Stockport, Cheshire.   His cause of death was
     1(a) traumatic asphyxia.
          Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron was born on the           25th June,
     1921 at Preston.   He was a retired postal worser           of 10
     Sawley Crescent, Moornook, Preston, Lancashire.             The cause
Ti   of death in his case was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia;
     bicuspid aortic valve.  Ischaemic heart disease.            •

          Adam Edward Spearritt was born on the 13th of June,
     1974 at Liverpool.   He was a schoolboy.   He was the son
     Edward Spearritt, a taxi driver, and Janet Elizabeth
     Spearritt, of 1 Priory Close, Halton Village, Runcorn,
     Cheshire.   The cause of death m the case of Adam was H>a;
     traumatic asphyxia.
          David William Birtle was born on the 6th of May, 1966,
     at West Bromwich.    He was a heavy goods v e h i c l e ^ driver of
     Central Hotel, Old Fallow Road, Blackfords Cannock,
     Staffordshire and the cause of his death was 1(a) traumatic
     asphyxia.
          Stephen Francis Harrison was born on the 6th of April,
     1958at Huyton with Roby, Liverpool.    He was a driver by
     occupation of 33 Lydieth Lea, Netherley,#Liverpool.    The
     cause of death in his case was 1(a) respiratory failure, due
     to (b) traumatic pulmonary contusions.   2 Fractured left
     with pneumothorax.
          Gary Harrison was b o m on the 1st of January, 1962 at
     Liverpool.   He was a driver of 3.45 Steerscroft,
     Stockbridge, Huy ton, Liverpool.   The cause of death wa
     1(a) traumatic asphyxia.    2 Myocardial ischaemia, coronary
     artery atheroma.
           Gary Collins was born on the 7th August,      at
      Liverpool.   He was a quality controller of 22 Uolfenden
                                                             38



Avenue, Bootle, Liverpool.   His cause of death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.  2 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage.

     Peter McDonnell was born on the 9th February, 1968 at
Liverpool.   He was a bricklayer and painter of 18 Hillview,
Kelton Park, Liverpool.   The cause of his death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.
     Henry Charles Rogers was born on the 14th of February,
1972 at Hertford in Hertfordshire.   He was a schoolboy of
Meadowville, Pulford Lane, Dodleston, Chester.   The cause
of his death was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.
     Gary Philip Jones was born on the 18th December, 1970
at Liverpool.   He was a student of 9 Empress Close, Green
Park, Maghull, Merseyside.   The cause of death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia. 2 Inhalation of stomach contents.

     John McBrien was born on the 15th February, 1971 at
Bromborough. He was a student of The Old Vicarage, Well
Street, Holywell, Clwyd.   The cause of his death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.
     Stephen Paul Copoc was born on the 1st of August, 1968
at Liverpool.   He was a landscape gardener of 12 Petworth
Close, Speke, Liverpool.   The cause of death was 1(a)
inhalation of stomach contents due to (b) crusn asphyxia.

     Francis Joseph McAllister was born on the 10th of
October, 1961 at Liverpool.   He was a fireman of 22 Church
Road, Roby, Liverpool.   The cause of his death was l(.a;
crush asphyxia.
     Stuart Paul William Thompson was born on the 16th of
September, 1971 at Liverpool.   He was an apprentice joiner,
11 Whitehouse Lane, Formby, Liverpool.   The cause of his
death was l(a) crush asphyxia.
     William Roy Pemberton was born on the 18th of January,
1966 at Liverpool.   He was a student of 211Hunts Cross
Avenue, Woolton, Liverpool.   The cause of his death was
1(a) crush asphyxia.
     Tracey Elizabeth Cox was born on the 4th of August,
1965, at Walton and Weybridge in Surrey.   She was a student
of Greystones, Station Road, Minety, Malmesbury, Wiltshire.
The cause of her death was 1(a) crush asphyxia.

     David Leonard Thomas was born on the 14th May, 1965, at
Birkenhead.   He was a joiner of 30 Moorland Road, Higher
Tranmere, Birkenhead.  The cause of his death was 1(a) crush
asphyxia.
                                                             39



     Peter Andrew Harrison was born on the 4th of May, 1973
at Liverpool.   He was a schoolboy, the son of John Harrison
an HGV driver and Patricia Margaret Harrison, an auxiliary
nurse of 124 Finch Lane, Knotty Ash, Liverpool.   The cause
of his death was 1(a) crush asphyxia.

     Paul Clark was born on the 12th March, 1971 at
Holbrook, Derby.   He was an apprentice electrician of 10
Rowthorne Avenue, Swanwick, Derbyshire.   The cause of his
death was 1(a) inhalation of stomach contents due to (b)
crush asphyxia.

     David George Rimmer was born on the 15th September,
1950 at Ormskirk.   He was a sales manager of 20 Thornwood,
Skelmersdale, Lancashire.   The cause of his death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Kevin Tyrrell was born on the 19th of June, 1973 at
Liverpool.   He was a schoolboy, son of Francis Tyrrell, a
PSV driver, and Margaret Rosemary Tyrrell, of 150
Masseyfield Road, Brookvale, Runcorn, Cheshire.   The cause
of death for Kevin is 1(a) inhalation of stomach contents
and 2 crush asphyxia.




             Carl Brown was born
                                                           40



     Carl Brown was born on 21st March, 1971, at Leigh,
Greater Manchester.  He was a student, of 112 Windermere
Road, Leigh, Greater Manchester, and the cause of his
death was (la) inhalation of stomach contents; (2) crush
asphyxia.

     Arthur Horrocks was born on 19th January, 1948, at
Liverpool. He was an insurance agent of 67 Town Lane,
Bebington, The Wirral, Liverpool, and the cause of his
death was:  (la) inhalation of stomach contents; (2) crush
asphyxia.
     Sarah Louise Hicks was born on 10th April, 1970, at
Teesside North.  She was a student of 1 White Craig Close,
Hatch End, Pinner, Middlesex.  The cause of her death was
(la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Victoria Jane Hicks was born on 20th July, 1973, at
Bedford. She was a schoolgirl, daughter of Trevor Hicks,
a managing director, and Jennifer Hicks, technician, now a
student, of 1 White Craig Close, Hatchend, Pinner,
Middlesex.

     Paul Anthony Hewitson was born on 18th September,
1962, at Liverpool. He was a general builder of 20
Hillary Drive, Crosby, Liverpool.  The cause of his death
was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     I forgot to read Victoria's cause of death which was
(la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Andrew Mark Brookes as born on 10th December, 1962,
at Brotnsgrove. He was a car worker of 11 York Close,
Sidemoor, Bromsgrove and the cause of his death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Inger Shah was born on 13th October, 1950, in
Denmark. She was a secretary of 24 Woodstock Road,
Golders Green, London.  Her maiden name was Agerup and the
cause of her death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Gordon  Rodney Horn   was born on 26th March, 1969, at
Liverpool. He was of no    known occupation and lived at 34
St. James Drive, Bootle,   Liverpool. The cause of his
death was (la) traumatic   asphyxia.

     Thomas  Howard was born on 24th May, 1949, at
Liverpool.    He was a chemical process worker of8Oxmore
Close, Brookvale, Runcorn in Cheshire, and the cause of
his death was (la) crush asphyxia.

     Christine Anne Jones as born on 3rd November, 1961,
at Lancaster.  She was a senior radiographer, wife of
Stephen Jones, a radiographer, 92 Marsh Way, Penwortham,
Preston, and her maiden name was Alderson.   The cause of
death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     David John Benson was born on 20th November, 1966, at
Liverpool. He was a sales representative of 29 Hall Nook,
Penketh, in Warrington. The cause of his death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Joseph Clark was born on 26th February, 1960, at
Kirkby. He was a fork lift truck driver of 15 Changford
Green, Northwood, Kirkby, and he died of (la) traumatic
asphyxia.
     Peter Reuben Thompson ....   (interruption from the
Jury) Which one is out of sequence?    I think I will carry
on with the order I have got it at the moment and we will
have a look at that before I let you go just to make sure
of what the reason for that is.   I have got a feeling that
one is out of order - Mr. Howard.

     Peter Reuben Thompson was born on 27th April, 1958,
at Whiston. He was an engineer of 31 Parkside Crescent,
Orrell in Wigan, and the cause of his death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.
     Thomas Steven Fox was born on 14th June, 1967, at
Birkenhead.  He was a production worker of 30 Carlton
Road, Birkenhead in Merseyside, and the cause of his death
was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Colin Mark Ashcroft was born on 8th June, 1969, in
Colchester.  He was a gardener of 58 Strawberry Close,
Birchwood, Warrington, and the cause of his death was
traumatic asphyxia.

     Ian David Whelan was born on 11th March, 1970, at
Warrington. He was a junior clerk of 4 Duckworth Grove.
Padgate, Warrington, and the cause of his death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

     David Steven Brown was born on 29th September, 1963,
at Wrexham.  He was a machine operator of 1 Hill View,
Holt Road, Llanypwll, Wrexham, and the cause of his death
was (la) traumatic asphyxia.
     Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons was born on 30th January,
1955, at Liverpool. He was a moulding technician of 5
Millingford Grove, Ashton in Makerfield, Wigan, and the
cause of his death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Anthony Peter Kelly was born on 12th August, 1959, at
Birkenhead.  He was unemployed of 2 Harthill Mews, Ford
Estate, Bidston, Wirral, Merseyside, and the cause of his
death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.
     Jon Paul Gilhooley was born on 25th October, 1978, at
Merseyside.  He was a schoolboy, son of Ronald Gilhooley,
a building worker, and Jacqueline Mary Gilhooley, a
support worker, of 11 Radway Road, Huyton in Merseyside,
and the cause of his death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Henry Thomas Burke was born on 23rd March, 1932, at
Liverpool.  He was a roofing contractor of 5 Derwent
Close, Kirkby in Liverpool.  The cause of his death was
(la) traumatic asphyxia.
     Christopher Barry Devonside was born on 1st April,
1971, at Bebington in Wirral.  He was a college student of
20 Stapleton Road. Formby in Liverpool, and the cause of
his death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Jonathon Owens was born on 19th March, 1971, at St.
Helens, Merseyside. He was a clerical officer of 132 Plas
Newton Lane, Chester, and the cause of his death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.
     James Robert Hennessy was born on 24th September,
1959, in Liverpool. He was a plasterer of 11 Northern
Rise, Great Sutton, Ellesmere Port, South Wirral, and the
cause of his death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     David William Mather was born on 17th October, 1969,
at Liverpool.  He was a Post Office counter clerk of 122
Page Moss Lane, Huyton, Liverpool, and the cause of his
death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     James Philip Delaney was born on 10th October, 1969,
at Wirral.  He was a car assembly worker of 1 Horstone
Crescent, Great Sutton in South Uirral and the cause of
his death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     John Alfred Anderson was born on 2nd June, 1926, at
Liverpool.  He was a security officer of 108 Hawksmoor
Road, Fazakerley, Liverpool 10, and the cause of his death
was (la) shock and haemorrhage, due to (b) traumatic
transection of the aorta, (2; traumatic asphyxia.

     Christopher James Traynor was born on 18th January,
1963, at Birkenhead.  He was a joiner of 25 Astonwood
Road, Tranmere, Birkenhead and the cause of his death was
(la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Martin Kevin Traynor was born on 20th May, 1972, at
Birkenhead.  He was an apprentice joiner, son of James
Traynor, a gardener/handyman, and Joan Traynor, of 43
Gorsefield Road, Prenton in Birkenhead. The cause of his
death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.
                                                        43



     Philip John Steele was born on 24th May, 1973. He
was a schoolboy, son of Leslie Maurice Steele, self
employed, and Dolores Philomena Steele, an office clerk,
of 12 Wilmcote Grove. Ainsdale, Merseyside, and the cause
of his death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

     Marian Hazel McCabe was born on 13th February, 1968,
at Strood in Kent.  She was a factory worker of 60 Oldwyk,
Vange, Basildon in Essex.  The cause of her death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Steven Joseph Robinson was born on 11th August, 1971,
in Liverpool. He was an auto electrician of 40 Dowhills
Road, Blundellsands in Liverpool, and the cause of his
death was (la) crush asphyxia.




                              Thomas Anthony Howard
                                                                 44
     Thomas Anthony Howard was born on the 28th February 1975
in Liverpool. He was a schoolboy, son of Thomas Howard, a
chemical process worker, and Linda Joan Howard, 144
Masseyfield Road, Brookvale, Runcorn, Cheshire. The cause of
his death was la. traumatic asphyxia. This is the one we
have got a mistake in the order and I will sort it out before
I let you go. There is a Thomas Howard and Thomas Anthony
Howard, father and son, and we have got them out of order.
We will just press on.
     Graham John Roberts was born on 5th May 1964 at
Liverpool. He was a Gas Board engineer of 6 Martins Lane,
Wallasey, Merseyside, Wirral. The cause of his death was la.
crush asphyxia.
     Kester Roger Marcus Ball was born on 2nd August 1972 at
Ormskirk in Lancashire. He was a schoolboy, the son of Roger
Charles Ball, a banker, and Brenda Jean Ball, of 26a
Farringford Close, Chiswell Green, St. Albans, Herts. The
cause of his death was la. traumatic asphyxia.
     Eric George Hughes was born on 28th October 1946 in
Liverpool. He was a sales executive of 74 Barmouth Close,
Callands, Warrington, Cheshire. The cause of his death was
la. crush asphyxia.
     Raymond Thomas Chapman was born on the 29th June 1938 at
Birkenhead. He was a machine setter of 84 Prenton Dell Road,
Prenton, Birkenhead. The cause of his death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.
     Lee Nicol was born on 3rd January 1975 in Liverpool. He
was the son of Donald Alfred Nicol, a forklift truck driver,
and Patricia Frances Nicol, a school escort (handicapped
children), of 12 Smollett Street, Bootle, Merseyside. The
cause of his death was la. cerebral anoxia, b. traumatic
asphyxia, 2. acute bronchitis and bronchopneumonia.
     Paul Brian Murray was born on the 12th April 1975 at
Stoke-on-Trent. He was a schoolboy, son of Anthony John
Murray, a telephone engineer, and Edna Catherine Murray, a
sub-postmistress (part-time), of 25 Harcourt Avenue, Meir,
Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire. The cause of death in the
case of Paul was la. crush asphyxia.
     Brian Christopher Matthews was born on the 19th October
1950 at Liverpool. He was a financial consultant of 142
Sugar Lane, Knowsley, Liverpool. The cause of death was la.
inhalation of stomach contents and b. crush asphyxia.
     G r a h a m John Wright was born on the 31st July 1971 at
Liverpool. He was an insurance clerk of 6 Longview Lane,
Huyton, Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la. crush
asphyxia.
                                                               45
     Michael David Kelly was born on the 1st March 1951 at
Liverpool.    Hewas a warehouseman of 39 Elmhouse Road, Old
Swan, Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la. crush
asphyxia.
     Carl Darren Hewitt was born on the 21st May 1971 at
Leicester. He was an apprentice cabinetmaker of 109 Severn
Road, Oadby, Leicester. The cause of his death was la.
inhalation of vomit and traumatic asphyxia.
     Nicholas Michael Hewitt was born on 5th March 1973 at
Leicester.   Hewas a schoolboy of 109 Severn Road, Oadby,
Leicester,  andthe cause of his death was la. traumatic
asphyxia.
     Peter Francis Tootle was born on 2nd February 1968 at
Liverpool. He was a labourer of 3b Page Walk, Langsdale
Street, Liverpool. The cause of his death was la. traumatic
asphyxia.
     Nicholas Peter Joynes was born on the 20th September
1961 at Liverpool. He was an industrial engineer of 10
Nursery Road, Lydiate, Liverpool, and the cause of his death
was la. traumatic asphyxia.
     Kevin Daniel Williams was born on 27th May 1973 at
Southport. He was a schoolboy, the son of Alan Howard, a
welder, and Ann Elizabeth Williams, stepson of James Stephen
Williams, an engineer, of 4 Whitehouse Avenue, Formby,
Merseyside. The cause of his death was la. traumatic
asphyxia.
     Philip Hammond was born on   8th December 1974 at
Liverpool.  He was a schoolboy,   son of Philip Hammond, a Post
Office executive, and Hilda May   Hammond, a senior sister at
Walton Hospital, of 21 Rosemont   Road, Aigburth, Liverpool.
The cause of his death was la. respiratory failure due to b.
traumatic pulmonary contusions, 2. fractured rib and
pulmonary lacerations with haemorrhage.
     Patrick John Thompson was born on the 4th September 1953
at Liverpool. He was a railway guard of 59 Sherbourne
Avenue, Macketts Lane, Liverpool. The cause of his death was
la. traumatic asphyxia.
     Eric Hankin was born on the 26th   October 1955 at
Livsrpool . He was a male nurse of 53   Croftfield, Maghull,
Liverpool, and the cause of his death   was la. traumatic
asphyxia, 2. inhalation of blood from   traumatic epistaxia.
     Gary Christopher Church was born on the 31st December
1969 at Liverpool. He was a joiner of 3 Doric Street,
Seaforth, Liverpool. The cause of his death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.
     Joseph Daniel McCarthy.was born on the 11th February
1968 in London. He was a student of 9 Amherst Road, Ealing,
London, and the cause of his death was la. traumatic asphyxia
and 2. traumatic subdural haemorrhage.
     Paula Ann Smith was born on the 27th June 1962 at
Liverpool. She was of no known occupation of 54 Wapshare
Road, Norris Green, Liverpool, and the cause of her death was
la. traumatic asphyxia.
     Paul William Carlile was born on the 8th.August 1969 at
Liverpool. He was a plasterer of 5 Easdale Walk, Tower Hill,
Kirkby, Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.
      Carl David Lewis was born on the 4th May 1970 at
Liverpool. He was a labourer of C16 Moorfields, Tower Hill,
Kirkby, Liverpool. The cause of his death was cardio
respiratory arrest due to b. cerebral oedema due to c.
tiraumatic asphyxia.
     Peter Andrew Burkett was born on the 16th February 1965
at Birkenhead. He was an insurance clerk of 101 Singleton
Avenue, Prenton, Birkenhead. The cause of his death was la
traumatic asphyxia.
     Richard Jones was born on 5th October 1963 at Liverpool.
He was an office worker of 8 Ravenna Road, Allerton,
Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la traumatic
asphyxia.

     Barry Glover was born on 30th March 1962 at Bury,
Lancashire. He was a greengrocer of 49 Garnett Street,
Ramsbottom, Bury, Lancashire, and the cause of his death was
traumatic asphyxia.
     Alan Johnston was born on the 6th March 1960 in
Liverpool. He was a senior accounts assistant of 138
Crescent Road, Walton, Liverpool, and the cause of his death
was la. traumatic asphyxia.
     Carl William Rimmer was born on the 21st February 1968
at Liverpool. He was a video technician of 68 Woddfarm Hey,
Stockbridge Village, Liverpool. The cause of death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.
     Alan McGlone was born on the 13th September 1960 at
Liverpool. He was a factory worker of 29 Mintor Road,
Northwood, Kirkby, Liverpool. The cause of his death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.
     Keith McGrath was born on 18th September 1971 at
Liverpool. He was an apprentice painter of 6 Gresley Close,
Liverpool. The cause of his death was la. traumatic
asphyxia.
     Ian Thomas Glover was born on 10th January 1969 at
Liverpool. He was a street paver of 63 Roxburgh Street,
Kirkdale, Liverpool. The cause of his death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.




                                       /Paul David Brady.
      Paul David Brady was born on the 23rd August 1967
at Bootle. He was a Refrigeration Engineer of 11 Thornfield
Road, Thornton/ Liverpool. The cause of his death was
1(a) cardio-respiratory arrest; (b) cerebral oedema from
hypoxia and (c) traumatic asphyxia.
      Barry Sidney Bennett was born on the 26th April 1962
at Anfield in Liverpool. He was a Seaman of 2 Tonbridge Drive
Aintree, Liverpool and the cause of his death was 1 (a)
traumatic asphyxia.
       Kevin Tyrrell was the lad who I did not have the
right form for.     I will just re-read him because I have not
been given the original so it is difficult for me to check

,it.
      It is Kevin Tyrrell/ date of birth 19th June 1973
at Liverpool. He was a schoolboy/ son of Francis Tyrrell
a P.S.V. Driver and Margaret Rosemary Tyrrell of
150 Masseyfield Road/ Brookvale, Runcorn/ Cheshire.
The cause of death was 1(a) inhalation of stomach contents;
2 crush asphyxia.
       The one we had out of sequence was in fact Thomas Howard
 I will re-read him.    I want to read these two again so
 that I am quite sure I have got them right because I may

 have got confused with the names.
       It is Thomas Howard, date of birth 24th May 1949
 at Liverpool/ a Chemical Process Worker of 8 Oxmore Close,
 Brookvale/ Runcorn/ Cheshire.
       Thomas Anthony Howard/ 28th February 1975 at Liverpool.
 A schoolboy. Son of Thomas Howard a Chemical Process
 Worker and Linda Joan Howard of 144 Masseyfield Road,
 Brookvale, Runcorn, Cheshire.
       Apparently I made one other    error when I was reading

 Philip John Steele's I did not give his place of birth as

 being Southport.
       MR. KING: Sir, could I just clarify Colin Andrew
 Sefton, who was the eighth person you mentioned. There had
 been one query from behind me as to the year of birth.
 The year of birth is 1966.
      THE CORONER: What w e ’have got on the form and if
X have misread it I am sorry, 25th March 1966. That is
correct, is it, at Liverpool?

       MR. KING:     Thank you sir.
      THE CORONER: My mentor tells me that I have made
another mistake with Thomas Howard.  I have left out his
cause of death, 1(a) crush asphyxia.
       Now that is in fact all the people whom you are

going to be dealing with.      Can I pass them to you?

(Forms handed to the jury)
       What we are going to do now is I am simply going

to   re-remind   you of the core definition, legal definition,

because you will remember that I have given you long

explanations and elaborations of these to try and make

it easier.       I don't intend to do all that again because

I expect that      you will have it in mind but I think I do

need to re-reraind you of the centre part and I also need

to remind you of the fact that there are certain rules

which you have to, 36B which I read to you and there is

another one as well, Rule 42.
        36B is the rule which requires that you must not

add any riders, who, when, where and how and nothing else

and the other rule, Rule 42, is the rule which provides

that the Inquisition must not appear to determine by

name anybody who may have criminal liability, nor must

 it determine civil liability, so that is those two rules.

You will remember that, won't you.
        The three verdicts which you are considering are

 unlawfully killed.      That has got to be beyond reasonable
    A                                                                      50
\
\




            doubt.    Accidental death or misadventure which if you are

            considering it has to be on the balance of probability

            and the open verdict is when on the evidence which you
        B   have heard you are unable to reach a conclusion.     You

            must reach a verdict for each and everyone of the deceased.

                     You must consider the order in which you consider

            them.     You   have got to start with the unlawfully killed

            because that is the highest standard of proof and then

            you work your way down.
                     Once you have satisfied yourself on a verdict that

            is it as far as that particular person is concerned.

                     Lord Justice Watkins set out the principal conditions

            which you have to consider and that is:
                     "1. You have to be satisfied beyond reasonable
                     doubt when you are considering unlawfully
                     killed that the person whose conduct you
                     are considering had a duty to have regard to
                     the health and welfare of the deceased.

                     2. That in the circumstances there was a
                     failure to do what should have been done for
                     the health and welfare of the deceased.

                      3. That that failure amounted to a substantial
                      cause of death.
                      4. That the failure amounted to recklessness.

                      5. Recklessness means that there was an obvious
                      and serious risk to the health and welfare o
                      the deceased and that the person whose conduct
                      is being considered having regard to his duty
                      was (a) indifferent to such a risk or (b)
                      recognising that risk to be present deliberately
                      chose to run that risk by doing nothing about
                      it.




                                        6.
      6. It must be emphasised, however,^that a failure to
      appreciate that there was such a risk would not, by
      itself, be sufficient to amount to recklessness.

      7. You can only return a verdict of unlawfully killed
      if you can attribute these ingredients to a single
      individual whose conduct is being called in question;
      such an individual should on no account be named or
      otherwise identified."
      1 just want to repeat one other matter with regard to

accidental death and that is you should remember what I told

you, that it straddles the whole spectrum from where you

sayj "Well, nobody can be blamed,      to the position where in

fact you may feel that there was negligence, but it covers

the whole of that range and must be borne in mind.       In

exactly the same way you must not, of course, name anybody

because you would be appearing to determine civil.liability

if you were to do that.

      Is it reasonably clear to you?

      When you go out, once you are out you are out, but that

does not mean to say you are on your own.       If you find that

need more directions or that something is not clear to you,

you bang on the door and the Jury Officer will bring you

back and you can then tell me what it is that is concerning

you and I will either deal with it there and then if I can

or if I have to research it I will research it and deal with

it.

      Do not consult the Jury Officer or anybody else.        kll
communications amongst yourselves, of course.       You can talk

as much as you like.      All other communications only in
Court, in public- with everybody who wishes to be here, here,

and to me.

       How the next thing we want to do is to swear in the

Jury Officers, and I am very fortunate in that the Crown

Court has kindly allowed two of their people who are

experienced in looking after juries to come and look after

you.

                 (The Jury Bailiffs were sworn)

       Now the next thing we need to do is to give you the

exhibits.     These are the complete set of the exhibits.    We

have not - you remember I said we were going to try and give

you the original photographs?     It has proved a jolly

difficult task, but if you find tnat you really need a

better quality one then bang on the door, come back in, and*

we will find you that particular one.     Certainly if you

think you need the best quality vou can get, then so be it.

The other thing we need to do is to show you how to use the

video equipment.

       While we are waiting for the video equipment, this does

not concern the jury so much but it is of interest to

everybody else, I have no idea - and you have as much time

as you need, I am not putting you under any time pressure

how long the jury is going to be.     It is a matter for you

 to decide where you secrete yourselves, so to speak, so that
                                                           53



if the jury does come back either for directions or to bring

in their verdicts you are available.

       (The Jury were shown how to operate the video)

     Is that clear to you?

     Right, ladies and gentlemen, it is over to you.

               (The Jury retired at 12.33 pm)

     MR. KING:   Speaking from ignorance totally, I noted
you did not address the jury on the need for them to reach a
unanimous verdict.   I don't know whether that is something
you would normally do.

     THE CORONER:    I did not do it deliberately because if
they do not come back within a certain number of hours I
will bring them back and say they can reach a majority
verdict, but I did not want to put it into their heads that
there was anything other than a unanimous verdict.    Perhaps
I should have mentioned it, but my intention was-to do it
the other way round.

     MR. MANNING:   Just before I and anybody else goes to
secrete themselves, sir, may I enquire this, with respect:
clearly the jury has a long deliberation and a lot to think
about.   There may come a time this afternoon when an
inquiry may need to be made as to whether there is any
reasonable prospect of their being able to deliver that
verdict today or whether it would be then necessary for them
to have to remain overnight.   Could you give us some
indication at what time you might think of making that
inquiry?

     THE CORONER:   The answer is at about four o'clock that
I would wish to make the inquiry.  I think it would be
premature to make it any earlier than that.   I have no
idea, but I suspect with Inquests of these lengths, they may
well want more time than that.    If they do say they are
nowhere near, and in fact when I get them back I will
probably talk about the unanimous verdict then, but if they
say they are nowhere near I will tell them they can go on
until 4.30 and then they are off to their hotel for the
night.
     M R . ISAACS: Sir, on the question of unanimity, or
otherwise, of verdicts, you mentioned earlier that you would
at some stage wish to give them a majority direction.    Do
we take it from what you have just said that having regard
