       Ri.:              ;3                                                                 53 iA
          2 4 A i- ’£V)£>
                                                  •ruox
                                                                 <£c*v\,
    see i*iT ;i4;Y gf s t a t e                                   /(v^
                                       10 DOWNING STREET r* / / 2SJPR !Mg £=y? ,
                                          L O N D O N SW1A 2AA                    **’
From the Principal Private Secretary


                                                                    21 April 1989

                                                                              n     M"-ftnuri "j
    JW ,                 ,                                                          N W -j
                                                                                    N   K/t/th

                                  HILLSBOROUGH GROUND DISASTER                      ^              ^

       The Prime Minister held a meeting at No 10 Downing Street                                       k
  at 9.30 am yesterday to discuss the management of the Football
  Spectators Bill in the light of the Hillsborough Ground
  disaster.  Present were the Home Secretary, the Secretary of
  State for the Environment, the Lord President, the Lord Privy
  Seal, the Chief Whip and the Minister for Sport.
  Mr A J Langdon (Cabinet Office) was also present.

       I should be grateful if recipients of this letter would
  restrict circulation to those officials with a strict
  operational need to kn ow .

        The Secretary of State for the Environment said that,
  since the Prime Minister's meeting on 17 April, it had been
  established that a power could be added to the Football
  Spectators Bill to allow the requirement of all-seated
  accommodation as part of the licensing arrangements under the
  Bill.   To enable this addition to be made in the House of
  Commons, however, a formal Instruction would need to be moved
  at some point after Second Reading.   The Home Secretary
  commented that he could also issue guidance encouraging all­
  seated accommodation to the local authorities responsible for
  the licensing of football grounds.   Although this would not
  have the force of law, he would expect it to have a real
  effect, although it would take time (and money) before
  all-seated accommodation became the norm.   E^ut even a
  statutory requirement would take some time to be implemented.

      The Home Secretary explained that, while Lord Justice
 Taylor was responsible for the conduct of his inquiry and
 could not be given instructions by the Government, it was
 understood that he intended to produce an interim report on
 physical measures in June or July.  The inquiry's full report
 would not be available before the end of the year.

      The Chief Whip said that there were many Government
 backbenchers who had never been more than reluctant supporters
 of the Football Spectators Bill, and who were now seizing on
 Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry as an excuse to dissociate
 themselves from it. The Home Secretary and the Secretary of
 State for the Environment would confirm from the approaches


                                            CONFIDENTIAL
                                 2



that backbenchers had made to them that the proposition of
waiting for Lord Justice Taylor's report now commanded
considerable support in the Party, including some notable
names, and he could not recommend an early Second Reading of
the Bill in the House of Commons.  Looking ahead, the obvious
problems would be whether Lord Justice Taylor would produce an
interim report early enough, and whether it was feasible to
complete the Bill in the light of the interim report in the
closing weeks of the Session, since it was most unlikely that
there would be co-operation from the Opposition.

     The following main points were then made in this part of
the discussion.

    - The rationale of the present target for Royal Assent in
      July was that this would enable the membership scheme to
      start operation in the Spring of 1990 (ie towards the end
      of the 1989-90 football season).  If Royal Assent were
      postponed to the end of the Session in, say, October, the
      scheme might not be ready even for the start of the
      1990-91 season.  If the Bill were withdrawn, however, the
      whole timetable would slip by twelve months.

    - The powers in Part 2 of the Bill to enable the imposition
       of restriction orders on convicted hooligans, so as to
       require their attendance at reporting centres in this
       country when major matches were being played abroad,
       would take some time to achieve their full effect, since
       they could only be applied to people who were convicted
       after the Act was brought into force.   The proposed
       restriction orders had general cross-Party support.   On
       the other hand, the National Membership Scheme, to which
       the Labour Party was opposed, would enable much earlier
       action to be taken to prevent hooligans from this country
       attending international matches held abroad.   The reason
       for this was that the tickets for such matches were
       allocated by the Football Association, which would be
       able to inform itself about the people excluded from the
       membership scheme, and ensure that tickets were not
       issued to them in this country, though some football
    il supporters might evade this screening by obtaining
/   [| tickets abroad.  The commencement of the membership
       scheme in Spring 1990 would enable thes,e arrangements to
       be in being for the World Cup matches due to be held in
       Italy in June 1990, in which there was still a prospect
       that the English team might participate.

    - There was little doubt that opponents of the National
      Membership Scheme would submit evidence on their views to
      Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry, claiming that the
      Hillsborough disaster would have been worse if the scheme
      had been in operation.  There were many good arguments
      against that, but the inquiry would keep the matter in
      the public eye and it could not be assumed that
      Lord Justice Taylor would not comment on the scheme.

    - The Bill would, at the very least, need to be taken
      through its Second Reading in the House of Commons before


                           CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL
                                3



     tha Summer Recess if it were to be enacted in the present
     Session, and the aim should probably be to complete as
     much of the Committee Stage as was feasible before the
     Summer Recess.  One possibility might be to take Part 2
     of the Bill in Committee before Part 1, since Part 2 was
     broadly acceptable to the Opposition.

   - Since the Bolton disaster in 1946, nearly 300 people had
     died at football matches involving British clubs
     in incidents stemming from poor crowd control,
     hooliganism or both.  This record was the worst in the
     developed world.  The character of football had sharply
     deteriorated in the last two decades.  The judgment in
     the Heysel case was expected to be delivered in the
     following week and it would no doubt focus attention on
     hooliganism once again.  This might cause the Football
     Spectators Bill to be seen much more favourably.

     The Prime Minister, summing up this part of the
discussion, said that making progress with the Football
Spectators Bill before the Summer Recess offered the only way
of having a vehicle to implement any of Lord Justice Taylor1s
recommendations in the present Session.  Furthermore, there
was an overwhelming case for getting the Football Membership
Scheme into operation as soon as possible, in view of the
record of fatalities at football matches, the 6,000 arrests
that took place annually in connection with football matches,
and the diversion of police effort that was required to
maintain order at them. While a short pause for reflection
was indicated, any delay of the order of twelve months in the
scheme's operation would be a very serious matter that should
certainly not be laid at the Government's door.

     The meeting then adjourned and a meeting of the Cabinet
followed. When the meeting reconvened after the Cabinet
meeting, the Lord Privy'Seal and the Chief Whip were not
present but the meeting was joined by Sir Clive Whitmore and
Mr A H Turney (Home Office) and by Mr D A MacDonald and
Mr N Kingham (Department of the Environment).

     The main points made in this part of the meeting were as
follows.
                                           t
   - If, as appeared to be the case, there was no possibility
     of getting the Bill enacted before July, then none of the
     benefits of Part 1 of the Bill could be brought to bear
     before the World Cup matches in June 199 0; though the
     powers to impose restriction orders would be available
     from the time the Act was brought into force.

   - Although the House Authorities had given their opinion
     that requiring all-seated accommodation was a topic that
     was cognate to the Bill, and which could therefore be
     added to the Bill following an Instruction, it could not
     be assumed that the Bill's scope was necessarily wide
     enough to enable other recommendations of Lord Justice
     Taylor's interim report to be taken on board.  That
     depended on what the recommendations actually were.


                           CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL
                                4



   - The Secretary of State's Order confirming a membership
     scheme under the Act was subject to negative resolution
     procedure. Whatever wider attraction there might be in
     affirmative resolution procedure, that course was ruled
     out of court by the fact that the use of affirmative
     resolution procedure would make the Bill hybrid.

   - If the Bill's Second Reading in the House of Commons was
     to be held over until nearer the Summer Recess, then
     further thought was needed about the handling of the
     remaining stages in the Lords.

      The Prime Minister, summing up the discussion, said that
 it would be indefensible for the Government to leave itself
without a vehicle to implement any recommendations of Lord
 Justice Taylor's inquiry in the present Session, and a year's
delay in the implementation of the Football Membership Scheme
would also be quite unacceptable.    For both these reasons
there was a clear need to proceed with the Bill in the present
Session, though the target of Royal Assent in July was no
longer attainable and the Bill would need to be enacted later
 in the Session.  Those who sought to delay the Bill's
enactment had no alternative to suggest, and to abstain from
taking action on football safety and hooliganism would be the
gravest possible matter, now that the need for this action had
been so conclusively demonstrated.    Far from being a measure
that pre-empted Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry, the Bill was an
enabling framework that provided the only route for taking
early action on the inquiry's interim recommendations.    It
should also be possible to take account of the final
recommendations in the design of the subsequent scheme.
The Government should vigorously confront Parliamentary and
public opinion with these arguments during the period for
reflection that was now called for.    It should also be
brought out that the Bill represented the only way available
of controlling the behaviour of English football supporters
abroad and that its enactment had been linked with the return
of English clubs to European football.    The kernel of the
Government's position was that it was doing everything
possible to implement Mr Justice Popplewell's recommendations
and to prepare the way for implementing those that might now
be made by Lord Justice Taylor.   The Government's critics
were, in effect, saying that they would respect whatever
recommendations Lord Justice Taylor might make though they
rejected those of the last Judge to consider football
questions.   That was an absurd position.

     I am sending copies of this letter to the Private
Secretaries to other Ministers present at the meeting, to
Sir Clive Whitmore, and to Anthony Langdon and Sir Robin
Butler.




                                  ANDREW TURNBULL

Colin Walters, Esq.,
