MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512

Date:       1^ January 1998

To:        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach

                  replies from PC Huckstepp and PC Walpole about the changes to their
                  statements (with copies of my letters that they are replying to). These arrived
                  yesterday, and with the letter from PC Groome which I gave you we now have
                  replies from three out of the four officers to whom I wrote. The other one
                  (ex-inspector White) rang me yesterday to say that he would not be responding
                  until, probably, the week after next. He has got his solicitor in on the act.

                  a revised version of Appendix 1 (people who helped), which I would be
                  grateful for a talk about. I am not altogether sure of my ground as regards
                  par 5. I am checking the details at para 1 with the Family Support Group to
                  make sure there is no inadvertent faux pas.

                  a very slightly amended version of the Hicks material, with alterations in bold
                  italic as usual.

                  also on Sarah Hicks, a still which South Yorkshire police have made showing
                  the person on the floor surrounded by firemen, and a copy of the original of
                  Anthony Bambrock’s statement. The significance of the statement is that it is
                  clear (bottom of page 6) that Bambrock’s original reference was to Sarah
                  Hicks. Why it is that the (typed) copy Trevor Hicks sent us had an inking out
                  at this point with Sarah’s name written over the top I do not know, but I do not
                  think it would be right now to refer to this alteration in your comments and I
                  have amended the text accordingly.

                 The video still is useful. The shoes on this person look different from those
                 pictured in the Sarah Hicks file - Supt Hepworth thinks they may be black
                 Adidas trainers (three diagonal white stripes on the upper). He also says that
                 the person has rather thick ankles, with socks, whereas Sarah Hicks was of
                 slender build and not, apparently, wearing socks. The trousers seem to have
                 turn-ups and an ironed crease - again features not apparent on the garment
                 pictured on the file.


G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\050.DOC
                chapters 1 and 2 as they now stand following the discussion we had yesterday.
                The change to Chapter 1 is that the first few paragraphs have been pulled out
                to form an introduction (on the lines of Lord Taylor’s report) - Chapter 1
                proper then begins at what was the old paragraph 6. Chapter 2 now contains
                the account of what Counsel saw (paras 69 and 70).

                I attach both old and new versions of chapter 1 and chapter 2.

                a gratuitously offensive letter from Mrs Julie Fallon, whom you will remember
                from Liverpool. It is a copy of one she has written to the Home Secretary.
                Attached to your copy was a sticker saying 'for the personal attention o f Lord
                Justice Stuart-Smith, and I would like his responses to the questions I ’ve
                raised with the Home Secretary at the earliest possible time’.

                Most of these questions are not for you to answer. The only point she makes
                which falls into our bailiwick is her ramblings (bottom of first page) about
                your terms of reference. We discussed these with Mrs Fallon etc. in
                Liverpool and I don’t think there is anything we can add to what we said then.
                If we did add anything Mrs Fallon would no doubt find fault with it.

                I confess to having sat on this letter for week or so, while I discussed it with
                Paul Pugh and his people (who are drafting Mr Straw’s reply). Their advice
                was that I should show it to you, though I don’t think there is much point in
                your seeing it or in responding to it, except as a matter of form.

                I attach a draft reply (which I think should go as from me).




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\050.DOC
