h s .9.1/hillsub.peb


From:   P E Bolton                      cc      Mr Yates
        G2 Division                             Ms Adams
        Ext 3322                                Ms Craig
                                                Ms Rex
        1 September 1989                        Mr Chi1cot
                                                Mr Moriarty
                                                Mr Turney
                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                HMCIC
                                                HMCIFS
                                                Mr Goddard   ,
                                                Mr Whalley-/
                                                Mr Mower
                                                Mr Haslam
                                                Mr Mould
                                                Mr Lidington

Mr Walters


THE HILLSBOROUGH INTERIM REPORT

In your note of 24 August you asked for a note for the Home
Secretary's meeting on 7 September gathering information on the
way that clubs and authorities have responded to the Taylor
Interim Recommendations.

Compliance with the Interim Recommendations

2.   In the first week or so the preliminary indications received
in the Department (from telephone calls and other enquiries from
clubs, local authorities, the police and the fire service)
indicated that all the recommendations were being taken seriously
and addressed as a matter of priority.   There have been a number
of problems of interpretation which were referred to later.

3.   We have since asked for more formal reports from police
forces   and  fire brigades   on the    implementation of those
recommendations which were particularly of concern to them.
Reports from individual brigades are being received in the
office.   Not all have yet replied but those which have indicate
that relevant recommendations have either been complied with or,
at the least, addressed and are being complied with.

4.   Reports from the police have been coordinated by ACPO. We
therefore do not have a club by club analysis but they have
provided a memorandum to HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary (copy
at Annex A) which provides a similar picture.

Particular problems arising from the recommendations

5.   There    are, however,   some   problems    arising    from   the
recommendations.

6.   Recommendation 4 (on written agreements between the club and
the police)    has caused problems in some cases, largely      of
interpretation. Taylor clearly wanted to see no misunderstanding
of who was responsible for controlling particular matters within
the grounds.   Some police forces are not willing to enter into
specific   agreements   (Bedfordshire/Luton Town)   and in West
Yorkshire (Leeds) lawyers are at present considering whether such
an  agreement would create personal liability for the       Chief
Constable in the event of an incident.
7.   Recommendation 8 (that gates in the perimeter fence should
be   kept fully openduring the period of the match)        causes
practical difficulties in a number of cases.      For example at
Millwall, where the perimeter gates are very large and the
reputation of the crowd is poor, the local authority (Lewisham)
is not willing to concede that the gates should be open for fear
of crowd disorder.    In one or two cases, where there is little
space between the perimeter fence and the pitch, leaving gates
open causes obstruction likely to injure players.     In one case
 (Derby) the gates have been removed.  Problems of interpretation
also arise where clubs have low perimeter walls and fences rather
than the cages which existed at Hillsborough.

8.   Recommendation 10 (Provision of cutting equipment) has
caused   a  few difficulties.       Some  clubs  have   acquired
inappropriate equipment (oxy acetylene instead of bolt cutters)
and the Fire Brigades Union have written suggesting that all
cutting equipment should be in control of the fire service.   We
do not agree with this and HM Chief Inspector of Fire Services
has now replied to the FBU indicating how we think this
recommendation should be addressed.   A copy of his letter is at
Annex B.
9.    Recommendation 2(b) (the arbitrary deduction of 15% from
calculated terrace capacity) potentially is the most troublesome.
We have evidence that some major clubs worked in the past on a
crowd capacity figure on terraces well in excess of the maximum
Green Guide figure of 54 persons per 10m2 .        The effect of
imposing the Green Guide figure and the arbitrary reduction of
15% are, it is alleged, in some cases causing problems of fans
being unable to gain access to matches.     We would not condone
crowd densities in excess of those in the Guide but it must be
said that the figure of 54, which has stood the test of time,
provides a "comfortable" terrace.    Tests by the South Yorkshire
Fire Brigade suggest that maximum capacity is in the region of 98
persons per 10m2 . We understand that some local authorities have
already decided not to insist upon the 15% reduction (which
provides in effect a maximum capacity of 46 per 10m2). We shall
need to watch carefully the consequences for public order of
these reductions, and the measures which are necessary to enforce
them.    There is increased potential for trouble outside grounds
 and some kickoffs have had to be delayed.

 10. Three other interim recommendations which have caused
 interpretation problems are 19 (on the capacity of turnstiles),
 which is ambiguous; recommendation 26, where reference to a Chief
 Officer is being misinterpreted as reference to a Senior Officer
 when what was meant (Mr Whalley has confirmed) was an officer of
 ACPO rank) and 42, which appears to preclude the use of Red Cross
 or St John's Ambulances even with the agreement of the ambulance
 authority.
Press coverage

11. Early press reports included allegations that some clubs
were dragging their feet (Daily Mirror) and there were letters in
the Times, which the Home Secretary saw, alleging that he would
be culpable if there were a further tragedy.   I recommended, and
the Press Office and Mr Patten agreed, that no reply should be
sent to the letters in the Times.    Public interest was in fact
soon diverted by the Marchioness tragedy.    Mr Edey, one of the
Times  correspondents,  has now written direct to the Home
Secretary to the Judge and to the Prime Minister.   There is much
to be said for providing an official reply or at most a private
secretary reply.  I have seen Miss Bannister's note of 30 August.
Separate advice will be given on the letter.

12. Current press concern is largely devoted to the crowds
outside grounds in consequence of restrictions of crowds numbers
and more careful monitoring of numbers, and to late kickoffs.

Football Spectators Bill

13. Mr Moynihan has continued to provide a highly      personal and
aggressive defence of the government's proposals for   the football
membership scheme,   including appearances on the      Jimmy Young
programme and "Wogan".     The football authorities     continue to
oppose the scheme and are being more selective and     objective in
their approach.

14. Home Office officials have continued to be in touch with DOE
on the detail of the Bill, including in particular offences and
penalties and the interaction between the proposed powers of the
Football Licensing Authority to supervise safety and the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975.          There are still difficulties
particularly in relation to appeals.


Summary

15. All the evidence available to us is that clubs, local
authorities, the police and the fire service have addressed the
recommendations in the Interim Report on Hillsborough, and that
there is no wilful "dragging of feet".        There are however
difficulties   of   interpretation and application which are
inevitable, given that the recommendations were not tested
against all football grounds before they were made.  The general
advice which we are giving to local authorities, to the fire
service and to the police is that where it is not practicajfc>(pto
apply the recommendations literally, sensible discretion should
be applied with the aim of ensuring that any alternative
solutions to the problems provide at least the same and if
practicable a higher degree of safety than would be achieved by
the Interim recommendations.




                                        P E BOLTON
To:        H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary

Subject:   INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


Further to our telephone conversation of 23rd August, 1989 I
caused enquiry to be made of all forces, England and Wales
with r e g a r d to the ex-tent -to which, in broad terms, the
recommendations of the Taylor Report have been implemented
and any areas of difficulty which may have been highlighted.

Consequent upon the publication of the Interim Report and
Home Office Circular 68/1989, police forces and football
clubs have accepted the recommendations and responded with
speed, enthusiasm and commitment in their undertaking to
implement same.   Nonetheless a number of the recommendations
continue to promote discussion and/or reservation and I shall
confine my remarks to those which have elicited most comment.

Recommendation 4 deals with the need for "....a written
agreement between the police and the club setting out their
respective responsibilities for crowd safety and control
It is fair to say that there has been a divergence of opinion
on the content of the written agreement and the form it
should take.     Many clubs however have exchanged agreements
with the forces concerned and the remainder have set out
mutually agreed parameters outlining essential areas of
responsibility which will b© the basis for immediate use and
be 'subject of further scrutiny by the appropriate legal
offices.     It is not anticipated that such scrutiny and
eventual agreement will be resolved immediately and further
 liaison will be arranged, as necessary.   At this stage there
has    been   no   intimation that   agreement  will   not  be
 forthcoming.
 Recommendations 8 and 9 which deal with the requirements for
 all gates (in perimeter fences) opening onto the pitch, to be
 fully opened and manned during the course of the match, have
 resource and public disorder implications that have been
 highlighted by a significant number of forces.    Indeed there
 has been a decision at two grounds (Bolton and Millwall) that
 much flexibility will be deployed in this regard.   Both these
 recommendations and that at 28       (which deals with     the
 provision of police reserves for immediate deployment) pose
 potentially large increases in charges for police presence at
 the club concerned and significant and continued resistance
 has been experienced by ground commanders in some force
 areas.
 Recommendations 21, 31 and 32 deal with the installation of
 close circuit television, enhanced radio communication and
 operators to handle same and the provision of a separate
 system of land line, have again, cost implications for the
 clubs which have been resisted.
                                              continued/
Nevertheless it is fair to report that                 focussing of minds
engendered           by    the    implications      of    these    inter
recommendations has not impaired, as I indicated earl e
relationships between            the Police Service
                                                                       ,
                                                        and the football
clubs.          Suggestions have continued to be made by forces and
are        being        collated by the    A.C.P.O.     General  Purposes
Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events                   on such
m a t t e r s ^ as  colour-coding for exit gates, national training
videos and           a national system of hand signals should
communications be rendered ineffective.
I have no    doubt that you   will continue to be apprised of
developments with regard to these recommendations after the
next meeting of the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at
Sporting Events.    A meeting has been speediiy arranged   o
Friday, 8th September, 1989 at Greater Manchester Police
Force Headquarters.




 D. Wilmot Esq., Q.P.M. B.Sc.
 Deputy Chief Constable
 Greater Manchester Police


 29th August, 1989




                                        - 2 -
                                                                                              2~>




                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen A n n e ’s Gate L o n d o n SW 1H 9A T
                                                      D irect line: 0 1 - 2    27 3 35 6 1
                                                   Switchboard: 01             2 7 3 3 0 00

O ut reference:
Your reference:



       Mr D Matthews
       National Officer Health & Safety
       The Fire Brigades Union
       Bradley House
       68 Coombe Road
       KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES
       Surrey KT2 7AE




                                                                     25 August 1989




        Dear


        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT

        Thank you for your letter of 16 August in which you voice your
        concern about Lord Justice Taylor's interim recommendation number
        10 .

        The position is not, in my view, entirely analogous with road
        accidents where the nature of the cutting gear required will not
        be apparent until firefighters have attended and where trained
        people will not normally be available from any other source.

        The way to approach recommendation 10 in my opinion should be to
        raise a number of questions

                  1. What is the nature of the perimeter fencing at the
                  ground

                  2. What type of cutting equipment, if any, is
                  appropriate.  (Here we are recommending that clubs
                  should seek advice from brigades and much will flow
                  from the advice given).

                  3. What degree of skill or   training is necessary to
                  operate that equipment?


                                               1
           4.    Where will it be located?

  The answer to question 4 will depend entirely on local
  circumstances.   As indeed will the answers posed by some of the
  other questions.

  Having said this clubs are private premises and the primary
  responsibility for safety rests with them.  If such a solution
  after consultation meets the needs of the ground then it is not
  unreasonable to expect that it will be acceptable to the local
  authority responsible for the safety certificate.

   In conclusion I think what we must bear in mind is that the 43
   recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's interim report were made
   on his analysis of the causes of the Hillsborough disaster and
   inspections of some other grounds. They are short term
   recommendations pending the report of Part 2 of the Inquiry which
   is expected at the end of the year.

                                               Yours sincerely




                                            SIR REGINALD DOYLE
                    Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Fire Services




Mr B o l t o n /
HMI K i l f o r d
HMI G r e e n w o o d
Mr L o c k e t t




                                           2
