                            0171 219 4711
      7      09:20   FAX 0171 219 4711                                                           HOME OFFICE               @ 001/002

                      F r o m T h e R ig h t H o n o u r a b l e T h e L o r d I r v in e   of   L a ir g




                              (Ar                                                            H o use        of   L ords,
                                                                                                     L ondon       s w i a opw
          CH a n




    The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
    Secretary of State for the Home Department
    Home Office
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT
                                  cfc Mr KooOtXfcU
                                     4 Mr
                                            o '
                                                cWvai
                                                                                       L ouok»
                                                                                                                             6
                                       ferrvx S f C.                                   LOCxTAQT
                                                                                       0 ^ 2 -0 -
                                       ULt>                            s
                                                Mr                S A 'i • V\~>
                                                                                                                  RECEIVED BY
             J
P   Dear
                                                Mr G b6r\obh
                                                   c JM-oa JSc w
                                                         C^l0-£o»' (.mb)
                                                                                                                    09 JUN 1997
                                                                                                                 HOME SECRETARY
                            THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

    I have seen your Private Secretary’s letter to my Private Secretary of 29 May 1997 about the
    possibility that you may wish to establish some form of further judicial examination of the
    Hillsborough Stadium disaster in 1989.1 agree in principle that, if you do decide to proceed in
    that way, it would be a suitable task for a High Court Judge.

    I consider that, in terms both of his ability and standing, Mr Justice Collins would be well able
    to carry out this task. However, my own feeling, and my advice, is that the fact that Collins J
    was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry makes it preferable for the task to be given to another
    Judge, almost certainly from a Queen’s Bench Division background.

    There is, however, a more fundamental point. Although the terms of reference do not in any
    way suggest that the Inquiry may result in any criticism or questioning of his findings in the
    Taylor Report, that could arise or be thought to have arisen. It is therefore my view, and the
    view of the Lord Chief Justice, that it would be appropriate for this task to be entrusted to a
    senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal.

    I took the view after our discussion about this after Cabinet yesterday, that the quickest way
    through was for me to have a direct word with the Lord Chief Justice. He and I agree that
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is the best choice. He is 69 and approaching retirement and in first
    class intellectual order. He also has the requisite experience; his public presence is impressive;
    and if the Inquiry were to result in a Public Inquiry (which I appreciate may well be unlikely),
    it will be no disadvantage for him to carry on as Chairman of that Public Inquiry in retirement
    I believe that he may become Treasurer of Gray’s Inn next year but that merely adds to his
    status and in no way diminishes his capacity to undertake the task. I therefore strongly
    recommend him to you, with the support of the Lord Chief Justice.
06    97   09:21    FAX 0171 219 4711                                         HOME OFFICE SEC     1002/002




     The Lord Chief Justice is taking steps to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will be
     willing to accept this task but is reasonably confident that he will be. It would be helpful if
     you could let me know as soon as possible;

            (a) whether you wish Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake this task and;

            (b) your decision on whether there is to be another judicial examination of
            Hillsborough.

     In view of your letter of 5 June, I am copying this letter to John Morris.

                                                   Yours
