HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR .SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APR'lL. 1989




                Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

        (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                  At

            The Town Hail, .
              Sheffield.

                  On

    Monday, 19th November, 1990.




      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
     Official Shorthand Writers,
 55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2Dx
    THE HJDTCTAL SCRUTINY INTO
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


          INDEX TO APPENDICES


 VOLUME I

 Appendix 1: Taylor Report

 Appendix 2: Judgment of Divisional Court, 5 November 1993

 Appendix 3: Summing - up of Dr Stefan Popper, 25 - 26 March
             1991

 Appendix 4: Evidence of control box police officers to Lord Justice
             Taylor and the inquests

               (i)     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

VOLUME n

Appendix 4 (Contd.)

              (i)      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield (Contd.)


VOLUME i n

Appendix 4 (Contd.)

               (ii)    PC Ryan
               (iii)   Sergeant Goddard
               (iv)    PC Bichard
               (v)     PC Guest
               (vi)    Chief Inspector McRobbie

VOLUME IV

Appendix 5: Evidence of Roger Houldsworth

               (i)     Affidavit of Roger Houldsworth with exhibits
               (ii)    Statement dated 28th April 1989
               (iii)   Statement dated 5th December 1989
               (iv)    Interview with Yorkshire TV, 1989

Appendix 6: Statement of Trevor Hicks
Appendix 7: Evidence of Dr Edward Walker

             (i)     Note of events of 15th April 1989
             (ii)    Correspondence
             (iii)   Statement dated 20th July 1989
             (iv)    Transcript of Philip Hammond mini - inquest

Appendix 8: British Medical Journal (1991) Vol. 303, ppl381 - 5

Appendix 9: Evidence relating to Andrew Sefton

             (i)     Statements of PC Shipley
             (ii)    Statements of PC Kearney

Appendix 10: Evidence relating to Stephen Williams

             (i)     Note of interview with Stephen Williams and
                     Andrew Worseley
             (ii)    Dr Leveson’s report

Appendix 11: Medical evidence

             (i)     Statement of Dr James Bums
             (ii)    Report of Dr Ian West
             (iii)   "Pathological aspects of the disaster"    by
                     Professor Usher

Appendix 12: Evidence relating to Graham Roberts

             (i)     Extract from summary of evidence presented at
                     inquest
             (ii)    Statements of PC Wadsworth
             (iii)   Letter from SYP dated 17th January 1992
                     indicating that no further evidence exists

Appendix 13: Evidence of Mr Roger Ball

             (i)     Note of events of 15th April 1989
             (ii)    Letter from Marchant & Co. re
             (iii)   Transcript of inquest evidence
             (iv)    Extract from summary of evidence presented at
                     inquest

Appendix 14: Statements of Dr Naderassen Curpen and Dr Andrew
             Byrne and Dr Bull

Appendix 15: Statement of ambulance man John Flack

Appendix 16: Correspondence between Dr Walker and Dr Slater
Appendix 17: Transcript of evidence of Mr Wardrope and Professor
             Usher to inquest, 18th April 1990

Appendix 18: Skeleton Argument for Judicial Review 1993

Appendix 19: Evidence of Paul Taylor



VOLUMES V AND VI

Appendix 20: Memorial submitted to the Attorney - General in 1993
             with enclosures
                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                   Page

    OPENING STATEMENT BY THECORONER                  1

    APPEARANCES                                      2

    LEGAL SUBMISSIONS                                3

    STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                  ‘     IS

    SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS                       25

    STATEMENT BY THE CORONER    TOTHE JURY         54

    ^    S. BROWN Sworn

            By The Coroner                         59

        M. LAYTON Sworn

            By The Coroner                         63
            Cross-Examined     by   Mr.  Payne     79
            Cross-Examined     by   Mr.  Isaacs    79
            Cross-Examined     by   Mr.  King      80
            Cross-Examined     by   Mrs. McBrien   81

    LEGAL SUBMISSIONS                              83




\
                                                           3




     MR.   CALLAGHAN:    Sir, you know the representation on
previous occasions and I should say it is my intention to stay
only for today and in the case of one or two witnesses.    I
will not take any major part in the Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:   I have got no particular objection to
you being here.   I thought you probably would not be here
continuously but I wanted to be sure about that.    Perhaps
the best thing would be if we started with you really and
if we started with appropriate legal submissions.    It may
be easiest if we start with Mr.. King and then we will move
across the table, so to speak.

     MR. KING:    Sir, my primary legal submission is
directed to your preliminary ruling on the last occasion
that this Inquest should be concerned only with events up
to about 3.15 pm.    As I understand your ruling, sir, it
was designed to ensure that this Inquest would only be
concerned with events leading to the crushing on the
terraces and the first arrival of an ambulance.

     As you know, sir, the families whom I represent are
very anxious that this Inquest should deal with what to
them is a very major issue, as to how their loved ones came
by their deaths, namely how the services and the rescue
services, and those attending with the emergency, coped
with it immediately after people were brought off the
terraces because death was not certified in many, if not
most, cases until after 4 pm.   Sir, I do not know if you
have had an opportunity to read these.    I did ask those
instructing me to send to you statements from each of the
families whom I represent setting out a number of
individual questions directed to their own Inquest but also
incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn of what happened between the time there
was a first sighting of any loved one being brought off the
terracing and the pronouncement of death.    I do not know
if you had an opportunity to read them.

     THE CORONER:   I have briefly because these did not
arrive until Friday afternoon but I have looked at them.

     MR. KING:    What I would like to do is take you
through some individual examples in order to persuade you
that this is a question which ought to be gone into at this
particular Inquest.    I do not know whether that is a
format you want to follow or whether you want first to hear
some other representatives as to their attitude to my
submission.    I am happy to go into considerable detail
about it.

     THE CORONER:   There are several points which have
occurred to me and the first point I would like you to deal
with is this;  you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
dealt with three issues which Coroners deal with;  who the
deceased was, when he/she died and where he/she died.    I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as you will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.

     I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.   At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the
pathological cause of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.   My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right - bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

      MR. KING:     Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.         All
that was done when      one looks at those Inquests was to
identify the time of a first sighting, that is to say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.       In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if I can just give      one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people      who are brought off at 1522 and it is
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
There has been no investigation directed to thealobai.
organisation_of w hat happpnpd immediately after they were
brought off _the torrsrfis._ certainly I havt; ueen through
the” inQjLvxUuaj. transcripts and there does not seem to be
any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
were called could not deal with those issues, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in respect of these individuals is not in fact the
pathological cause of death which we have been given but due
to a novus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?

     MR. KING:    Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir, and putting it bluntly, cards on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team being brought in, of proper
medical equipment being available, of proper triage being    !
carried out, that those measures, had they been there, in
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.    They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me concrete evidence of that at this
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.

     Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) been held down over what happened
after they were brought off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dead and there has been no effort
made systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
the time for the rescue, what might have been, and what could
have made a difference.   A very simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a pulse and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never know whether or not that
individual was alive or dead at that stage.   It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces".   I cannot put it any more firmly than that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    You have put it very plainly and I
appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
a few moments but do you want to develop it further?
Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues.

     MR. KING:   Have you the individual statements which
were supplied?

     THE CORONER:   I do have those in front of me.   I would
not want to go through all of them but if you wish to pick
one or two as examples I am prepared to listen to you and
indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
     MR. KING:    Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which is the submissions to you of the Jones family,
Richard Jones, I do not know whether you have been given one
or two documents.    I have two documents in relation to Mr.
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one headed "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:   No. 11, did you say?

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.   I beg your pardon, sir, it is
No. 10.   Sir, if you look ---

      THE CORONER:   Mr. King, may I just stop you for one
moment because something has occurred to me, and I have been
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press before we go
further?    The session this morning is being heard without
the Jury and the reason we have not got the Jury is because
we are dealing with legal points.    That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session but you should not actually
report what is being said.    You will no doubt be familiar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not report what we
are discussing.    If we had wanted the Jury to hear we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hear at thi;
stage.    You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, o:
course, that is a different matter but for the moment please
do not report the content of the legal matters we are
discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
you continue?

     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at any documen-
but it is just to.help you is one headed to myself,  "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
Steel” dated 22nd October.

     MR. KING:   Sir, this   is dated 7th November.

     THE CORONER:   I have   not got it I am afraid.   It is
not in front of me.

     MR. KING:   I apologise for that and I will take you
through, if I may, through five points which are raised by
Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they make the basic point that th<
report into the death of their loved one,' Richard, was
certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must b<
entitled to, up to that time the evidence of death is not
clear as having already occurred.

     Point No. 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
by Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
it was evidence given on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
sir, it is a quotation from his evidence which you may
recall:

     "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
     is quite difficult in someone who has a low blood
     pressure as would have been here.   In fact it can be so
     difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
     electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
     stopped or not."

     Then there is the statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
certainly a statement in the large bundle of statements given
to the West Midlands Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
evidence to the Taylor Inquiry in which he says this:


                                  /"For an extremely long...
