INQUIRY     INTO      T HE          HILLSBOROUGH

       STADIUM                  DISASTER




                    Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                       At

                The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

           Thursday, 18th May, 1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                          (Morning Session)

                                               Page

STATEMENT BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR                1

     T. HICKS Called

          Examined by Mr. Collins               2
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King           16
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward       18

     I.W. BURKE Called

         Examined by Mr. Collins               27
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward        35


     W.H. COMERFORD Called

         Examined by Mr. Goldsack              40
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson         44
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward        44

     D.S. CONNOLLY Called

         Examined by Mr. Philips               49
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson         57
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward        57

    P.J. GARRETT Called

         Examined by Mr. Goldsack              58
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson         64
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward        65
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow         71
               FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               THURSDAY, 18th MAY, 1989

                  (MORNING SESSION)

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Before we start this morning
I would just like to say this.    Yesterday I criticised
the inaccuracy of reporting in a newspaper and also
criticised the headlining.    The particular newspaper
article was incorrect and graciously that newspaper has
published a correction.    However, I have received
explanations from reporters concerned and I quite
satisfied it was not their fault there was inaccuracy in
the article.   I used the word "slant" yesterday, saying
it was the duty of reporters to report accurately and not
to slant their reports.    In view of the explanation I
have received I would like to withdraw the word "slant".

      I would just say one other thing.   I did indicate
yesterday the basis upon which the statements of
witnesses are available to the press.   As I understand
it, in view of the need of the press only to report what
is actually said by the witness rather than what is
contained in his statement, a number of members of the
press would prefer not to receive the statements.   That
is entirely a matter for them.   Statements are available
on the same basis as I indicated before for any reporters
who wish to have them. If they do not wish to have them,
as I say, they do not have to.

      MR. COLLINS:   Sir, we continue today with
Liverpool supporters' evidence.   May I say the witnesses
we propose to call today are witnesses who have been put
forward by the Football Supporters Association and by the
representatives of the bereaved who are taking part in
this Inquiry.   You will have noted from the form of the
statements you have received that they are statements not
taken by the West Midlands Police but either volunteered
or taken by the solicitors to the various organisations
concerned.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   As I understand it,
Mr. Collins, the position is this.     As everybody knows,
this Inquiry has been mounted extremely swiftly, for good
reason, so swiftly that the very large number of
witnesses who there are to be interviewed, may not all
have been interviewed before it began.    It has been the
concern of the Inquiry, that is to say, myself and the
Assessors, as well as yourself, that we should not miss
any witness who has anything vital to say that has not
already been said.   To that end we have asked that any
of those who are here represented, the injured and
                              2




                                             T. HICKS


     bereaved, the supporters' club or anybody else, should
     make available to the Inquiry any witness who they think
     can add something to what has already been said, and we
     are having some of those today?

           MR. COLLINS:   That is correct.   In fact I think
     all witnesses today fall into that category, sir.

           Having said that may I start with Mr. Hicks.

                      TREVOR HICKS Called

                    Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. You are Trevor Hicks? - A. That is correct.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Hicks, before we start
     can I say this.   I think everybody in this room knows
     what an ordeal you had and if at any stage of your
     evidence you want a break please say so..

Q.         MR. COLLINS:   You live in the Greater London area?
     - A. Yes.

Q. Is it right that you, and perhaps particularly your
   daughters, were supporters of Liverpool? - A. Yes, my two
   daughters, my wife and myself.   We were all members of
   the supporters' club and we used to travel regularly to
   watch games, both at Anfield and other grounds.

Q. Did you get tickets for the semi-final this year at
   Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

Q. What tickets were those? - A. My wife got one seat ticket
   in the North Stand and my daughters on Kop season tickets
   were given standing tickets.   Even though I had a season
   ticket in the stand, because of the number sequence I was
   given a standing ticket.

Q.   You and your two daughters had tickets for theterraces
     and your wife had a ticket in the North Stand? - A. That
     is correct.

Q. You went to Sheffield by car? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you arrive? - A. Actually at the ground or
   Sheffield or...?

Q. At Sheffield first. - A. I would say we left the motorway
   at about twelve o'clock.

Q.   You had been to Hillsborough before? - A. Yes.       In fact
     we came to last year's similar fixture.
                             3




                                            T. HICKS


Q. What time did you get to where you wanted to park the
   car? - A. At about 12.45.   We parked the car in the
   corner opposite Parkside Road I think it is called.   It
   runs up the side of the ground.   There is a large park
   and they were running a small car park in the corner
   which is in fact where we parked last year as well.

Q. So it was pretty close to the ground? - A. Yes, within a
   few minutes' walk.

Q. When you arrived there were you aware of fans in the
   vicinity collecting together? - A. Yes.   In fact there
   were both types of fans, Notts. Forest fans and ourselves
   within the cars.   In fact, the car next to us, there was
   a family of Notts Forest supporters.

Q. Had you noticed whether there was any sign of drink
   around? - A. No, there wasn't.

Q. I think you had something to eat? - A. Yes, my wife
   always prepared a picnic lunch which obviously was varied
   from time to time.    We always brought soft drinks and
   things with us.    I usually brought a flask of coffee.

Q. What time was it that you decided to going to the ground?
   -A. About 1.40.

Q. You had to go in through the Leppings Lane turnstiles? -
   A. Yes.

Q.    I was going to askyou about  Police presence asyou get
     to the turnstiles, what your awareness of it was? - A. We
     saw very little of the Police at all.    In fact my best
     recollection is that the first Police Officers we saw -
     there were a couple of men on the gate of the car park,
     but I believe they were something to do with the Parks
     people rather than uniformed Police Officers.    As you
     walk along Parkside Road there is a small shelter which
     look like a Police lodge or Police hut of some kind.    I
     saw a couple of Police Officers there and then we^did not
     see any more until we actually came across the bridge and
     in to the approach area into the ground.

Q.   Any mounted Police that you saw? - A. I have no
     recollection of seeing any mounted Police at all.

Q. Were you stopped by Police at any stage? - A. No.

Q. When you got to the turnstiles were you searched? - A.
   No.   Before we went to the turnstiles, no.

Q. At the time you were there, I think you told us about
   quarter to two, were there many people going through the
   turnstiles?- A. No. We went into the ground, I would put
                              4




                                            T. HICKS


     it nearer two o'clock, but the approach area generally
     was fairly quiet, obviously considering the size of the
     game and the expected crowds and things, it was
     relatively quiet by comparison.

Q. When you got into the ground were you aware of any Police
   presence inside? - A. No.   There was one Police Officer
   who stood just inside the turnstiles that my daughters
   and I went through.   In fact I half expected him to step
   forward and search me, but he didn't.   He just stood
   there so we walked straight passed.

Q.   Any stewards that you were aware of? - A. A couple.  I
     have said, I think, two or three in my statement.    As we
     came through the turnstiles the tunnel was directly in
     front.   Just to the left hand side there were a couple
     of stewards there selling programmes.    They had
     cardboard boxes of programmes and things.

Q. But no directions? -A. No directions whatsoever, no.

Q. Were you aware of any way into the terracing other than
   through that middle tunnel at that stage? - A. No.   In
   fact the thing that caught my attention was the sign
   directly above the tunnel that said '•Standing” .

Q.   I think it is right that at this stage your family,  as it
     were, split up when you got into the ground? - A. Yes.
     My daughters obviously being teenagers had friends and
     they did not like Daddy have his beady eye on them and
     over the years it has become practice that we would stand
     separately on the terraces.   They used to stand with
     their friends and I used to stand usually within
     distance.   You know, I liked to keep an eye on them but
     at a distance if you like.

Q.    Of course your wife had a seat in the North Stand? - A. I
     forgot to mention.    As we got to the approach area there
     is a little Benson and Hedges tobacconist and we in fact
     had agreed to rendezvous there immediately after the
     game.

Q. So did your daughters go ahead of you through the tunnel?
   - A. Yes.   Basically, as we were coming through the
   turnstiles, they started for the tunnel which again, as I
   have said, was the only way you thought you could get
   through.

Q.   Where did   you yourself go?   Ithink you had a cup of
     coffee and eventually where did you go? - A. I went
     straight across to where the programmes were.    I had
     promised to bring a programme for a friend of mine who
     has a boy who is an ardent fan, and obviously I wanted a
     programme for ourselves.   I went and bought two
b                                 5




                                                T. HICKS


         programmes.    I was about to go into the tunnel to go
         through to the terraces when I noticed that to the right,
         this is as I am facing the tunnel, there was a small
         refreshment kiosk selling burgers and coffee and this
         type of thing.    I went there and bought a cup of coffee.

    Q. When eventually you went on to the terraces where did you
       go? - A. I went to the corner terraces, if I may call
       them that, in between the West Stand and the South Stand,
       about two crash barriers from the back, next to the
       Police Control Box.

    Q. Did you get there by going down the middle tunnel and
       then along the wall or did you go round the end? - A. No.
       I walked along the back.   As I said, if I had not gone
       for the coffee I would not...

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You say not in front of the
         stand, you went round the back? - A. I walked along the
         back.   The coffee stall...   Just about where the
         pointer is was where I saw the coffee stand.   I walked
         along there to it.   There were no signs directing me
         there so I walked along to get the coffee and I am not
         absolutely sure whether there wasn't a sign on the back
         wall.

    Q.         MR. COLLINS:   There is a sign.   Can I ask you   to
         look at a photograph, Mr. Hicks?   Would you look at
         photograph 14.   You will not be able to see the sign
         itself, unless you have got remarkably good eyesight,   and
         I will be corrected if I am wrong, but if you look to   the
         right of that photograph do you see somebody standing   by
         a pillar, a sort of black figure? - A, Yes.




                                 /Q. Just to the right
                               6


                                                T.    HI CKS



Q. Just to the right of him there is an upright support for
   the Stand.   A.   That's right.

Q.    I think about there there is a small sign saying, "Standing".
     A.    Or is it on the pillar opposite?   There is a sign on
     the end pillar, the last one.

Q.    I think the sign is.-- do you see a little white          thing
     on that pillar?    A.   Yes.

Q- About the top of the wall level?       A.        Yes.

Q.   If you follow the wall down ---     A.     Yes,       I can see it.

Q     On the right hand side of the photograph you reach a
     pillar and there is a sort of white sign at the level
     of the top of the wall.     That is a sign which I think
     says "Standing" and points in the direction going round
     the side of the Stand.     A.    Yes.   That, I think, is
     the sign that drew my attention to the fact that you
     could - otherwise I would have obviously walked back and
     gone through the tunnel.

Q. Now would you be good enough to look at Photograph 46,
   please, Mr. Hicks.   That is a photograph taken from the
   seating part of the West Stand of the corner where you
   went, I think,  A.   Yes.

Q „ And you can see, I think, the Police Box on the very right-
    hand side, is that correct?   A.   Correct, yes.

Q. And you say you were standing where?        A.      If I could refer
   to 47, the next one?

Q.    Yes.   A.   You will see there is a floodlight tower
     and the Police Box is the one that has got, "Skits"
     written on it, I think,     I would be standing       I
     would say either the first barrier that you could see
     from the back or the second one.     I couldn't say

Q, So towards the back, as it were, of that area?   A.               Yes,
   in that corner.   I have said, I think, about 10 ft.             from
   the platform at the side of the Police Control Box.

Q.    When you went there, what sort of time are we talking
     about now when you got to your position on the terrace?
     A.    I would say ten past, quarter past three, perhaps --
     past two, sorry

Q. And at this stage were there many people in your area, if
   I may put it that way?   A.   Again, by comparison to
   that time for such a big match, I would say "No" .  It
   wasn't deserted but it was by no means full and there
   were several places where one could stand and I obviously
   sort of chose a place where I was leaning on a barrier,
                                7



                                                T.   HI CKS



     where I had a good view of the pitch and where I felt
     quite comfortable, obviously as I expected the crowd to
     be.

Q* What about the central pens?   A.   At that stage the
   central pens were much fuller, but I wouldn't have said
   that, you know, they were exceptionally full.

Q. Did you keep an eye on the central sections?    I mean
   obviously not the whole time but were you aware of the
   build-up in the central sections?   A.    I would say
   for about ten or fifteen minutes I didn't, in fact.      I
   was reading the programme.   I had a small transistor
  |radio and I was listening for team news and things so
   I would say for about ten or fifteen minutes, no.     At
   about 2.30 when I looked across, it was obviously starting
   to get quite busy then, and I kept looking over because
   obviously I hadn't realised when I had come round the side
   and I didn't, in fact, until lateo that there was what
   looked like a solid barrier between Pen No. 4, I think -
   the nearest one to me ---

Q.    3, in fact.   A.   3, I am sorry, Pen No. 3, and the
     one that I was in   - the corner.    I would say at around
     quarter to three,    something like that, it was starting
     to look extremely    busy and people were showing obvious
     signs of distress    then.

Q?    You were aware of that ---    This is before the teams
     have come out, is it?    A.     Yes, they had come out ---

Q.    They had had their warm-up but — -A.     They were
     warming up ---

Q.    Before they had formally come out.A.   Before they had
     formally come out.    I think during the warm-up - I can't
     be absolutely certain, to be fair, but it was obviously
     looking extremely packed then.

Q. Did you see at some stage people apparently getting out of
   those pens, climbing over the side fences?    A.   Yes,
   at around ten minutes to three, as best I can put it
   together, people were being pulled over the side fences.
   I could see fairly clearly from where I was people crushed
   up against the fence and similarly you could see some
   young boys were, in fact, climbing over the top, and I
   also believe some went over the pitch side fence as well
   at around that time.

Q. This is, again, is it, before the formal entry of the
   teams, if I may put it that way; which we know was about
   five to three?   A.    I think it was.  I cannot be
   absolutely certain, I must be honest, but I think it was
   around ten to three, yes.
6 T>f>>   *


                                            8


                                                          T.   HI CKS



              Q. Did you begin to feel concerned because you knew your
                 daughters, of course, were in these pens?    A.   Yes, I
                 did and, in fact, there was another man standing to the
                 left of me who was in a similar position to myself;    he
                 had a young boy.    Obviously I don't know who he is -
                 he has not contacted me or anything - but he and I were
                 sharing our concern, if you like, because he felt ---
                 The girls usually used to stand a couple of barriers
                 from the front with their back to a barrier, usually
                 slightly to the right of the goal.   This was their
                 favourite spot, so I knew roughly where they were, even
                 though I couldn't actually see them.      But, yes, we
                 were getting very concerned by that time.

              Q.    You were standing, as you told us, fairly close to the
                   Police Control Box.   A.   Yes, that's correct.

              Q. Were you aware of a certain amount of movement of Police
                 Officers to and from that Control Box?   A.   Yes, I was.
                 Yes.

              Q. Did you speak to or see any Officer in particular at about
                 this time?   A.    Yes, there was one Officer who came out
                 of the Police Box and there is a set of steps with a
                 landing at the top and stood on that landing looking out
                 into the general area of Pens 3 and 4, and I would say he
                 stood there for a couple or three minutes, and myself
                 and a couple of other people around me were calling to him,
                 couldn't he see that, you know, people were being crushed?
                 You know, we obviously got -- swear words started coming
                 out as well, I am sure, atseveral    spots, "Can't you bloody
                 see what's going on?" and that type of thing.

              Q. Can you help us to identify that Officer at all?    A.   I
                 think so.   I think he had a light-coloured anorak.    I
                 think it was light brown and I am almost certain it was
                 the man who actually ran on the pitch and, in fact, stopped
                 the game.

              Q. So it was a senior Officer?    A.    He had gold braid   on
                 his peak, I remember.

              Q. He had a flat cap?   A.   He had a flat cap and he had
                 gold braid on his hat, I am sure.   I think, as I said, if
                 I could see some photographs ---   Obviously we didn't
                 video anything that went on television on the d a y , otherwise
                 that would probably help but, as I said, I am sure he had -
                 because I thought at the time it was a little strange for
                 him to have a non-issue anorak, if you like, on the top.

              Q. Anyway, you say that this Officer stood there for a couple
                 of minutes, two or three minutes, and you and others were
                 speaking to him, calling to him.   Did he appear to react
                               9


                                                T.   HI CKS



     at all?   A.   No, in fact he just totally ignored us
     and if I am correct he then went down the steps and around
     the back of the Police into which I understand is the
     South Stand, I think.

Q . Could he hear?   Do you think he could hear what you
    were saying, hear the shouts that were coming from --- ?
    A.   I don't see how he could have failed to.

Q. What was the noise level in the ground generally at this
   stage?   A.   It was obviously getting fairly high.    The
   team were out, anticipation was building and there was a
   fair amount of noise but we were so close and again it
   was not just myself, there were two or three other people
   also calling and I don't believe he could not have heard
   at least some of it.

Q.   Can I go back a moment,  talking of noise levels.   Did
     you hear any relevant announcements over the tannoy
     at any stage?    A.   No, I heard no announcements at all.

Q.   Before the match?    A.   There was a bit of team    news
     and, you know, bits and pieces like that.

Q. By "relevant" I mean any announcements concerning crowd
   control or anything?   A.   No, no^annoanceniBnts': about crowd
   control.   Often people say, "Will people at the front move
   to the left" or ---   There was none of that, no.

Q. Now, when you saw this Senior Officer and called out to
   him, I put to you about this time, can you help us any
   more precisely as to the sort of time it was that this
   occurred?   A.   Yes, I think by this time we had, in
   fact, actually kicked-off.   There was a static cameraman
   and I cannot remember whether he was on the platform
   before the Police Officer came out or later on.   In
   fact, in the photograph which I attached to my statement
   it looks like two camer&men were standing on the platform
   and one was certainly with an ordinary camera and at
   another time I would class  him as a television cameraman
   with a portable video came on to the platform.

Q. Can you just help us about this platform that you have
   referred to.   I do not know whether if we look at
   Photograph 47 we can identify it or perhaps some other
   photograph.   Can^ou help?   A.   Yes, in fact, if you
   look at 47, right at the bottom right-hand corner where
   the "621" number is, you can see it sticking out of the
   side.   It does not show very clearly on there but you
   can see there is a leg coming down and it is a cantilever
   platform on the side of the Police Box.
                             10


                                           T.   HICKS



Q. The platform itself where they were standing would mean
   their feet were just below the "1" of the figure "1"
   at the end of the "753621".   A.   Yes, and obviously
   eye level would be perhaps half way up the window or
   something like that.

Q. So you?were calling to him from a lower level?       A.    Yes.

Q. Where you were standing, as you have indicated, so he was
   sort of just above you, as it were.   A.   I would say,
   yes.   I estimated something about 8 to 10 ft. from my
   head level to his head level.

Q. This, you think, was at or about kick-off time?       A.     At
   or about kick-off time, yes.

Q. What was happening in the pens at this stage as far as
   you could see?      A. Obviously people were getting more
   and more agitated.    You could see — -     I could only see
   the side fence, I couldn't see the front.      There was a
   little bit of sway going on but it looked very, very
   tightly packed.     In fact, even the people who were being
   pulled over the   side fences, it looked as they they were
   packed extremely tight.     They were having great difficulty
   more than just the problem of lifting up, you know,
   someone who was injured and things.      It looked extremely
   tightly packed.




                                          (From where you were.
                                 T. HICKS


Prom V7here you were standing although you could see there
appeared to b© overcrowding and people in difficulty,
were you able to appreciate that it was as bad as we now
that it was? - A. Obviously not. You knew it was bad by
the sheer numbers trying to get out but no, you could not
say there was 95 people dead, no.

Now you told us about this Police Officer. Was there any
other Police Officer at any stage that you remember? -
A. Yes, after the television cameraman who I have mentioned
came on the platform and went ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Sorry, I am not sure that I
have got this correct. At the time when you say was about
kick-off time was when you saw the television cameraman,
is that right? - A. Yes, that would be the first Police
Officer. That again would be around 10-minutes, 5-minutes-
to-3. He then left. I can't remember whether the static
cameraman was there 'while the Police Officer was there
or whether he came along, but there was one stage when there
were two cameramen actually standing on the platform, one
of whom brought a portable video camera with him.

I would just like to be clear about this. You say about
10-toS3 people were starting to be pulled over the side
fence? - A. Yes.

Then the time when the Officer with the gold braid was there
and you were talking to him, that was when? - A. That would
be ....

Before kick-off or after? - A. That would be around 1©
minutes, 5-to-3 as we were leading up to the kick-off.

I see that is 5-to-3 and then what you said happened at
kick-off time was the cameramen were on there? - A. It is
my opinion, and again it is only my opinion, I don't know
what was in their minds, they in fact knew there were
problems because they did not have their cameras pointed
towards the pitch, they had them in fact pointing down
towards the pens.

And what was going on on the pitch at that time? - A. That
was going on on the pitch/barrier sections at the front.

At the time they had their cameras focused on the pens
what was happening on the pitch? - A. I cannot be absolutely
certain.

Was there play or something you would have expected them
to be pointing at or what? - A. I think thereswas play
taking place but obviously I was more concerned with what
was going on in the pens where my daughters were so I
was not really watching the pitch in fairness.

      MR. COLLINS: I am grateful, sir.      It is my fault.
I thought the Police Officer was later.
                                 T. HICKS


So we have had the first Officer. We have had the Cameramen
and you are about to tell us about a second Police Officer?
- A. Yes, another second Police Officer came and stood, I
don't think he stood on the platform, I think he was a
couple of steps down from the platform and I believe he
had black braid on his hat.

Again a flat cap? - A. A flat cap with black braid across
the peak. I think I could possibly recognise him. I have
quite a good recall of faces and in fact again we were
calling to him and I in particular called to him and did
not get a very good reply.

Again can you help us as to what time this was? - A. I would
put this at sometime around perhaps 10~past-3.

Was this after the game had stopped or before? - A. I cannot
be absolutely certain, it was around 6-minutes, 10-past-3,
it was certainly of that sort of time.

We know that the game stopped at....   A. 6-minutes-past
I believe.

About. The video time says 3.5 and 30 seconds but that
may be 30 seconds slower so it was as you say about
five-and-a-half to six-minutes-past, but you cannot remember
whether the game was still going or not? - A. No. Obviously
I think it was partly to do with my state at the time and
a short time afterwards.  I cannot be absolutely certain
as to whether that was just before the game was stopped.
I believe it was but I cannot be absolutely certain.  I
must be honest.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs Mr. Hicks, you said you did not
get a very good reply. Let's have what reply you did get?
- A . In full?

Yes please? - A. Shut your fucking prattle.

      MR. COLLINS: Was he looking in the direction, as far
as you could see, of the pens in question, 3 and 4? - A.
Yes, he was.

And how long did he stand there? - A. ®§ain I would put
it at three or four minutes. He obviously replied to me
so he had heard what I said and in fact a fan behind me
made a comment:  "Well at least he has heard you this time"
or something along those lines, but I can't be absolutely
certain.

Were you aware at this point of more and more people
climbing out of the pens or being hauled out? - A. I think
by this time in all directions. The Police had thrown
an additional cordon, had some pitch side or fence side
Officers first and then they had thrown a second cordon
around in an arc behind the goal.
                           13

                                    T. HICKS


Q. Were you aware of a number of Officers emerging from roughly
   underneath where you were from the corner of the South
   Stand at any stage, a number of Officers emerging from
   there and going across? - A. Yes, I think those would be
   the ones I am talking about that put the curved cordon
   around behind the goal.

Q. Because we know that a number of such Officers emerged at
   about 2-mimites-past-3. That appears on the video, you
   see.

   Help us: are you saying that your conversation with the
   second Police Officeroccurred before those Officers
   emerged or after? - A. I would suggest it would probably
   be about the same time. It may have been slightly after­
   wards .

Q. It was about the same time as these Officers emerged from
   roughly underneath where you were standing? - A. Yes.
   The problem I have got in recalling it is obviously we
   were shouting at them to do something. At the same time
   they were putting people back as I believe you have
   already had evidence.

Q. Were you able to see what was going on at this stage at
   the perimeter fence. Could you see the perimeter fence?
   - A. I could not see the perimeter fence, the front fence
   as I would call it. I could see the side fence, the
   dividing fence.

Q. Obviously you were gettingmore and more worried as this
   was going on. Did you move your position at any stage?
   - A. Yes, again I cannot remember whether the chap next
   to me followed as well, but I left my position at I would
   put it somewhere around 10-past-3 or thereabouts. People
   were scrambling over, in all directions. They were on to
   the pit&h and I started to move down to the corner obviously
   at the side fence initially to see if I could see where
   the girls were and obviously to render whatever assistance
   I could and as I got perhaps halfway down the terracing
   towards there I saw Victoria being passed over the top.

Q. That is the top of the perimeter? - A. This would be the
   top of the perimeter fence, yes. In fact I was not
   absolutely certain because I only got a quick glimpse
   but of course I recognised her boots as she had some
   different, if I may call them, Doc Marten boots on and
   obviously I saw the 'T‘ shirt and the long hair and things,
   so at that stage I then went on to the pitch through the
   access gate which had a Policeman on it from the section
   of terracing that I was in.
Q. I think you then came upon both your daughters on the pitch
   with people trying to assist them? - A. Yes, Sarah was
   already laid on the pitch and by some sheer coincidence
   Victoria was laid completely next to her and as she was
i

                                14

                                        T. HICKS


       laid down it was just about the time I arrived. There were
       two men already giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to
       Sarah and then myself and another chap, in fact I think
       there were two chaps initially, started looking at Victoria.

    Q. I think there was someone attending to Sarah who you later
       discovered was a doctor? - A. Yes, it was a Doctor Flenley
       whose name I have in fact given now. I did not know he
       was a doctor until he wrote to me afterwards but it was
       quite obvious he had some medical training and I thought
       he was at least a qualified first-aider.

    Q. Did he aak for any particular equipment? - A. Yes, he was
       calling for Isuction" which I believe since is a device
       for clearing ....

    Q. "Suction"? - A. Yes, so while he was attending to mouth-to-
       mouth resuscitation, bearing in mind that there is about/live
       of us at this time attending to the two of them, I was
       calling out, theiewas Policemen obviously milling around
       there were Ambulancemen milling around and I was calling
       out for suction and obviously nothing was forthcoming.




                                     /Q. Were you aware
dmT)   } '*
                                          15

                                                             T. HICKS



              Q. Were you aware of the arrival of the first ambulance or an
                 ambulance? - A. Yes. Again, forgive me, I hope I am not
                 confusing you.  I am not absolutely sure whether the
                 ambulance had not actually got on to the pitch behind the goal
                 before I did.

              Q. In any event, you were aware of an ambulance and its position.
                 We know in fact an ambulance got into position roughly behind
                 the goal? You were aware of that? - A. Yes, that is the first
                 ambulance.

              Q. Was that a sensible position in your view for the ambulance to
                 take up? - A. I think I have made the comment in my statement,
                 I think it was an absolutely ludicrous situation to go to. It
                 was right in the middle of where everybody wanted to be, and
                 in fact when they tried to get the ambulance clear we were
                 having to move people, and in fact it was a twin-wheeled
                 Transit type ambulance with twin wheels on the back. When it
                 was trying to come out of the ground it was (a) having to move
                 very, very slowly, because people were getting out of the way,
                 and in fact as I was kneeling down, I was actually seeing
                 to Victoria by this time, it did in fact run across the tip of
                 my toes, and I believe across either a foot or a hand of
                 someone a little further along from us, again only with the
                 extra wheel being wider, but it was a stupid place for the
                 ambulance to go, and I believe purely to keep off the pitch.

              Q. About this time or shortly after, some oxygen appeared from a
                 Fireman? - A. Yes. Again we were still trying to get
                 equipment.  There was absolutely nothing. All we had was
                 effectively ourselves.  Then a person came across with yellow
                 leggings which I assume was a Fireman, and in fact was
                 carrying an oxygen bottle with the triangular type face mask
                 attached to the top. Of course, as I now understand or
                 believe, it was one of these devices for people who have
                 inhaled smoke, and unless you can actually breathe yourself in
                 and out of the face mask then it is useless.

              Q. Mr. Hicks, can I now put it broadly in this way, I think
                 thereafter you made desperate efforts.   Your daughters were
                 taken to hospital and there was what you consider to be, to
                 put it mildly, confusion in the way they were dealt with and
                 you were dealt with, but you appreciate that aspect is not a
                 matter for this Inquiry? - A. I do accept, but I think it is
                 something that does need looking at, I appreciate.

                      Again, what happened in the evening back at Hillsborough,
                 I presume is nothing to do with this Inquiry, but it
                 certainly needs looking at.  It was disgraceful the
                 way we were treated.

              Q. As I say, that is a matter which no doubt you will take up
                 elsewhere. - A. We will take that up separately, yes.
                              16

                                                   T. HICKS


                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Hicks, some very short points. First, if you had not gone
   to purchase your cup of coffee you would not have known how
   to get into the side terracing.  Is that correct? - A. No,
   absolutely and categorically no. If you look at the
   photograph the sign cannot be read from the point when you
   went up.

Q. Secondly, when you first became aware of people in distress,
   that is just before you spoke to the Officer with the gold
   braiding, did you have a good view of the side fence between
   the pens? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. What could you see? - A. I could see people actually penned up
   against that fence, some of whom were not looking towards the
   pitch, which was obviously a sign of how tightly packed, and
   they were not doing it voluntarily.    I did in fact see an old
   chap - I say "an old chap" - he had grey hair, wearing a light
   coloured jacket, and as I was going towards him - again I
   can't fully remember whether it was as I went towards him or
   from my fixed position when I was standing there - I could see
   his eyes were closed and he looked in obviously a pretty
   dreadful state.   There were other people as well, but that was
   the one that particularly caught my eye.

Q.   Did you have any difficulty at that stage in forming the view
     that people in that pen were in distress? - A. Absolutely none
     at all, and I would put that at 15-minutes-to-3 or
     thereabouts, possibly even earlier.

Q. The Officer with the gold braiding, the first senior Officer
   whose attention you tried to attract, from where you were did
   he appear to be as good a position as yourself to see what was
   going on? - A. No, he was in a far superior position. He was
   not much further away distance-wise, and obviously had the
   advantage of perhaps 10 feet extra height.  In fact, I think
   one of the things I called to them was "Christ, we can see.
   Why the hell can't you", or thereabouts, that type of thing.

Q.   Let me move on to the stage where you are trying tospeak to
     the second Officer with the black cap. What exactly were you
     saying to him? - A. Again I can't be absolutely certain, but
     it was along the general lines, "For Christ's sake can't you
     see what is going on?".   I did in fact make reference, "Have
     you not got any closed-circuit television?".   I did in fact
     work for a security company at one time, in fact Chubb Alarms
     in London - I was a director there - and I had some experience
     with closed-circuit television.   I said, "Christ, can't you
     see what's going on? We can see it with our eyes", this type
     of thing.   I can't be exactly certain of the words.  I made it
     perfectly clear that we knew people were in distress.

Q.. Before you moved away from that position you had a view of a
    Police cordon, I think you describe in your statement, in an
    arc around the two central pens behind the goal? - A. Yes.
*1
5    1

                                          17

                                                               T. HICKS


         Q. Were you able to see then people trying to climb over the
            front barrier? - A. Yes, both the front and the side, people
            were being pulled out at the back into the seating area.

         Q. What was the reaction of those Police Officers initially to
            that behaviour? - A. Initially, I saw one man stagger out who
            had his arm put up his back - I would call it arresting him -
            and frog-marched off to the side.  It was mixed reactions.
            There were people being pushed back, certainly everything but
            what I would class as helping.  I am talking in general
            terms. I can't talk about individual cases.  It was my
            opinion, and I am not sure whether an opinion is what you
            want, they thought it was quite clearly what was a pitch
            invasion when in fact we could quite clearly see it was not
            that, that it was people in distress trying to get out.

         Q. Thank you, Mr. Hicks.

                            Cross-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD;

         Q.   Mr. Hicks, I want to ask you some details about what you saw
              and about the time. Before I do ask you those questions
              please understand that the sympathy of the Police Force is
              with you. - A. Thank you.

         Q.   And the purpose of the questions is to identify some        detail,

                   MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, may I say this in relation to the
              matters that are later in Mr. Hicks' statement, in relation to
              the suggestion there may have been behaviour that should not
              have taken place at a time when he was distressed, when there
              was unthinking behaviour, those matters will be pursued, but
              not here.

                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        This is later on after the
              hospital?

                   MR. WOODWARD:    Indeed, sir, yes:

         Q. Can I ask you about your arrival.        You arrived and had your
            picnic? - A. Yes.

         Q. And you made an observation earlier on in your evidence in
            relation to about that time that when you got to the
            turnstiles and arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance it seemed
            quite quiet by comparison? - A. Yes.

         Q. Was it your impression that given your time of arrival there
            there were less people about than you would have expected? -
            A . Yes.

         Q. You had no difficulty in getting in? - A. No.

         Q. Having got in and got into your position you have described,
            you again have said that looking across the stands and looking
            at the general attendance at that time again that it seemed
            quiet by comparison? - A. I think as you add the "by
                                 18

                                                      T. HICKS


     comparison", there is quiet and there is quiet.  It was not as
     packed in all areas as I would have anticipated to be by that
     sort of time on a normal game of that magnitude.

Q. The state of affairs that you observed at the time you were
   there was the sort of state of affairs that you would have
   expected at a much earlier time? - A. I don't quite
   understand.  You mean the fact it was quiet?

Q. Yes. - A. Had it been 1 o'clock, say, yes, I accept that.

Q. Is it right that whilst you were on the stand giving your
   attention to what was happening and before the kick-off, there
   was no announcement that you heard directing people given over
   the Tannoy within the ground? - A. No announcement you mean
   about moving or crowd control?

Q. Yes. - A. I have no recollection of that, no.

Q. Because there was some evidence given yesterday by a gentleman
   who said about half-past-2 there was an announcement to the
   Liverpool fans to move back? You did not hear that? - A. No,
   again I did say earlier that around that time I was listening
   for team news, and I would have had....

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Move forward.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   I beg your pardon.   The Liverpool fans at
     the back of the goal should move forward because there were
     people at the back to come in. - A. Right.   I certainly did
     not hear that, but as I said earlier I was occasionally over
     that time listening to a transistor radio, so I could have
     missed it.

Q. It may be that, but the position you were in was a quieter
   area of the ground? - A . By numbers of people, yes.

Q. And if one is concerned with factors which might have blotted
   out the Tannoy announcement those factors, noise, congestion,
   were not so great where you were? - A. No, I think in fairness
   they would have been irrelevant because as you know if you
   have one of these small earpieces in you won't hear the
   background noise.

Q. Of course.  If you had that on. - A. Which I did have, as I
   said at approximately that sort of time.

Q. You say there came a time when a Police Officer appeared on
   standing on the platform by the box? - A. Yes.

Q. About what time do you say that was? - A. This would be the
   first Police Officer?

Q. Yes. - A. I would put it around 2.45, 2.50, that sort of time.
   I must admit I was not actually looking at my watch every few
   minutes.
                              19

                                                 T. HICKS


Q. In the evens that happened your sense of time at some stage
   may have been distorted or disturbed? - A. I think actual
   start and finish times, yes, but as at the time though,
   because I was obviously extremely anxious....

Q. But not at this time? - A. I think my problem relates to later
   in the fact some of the items - again you don't write things
   down until afterwards - obviously we were in a traumatic state
   afterwards.

Q. Yes, it depends what else is on your mind. - A. The second
   Police Officer's face, for instance, I don't think I could
   ever forget.  I may, as I said, if it ever comes to try and
   follow that through, but these are the sort of things
   which....

Q. May I ask you about the first Police Officer that you
   describe. You say he had a flat Policeman's hat on? - A.
   Yes, an Officer's hat, a peaked cap as I would call it.

Q.   With gold braid? -n A. i think it had gold braid on the peak,
     yes.

Q. You are sure about that, are you? - A. 60%-40% sure, let me
   put it like that.

Q. You say he had an anorak on? -A. I feel he had a light
   coloured anorak o n , y e s .

Q. Are you sure about that? - A. Fairly sure, yes.

Q. It was not a man in a black anorak or a black short jacket? -
   A. No, a light coloured anorak.

Q. Sort of fawny colour? - A. Like a fawny, possibly a grey.

Q.   Pale blue, something like that? - A. I don't think so. My
     recollection is of a light fawn colour, and I think, as I
     said, I have not actually seen any videos of it.

Q.   Are you sure it was in fact, because there are no Officers
     with gold braid and there is difficulty in identifying an
     Officer with a light anorak on, that it was in fact a Police
     Officer, that first Officer? - A. It was clearly a Police
     Officer, the first Officer, quite clearly.

Q. His attention was in what direction? -A. I felt towards pens 3
   and 4 and the general area of the back of the goal. That is
   where he was looking.

Q.   Was he out oh that position for very long? - A. I would say 3
     or 4 minutes, that sort of time.

Q. Did he speak to you at all? - A. No, he made no comments at
   all. He completely ignored me.

Q. You say that you called to him? - A. Yes.
                                            T. HICKS



Just the once? - A. No, several times. There were probably
half-a-dozen people in the general area who were shouting up
to them there, and obviously trying to draw their attention to
what we could see was going on.

Did his attention ever come down to you? - A. I don't think
so, no.

His attention was focused over towards the goal? - A. Yes.

And was it noisy at this time? - A. Reasonably noisy, yes.

It may be, as you say, that he ignored you.  It may be that
his attention was preoccupied with something really important?
- A. Yes. As I say, I can't comment. You must ask him that,
yes.




                                /Q. May I ask you about
                              21




                                            T. HICKS



Q. May I ask you about the second Officer?   This would be
   at about what time? - A. I cannot be absolutely certain
   again whether this was just before, at, or just after the
   kick-off.

Q. You relate it to the kick-off but cannot be more precise?
   -A. Yes, even the kick-off, if this does not sound
   strange for an ardent fan, was not that important.   My
   attention had already been drawn away from the game.
   Now I am told the crowd surged when Peter Beardsley hit
   the bar.   Now I would not have missed that normally, but
   I have no recollection of that happening.   As I say, I
   was not watching the game.

Q. There comes a time in what one is doing when everything
   the world sees you miss and you did not see that because
   you were concentrating on the... - A. Bear in mind that
   that was at the far end of the ground and my attention
   was focused at this end.   I remember Bruce Grobbelaar,
   for instance, walking round the back of the goal and that
   sort of thing, but it is only the events relating to the
   goal and directly around it.

Q. In relation to the second Police Officer what you are
   saying is that it was some time around kick-off? - A. It
   may have been just before.   It may have been just after.
   I cannot be absolutely certain.

Q.   Was thatOfficer alone on the platform? -A. I think the
     cameraman I have referred to was stood atthe front on
     the landing and the Police Officer was stood a couple of
     steps down from the landing on the staircase.

Q. Was that cameraman a media cameraman or... - A. I do not
   know. I think it was the one with the static camera, the
   standard 35 mm type of camera.   I do not think it was
   the video cameraman.   I think he had been and gone by
   the time that Officer came.

Q. The second Police Officer, can you describe his build? -
   A. Yes.    I would put him fairly stocky.

Q.   What was he wearing? - A. He was wearing a uniform.   I
     think he is an Inspector with the black...

Q. Black braid* that would be right.   I am not absolutely
   sure whether he had a radio clipped to him or not.

Q. Had he got a jacket on or was it a straightforward Police
   Officer s uniform? - A. I think it was a Police
   Officer's...   He may have had the standard issue Police­
   like coat on the top, but I did not really pay that much
   attention, to be honest.
                                       T. HICKS


What colour is that which you are describing, the
standard issue coat? - A. Sort of a dark bluey colour,
like Lord Justice Taylor's suit.   The standard sort of
navy blue if you like.

Not a weather garment? - A. I could not be certain
whether it was...   I felt it was one of these...   They
wear like a light sort of nylon-type jacket that they can
put on the top of their uniform.   He may have had one of
those on.   I cannot be certain.

You called to him? -A. Several times, yes.

Did he look at you? - A. Not until he actually looked
down.    When he made the comment he did and then he
looked straight away again.

Did it take you a little time to get his attention? -A.
Again I would say a couple or three minutes, yes.

During that time when you were trying to get his
attention, upon what did he appear to be focused? - A. He
again appeared to be looking in the general area of the
goal and the front of the pens.

He appeared to be concerned with something in that area?
- A. Yes, I suppose ''concern” is the word.  He was
certainly concentrating on that area.

It was not just a man having a look round.   He was
focusing... - A. In fact his whole mannerism from when he
took up his position to looking to actually leaving the
game did appear to be a man who was looking in that area,
yes.

You called to him a number of times and eventually there
came a point when he did turn to you? - A. Yes.

Do you remember what you said to him that he responded to
by turning to you? - A. I said several times - I cannot
remember exactly which one, but it was generally along
the lines, "For Christ's sake, can't you see what is
going on?     You know, "You have got cameras.   We can
see. Why can't you?"     That type of thing.   It was
certainly all related to drawing his attention to what
was going on.

Are you saying at this time there were a number of you
shouting those things? - A. Probably two or three at that
time.

Where you were standing were you fairly^closely packed? -
A. Again, by comparison, I would say not.   It was
                                       T. HICKS


reasonably full but we were not tightly packed as you
would expect to be.

Were you just shoulder to shoulder but not pressed... -A.
Yes.   You had room, if you like, to move around
reasonably.

It was comfortable? - A. Yes.   If I remember rightly you
could turn round and look up at him very easily without
having to push.

He swore, do you say? - A. Yes.   It may have been he was
under some pressure and it was a momentary slip, but it
certainly was not what I expected to hear, if I could put
it like that.

You say you obviously do not know what was in his mind
and it may have been he was under some pressure.   At
that time if someone was giving their attention to what
was happening behind the goal, they certainly ought to
have been very, very concerned? - A. Yes, which were
exactly the comments we were making to him, of course,
which he did not appear to be.

However, if you are right, there was plenty in that
direction to occupy the mind? - A. Yes.

When he turned and spoke to you was it a... - A. Well, he
did not actually turn because he was sort of at the
barrier at the side of the staircase and he just looked
down, said what he did and then he looked back up again.

As it were dismissing what you were saying? - A. Yes.   I
felt it was a dismissive, "Why don't you get out of my
way" sort of thing, which I know what you are trying to
suggest.   Yes, he could well have been meaning it in
that way.

To be fair about it, it would be a construction that
might' be put on what was said, "I'm busy, don't bother
me ? - A. I accept that could be a construction, yes.

"I am concerned about something over there.   You are not
in it.   Stay out"? - A. I take issue with "concerned".
He did not give the impression of concern.   He did give
the impression of paying attention to it.

You got the impression of attention, but beyond that you
cannot say... - A. I got the impression of
dismissiveness.   This is why I said...

Dismissiveness of you? - A. Almost of the situation, not
only of me.
                                         T. HICKS


Do you know at what time that happened?   You said
roundabout the kick-off? - A. I put it in my statement,
I cannot be certain.

Had any gates been opened along the front... - A. I could
not say for certain because I could not see the front, of
course, because of the people   I could not see the front
fence.   I could see the top of it.    The single gate may
have been open.   I cannot be certain.    I did not have a
clear view of that.

Did you see any gates along the perimeter fence open? -
A. No.   That is the one I am on about, the gate at the
perimeter fence.

At any stage did you see any gates in the perimeter fence
open? - A. Well, I went through one, of course, with the
Police Officer on to the pitch.   I have a recollection,
but again cannot be absolutely certain, of the one in
front of pen 4 opening and some people getting out and
that is when I saw people being arrested, as I call it,
where the Police were actually manhandling them to the
side.

Because when the films are looked at it can be seen there
is a time, very shortly after the kick-off certainly,
when gates are open in the perimeter fence. - A. Again, I
have not seen those videos and from my particular
position I did not have a good view of the front.   It is
more than possible.

What happened then? - A. When I started to leave my
position and go down on to the pitch?

Well, the Officer had given his attention back. - A. Oh,
I'm sorry.

Did he go down or into the box? - A. I think he went back
down but I cannot be absolutely certain.

There came a time when you say there was an arc of
Officers, a cordon, in relation to the goal? - A. Yes.

Whereabouts was that?   Was that between the goal and the
perimeter fence? - A. Yes, I would say it was an arc just
around the goal.   It was certainly behind the goal.

At the back of the goal? - A. Yes.

What time do you say that was   made? - A. Again I see that
around kick-off time.   There   was another little incident
later on which was just about   the stage where a lot of
Police Officers came from the   far corner, the North
                                        T. HICKS


Stand, and took up positions across the pitch, but that
was obviously after the game had stopped.

This arc of Officers that you described, the cordon
around the goal, how many Officers were in it? - A.
Fifty-plus.

Could you be mistaken about that, that they made an arc
round the goal, between the goal and the perimeter fence?
- A. I could be mistaken that it was an arc and the exact
numbers but they certainly took up positions in that
general area.

Where were you when that happened? - A. I was still
standing in my position on the terrace.

Are you able to say roughly what time that was? - A. To
be fair, I am gettingmore confused with the times as we
go through it again.    I have put it in my statement.

Your confusion is understood... - A. Forgive me, this is
a little difficult, as you can imagine.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think you said in your
statement that the game had just kicked-off and a Police
cordon was put in an arc round the two central pens? - A.
Yes.   I think it was just after the kick-off.

      MR. WOODWARD:    You did say a cordon of two to
three men deep? - A.They had not linked arms.     They
were not forming a tight barrier, they were basically a
body of Police Officers...

But two to three deep, do you follow?   That sounds
like... - A. There were situations where there were
Officers standing in line behind other Officers, but
again you can comment better you have seen the videos.

Well, the pace at which we are proceeding there is a lot
of material that has not yet been seen. - A. OK, well -
I have not even seen any of the television coverage yet.
We have deliberately not watched it, for obvious reasons.

You describe in the statement a Police cordon of two to
three men deep.     Do you mean that? - A. Forgive me, sir,
I would not have   put it in my statement if I did not mean
that, would I?I may be mistaken.   It may not have     been
two or three deep all across the arc.    It may not have
been an actual arc, but there was certainly a line of
Police Officers which were put across the back of the
goal, in my opinion, to repell people who were trying to
get out of the pens.
                                       T. HICKS


It was a line of Police Officers more than one deep? - A.
In places, yes.    My impression was most of it, but again
as I said...    Again, if you want my opinion, it was
certainly not to help.    It was there to stop people
getting out of those pens and on to the pitch.

There were Officers who did their utmost? - A. Individual
Officers, yes.

There were Officers, you may have observed, who were
very, very distressed and upset by what they went
through? - A. Yes.

Did you notice during the period that followed, whether
it was justified or not is another question, a lot of
antagonism being shown by some people to some Officers? -
A. I personally did not see any of it. I could imagine
it. If I were one of the people who had just managed to
get myself out and I had been shoved back in again I
would have been a bit antagonistic.

Did you see any coins being thrown, spitting going on? -
A. No, I did not.   I made a comment in my statement that
when the television cameraman came on to the platform at
the side of the police box there may have been something
thrown at him, but again I could not be certain of that,
but I certainly did not see any coin throwing going on at
the pitch side when we were actually on the pitch.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

      MR. GLASGOW:   Mr. Hicks, my name is Edwin Glasgow.
I represent the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.   The
members of that Club wish me to express their sympathy to
you.   I would like to add my own and my own and I think
all the lawyers present, their boundless admiration for
the way in which you have behaved today.

      T. HICKS:   Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could I also add my sympathy
and say what I think everybody in this room must feel
that I very much admire your fortitude.   Thank you for
coming.
                               27




          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I just say, I have been
     consulting with Mr. Collins, tomorrow there is an event
     in Sheffield which I believe starts outside here and
     will involve a good deal of noise which makes it not
     possible for this hearing to on in the afternoon.
     Accordingly, we were proposing at first to conclude the
     hearing tomorrow at 1.30 - go right through to 1.30
     and then stop for the day.   It occurs to me, in view
     of what has just been said, amd indeed it has been said
     at various stages of this Inquiry, that it might be
     helpful if, instead of going on until 1.30 we went on
     until 1 o'clock and at 1.30 a showing of the video
     which has been prepared and is about two hours and a bit
     in length could then be shown and all counsel, lawyers
     or people who want to see it -- anybody can see it,
     frankly, I think we can probably rig it up in the room
     which has got the overflow in - that that will be available
     to be seen and I propose, unless anybody thinks it is a
     bad idea, that that should be done.

          Anybody who has seen it and does not want to stay
     need not but, unless someone suggests it is unwise,
     that will be made available, so we will do that tomorrow.
     I say that will start at 1.30 because I think it will
     then be through in time for anyone who wants to get a
     train elsewhere at 4 o'clock to be able to get it.

          Right, we will proceed.

                      IAN WILLIAM BURKE,    called

                      Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. Are you Ian William Burke?       A.     Yes.

Q. Do you live in Skelriiersdale in Lancashire?           A.   Yes.

Q. And did you go to the football match at Sheffield on
   15th April?   A.   Yes.

Q. What time did you get to Sheffield?            A.   About 1 o'clock.

Q.    Did you see any policemen about when  you got there at
     that time?     A.  Yes., when you come down the road towards
     the ground, they are like in the roadways, on the side, on
     their bikes and in their cars and that.

Q. They were on the roadways, you say, at the side?    A.  Yes,
   off the side of the road, you know, like on their bikes
   and that, sitting there, watching the crowds going by.

Q.   Did they speak to you, any of them?          A.    No.
x   *•



                                          28



                                                              I.    W.   BURKE



         Q. How far away from the ground had you parked?                  A.     About
            a mile.

         Q. About a mile?     A.   Yes.

         Q. Did you come into Leppings Lane and go on towards the
            entrance there?   A.    Yes.   We come down, you know,
            past Gateways Food Store and then went round through
            Leppings Lane that way.

         Q. What time did you get to the entrance to the ground?
            A.   It was about quarter past one to half past, around
            that.

         Q. Were there many people going to the ground at that time?
            A.   Not as many as usual.

         Q. Not as many as usual?   A.   Like, last year ---  We
            went last year and there was more than that at that time
            last year.

         Q. You got there at the same time the year before,                did you?
            A.   Yes.

         Q. Do you like to get there early?          A.      Yes.

         Q. You went into the ground,      did youj,      through the turnstiles?
            A.   Yes.

         Q. Did you have any difficulty going through the turnstiles?
            A.   No.

         Q. Did you have to queue?        A.     There was like four or five
            people in the queue.

         Q. Four or five people?     A.        Yes, that's all.

         Q.   I think you were in a group of several people,              seven of you
              altogether, were you not?   A.   Yes.

         Q. Including your father,   your brother and some friends?
            A.   Yes.

         Q. Now, when you got into the ground, where did you go to?
            A.   You come in and  the middle sections, where the tunnel
            goes, we went to the  right-hand side.

         Q. You went to the right-hand side when you went down the
            tunnel?   A.   We didn't go down the tunnel, we went
            to the right-hand side.

         Q. I am sorry, you went to the right-hand side of the tunnel?
            A.   Yes, I think that is B Section over there.

         Q. Would you like to just turn round and look at the model
            and see where ----    Were you going round the end of the
                                                 I.   W.    BURKE



Stand?   A.      Yes,    round the back.

So that is Pens 1 and 2.            A.    Yes.

Near to the Police  Control Box?                A.Yes, well,     we were
just at the back against the wall,              at the back of it.

You were at the back against the wall?                 A.        Yes.

And did you all stay together as a group?    A.   Yes,
until about -- a bit later on and then me and my friend
left and went into the middle section.

That is what I am going to ask you a b o u t . You and your
friend - your friend was called Stephen, was he not?
A.   Yes.

You say you left that position in Pen 1?                    A.      Yes.

Where did you go to?    A.   Come back out round the back
and in through the tunnel and then we come down into
this side section.

Which side    did you go on to when you came out of the
tunnel?       A.   You come up down the tunnel there and then
to this —     as you look at the back of the goal, to the left
of it, the    left-hand side.

So you went into Pen 4?            A.    Yes,   I don't know ---

To the left of the goal but at the backipf the goal?
A.   Yes.

Leaving the other people where they were in Pen 1?
A.   Yes, the other five were in the other side.

As you were coming round the back, then, from the first
pen to the tunnel, did you see many people in that
courtyard between the turnstile and the tunnel?
A.    Well, there was like -- normal.  There was a few
people around, walking around and that, buying Coke and
prog ra mme s.

Were you able to go down the tunnel alright?                      A.    Yes,
you could walk down the tunnel easy.

Easily enough?      A.      Yes.

Did you see in your going in the first place to the first
pen and then backrggaon. to the tunnel, did you see any
stewards about?    A.    A few, there was about three or four.

What were they doing?   A.   They were just like standing
against the tunnels, you know, standing at the sides.
                                  30



                                                    I.    W.   BURKE



Q. Standing at the side of the tunnel?   A.   Yes, and there
   was one by the kiosk where you buy food and drink and
   that.

Q. What time was this when you saw them?             A.        It was
   about ten past two.

Q. Ten past two?   A.   Yes, because we stopped to get
   something first and then we went into the section.

Q. These stewards that you saw at the side of the tunnel,
   were they giving any directions to anybody?   A.   No,
   they were just standing round.

Q. Just standing there.         On the ground side of the tunnel
   or the outer side?      A.      What  do you mean?

Q.    On the pitch side of the tunnel or on     the outer side?
     A.    On the outside.

Q.   On the outer side.   A.     Yes.

Q.   So you went into Pen No. 4.How far    down that pen did
     you go?   A.   We went to about  ---    Just in the first
     barrier by the fencing, just in front of that.

Q. The first barrier just in front of the fence?                  A.    Yes.

Q.   Towards the front then?      A.    Yes.

Q.   Were you on the left-hand side  or the right-hand side
     of that pen?    A.   On the left.

Q. On the left?     A.    Yes.

Q. Away from where the gate was then?          A.         From the
   gate against  the perimeter fence?

Q.    The gate in the perimeter fence on to the pitch.
     A.   No, well, that was on -----    There was like   the
     railing going   up and there was a gate on      that side
     and then I think there was   a gate on the      other side
     of the pen, but I am not too sure about that.      I
     couldn't see that.

Q. The gate in the perimeter fence was to your right, is that
   right?   A.   There was one to the left and one on the
   far right.

Q. The one to the left was probably in the next pen, was it
   not?    A.  Yes, I think so.

Q. You were in the left-hand corner towards the front of the
   pen?    A.  Yes.
                                              I.   W.    BURKE



Were you against a barrier?        A.    We had our back on the
b ar ri er .

You had your backs on the barrier - on the front barrier?
A.   Yes.

And what were the conditions like in the pen when you
first got there?   A.   You could just, like, move around.

You could move around?   A.   Yes,       there wasn't many
people in front of us at the time.

This was before half past two, was it?        A.        Around half
two, yes.

Did you notice any change in that as time went by?
A.   It was just like, as kick-off got nearer, it was
just like filling up a bit more and more, just as if
you were at Anfield, like, it was just building up as
usual.

Filling up as usual?      A.      Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could you speak a bit louder
and perhaps lean forward a bit and speak to the microphone
would you?

     THE WITNESS:      Yes.

     MR. PHILIPS:   Well, as it wasfilling up as  usual,
getting closer to kick-off time, did anything occur which
in your view was unusual?   A.   Leading up before the
crush?   No, it was just as normal.

Just getting tighter and tighter?   A.   Yes, but it still
wasn't as tight ---   You could still move around and that

And then you mentioned the crush - what happened then?
A.   Well, we were just stood at the front and then just
all of a sudden it just went - bang - and you just had
to put your hands up like that and you were just stuck
like that, couldn't move at all.

Had the players come out       on to the pitch at that      stage?
A.   I think so, yes.

Had the game kicked off at that stage?   A.    I am not
too sure because I wasn't really taking much notice.
Like, you were just swaying round and we weren't taking
much notice of the pitch - trying to get your balance
back, and that.

Now, were you still with your friend, Stephen, at that
stage?   A.   Yes.    Well, I was holding on to the back
of his coat as we were getting pushed around.    I had
hold of the  backncf his coat.
                                                I.   W.    BURKE



After that initial erosh, did it get any worse or did it
stay the same?   A.   It got worse.   It was just getting
heavier all the time.   They just wasn't giving way.

How close were you   then to the perimeter fencing?
A.   There was a little boy at the front and then my
friend and then I was behind him, my friend, so I was,
like, three people back.

Could you touch it from where you were - the fence?
A.    May have just been about that far away from my
fi ngers.

Your friend in front of you ---      A.      Yes.

Could he toach it?     A.    Yes, he had hold of it.

He had hold of it?     A.    Yes.

What was he doing as he was holding it?    A.  He had
his hands stretched like that on the fencing with his
foot up against the wall stopping this little kid who
was screaming against the front of the fence.   He was
stuck on it, the little kid, and he was, like, keeping
himself off the fence so he could breathe.

Trying to protect the boy?      A.    Yes.

And was he able to do that successfully?    A.   Yes, well
his arms were bending, like, at the elbows.    They were
bending, like, that way, sort of like this ---

     L0RD JUSTICE T&YL0R:   The wrong way?            A.      Yes,
the opposite way from the joint.

     MR. PHILIPS:    You say the boy was screaming?
A.   Yes.

Were other people nearby doing similar things?
A.   Everyone was, like, just shouting and the Police
were, like, walking in front — started walking in
front of the fencing and everyone was telling them to
just open the gates and everything and they were, like,
saying, "Get back, get back" and you couldn't move at
all.

Did you see anybody try to get over the fence?              A.       Yes

How close were you to that person?    A.   He was right
next to me, just in frait of me to the left.

What did he do?   A.   He climbed up on to the top and
over and then I was stuck like that and the pressure was,
like, pushing me into the gap on to the fence, so I just
decided to throw myself up on to the top because I would
have, like, got crushed on the fence myself.
                                                              I.   W.   BURKE



Did you get up to the top of the fence?                  A.        Yes.

Did you get over straight away or did you stay there?
A.   I sat on the top for about 30 seconds, like, getting
my breath back.   I was, like, exhausted and the Police
Officer came over and he was saying, "Get back in" and I just
went, "No way" and I just climbed over.

Well now, this Police Officer you mentioned, can you
describe her or him?   A.   She had ---   I don't know -
she was just a W.P.C.   I didn't take much notice,
re a l l y .

Where was she,         in fact?      A.     Where was she?

Yes.       A.        When I got over the fence or when I was on
top?

When you were on the top and she was talking to you.
A.   She was, like ---  The fencing going up, like the
boards, she was, like, just in front of that.

Was she standing on the low wall in front of the fence
or on the track?   A.   No, she was standing on the
track.

On the track?          A.     Yes.

What did she tell you to do?                A.   To get back over,
to get back into the pen.

Did you?        A.      No.

Did you climb down?           A.     Yes.

What did you do then?   A.    I was, like ---   She was
stood at the side of me and I was looking in to see what
was happening and there was a lad getting pushed down,
you know, over the top, like.    He had fainted or something,
just collapsed, and I told her that he was coming over.
She said, "Never mind about that" and she just, like,
pushed me away on my shoulder there.

How old was this lad, could you see?                A.        He was only
about 17, 18.

And he was being passed over the top of the crowd?
A.   Passed over the top.

Did you see anybody else climbing over the fence?
A.   Yes, there was, like, loads of people climbing over.

Were they able to do so?   A.   There was  one lad, he
was stuck.   He had red track suit bottoms on and the spike
on the top of the fencing was ripping into his leg and he
                                34


                                          I.   W.   BURKE



     was shouting for help so I pulled him and there was
     another woman at the side, she was like helping me,
     and someone inside the ground was, like, trying to
     push him up.   His one leg was in and one leg was out.

Q. You yourself were at the fence helping a person over?
   A.   I was pulling him back off.

Q. Did you get up on to that wall against       the fence?
   A.   No, I was stood on the track.

Q. Did you see what Police Officers were doing when you were
   helping someone over the fence?   A.    No, I wasn't taking
   any notice, I was just helping the lad.

Q.    Was the gate open    into the pen at this time?   A.          I
     wouldn't know.    I   don't know.   I can't remember.

Q.    Now, you mentioned somebody saying to you, "Never mind
     about that, now" - a Police Officer when a boy was being
     passed over your head.    A.  Yes.

Q. Over the heads of the crowd.     Did he, in fact, get out
   of the pen?   A.     I don't know because, like, once I had
   helped this lad over I went back over to the side where
   my mate was and I was telling him to get out of it, you
   know, because you could see people, like, stuck on the
   fences.   I was saying, "Get out" and he climbed up on
   to the top and got over.     He got over and he sat on the
   boards at   the side getting our breath back and then a Police
   Officer escorted us into this section there, through the
   gate in the corner.

Q. On the North corner?   A.   Yes.  There is a gate right
   in this corner was open and we got escorted through there.

Q. Could you    see what was happening on the pitch at the
   time when    you went off to the corner pen?    A.   No,
   we were   just, like, shocked and that.      I sat down on
   one of the steps.

Q.    When you got into the corner pen, were you        able to look
     back on the place where you had come from?           A.   Into
     the middle section?

Q. Yes.     A.   Yes.

Q. You may have misunderstood me when I asked that.   You
   say you were taken by Police Officers to the corner pen.
   A.   Yes.

Q. After you had got out of the middle pen and you sat and
   got your breath back?   A.   Yes.

Q.   Were you able then to   look back towards themidd 1 e    pen
     from where you were?     A.   From inside?
                               35


                                                     I.    W.   BURKE



Q. From inside the corner pen.       A.      Yes.

Q. Was there any play still going on on the pitch at that
   time?   A.   I don7t know, I ^wasn't looking.

Q.   Did you see anybody on the pitch at all?   A.   People,
     yes, like all round the back of the goal and in front
     of the goal there was just people and people coming from
     the North Stand as they were coming down off on to the
     pitch to help.

Q. Were these people lying down, sitting down or what?
   A.   Some were lying getting mouth to mouth and some
   were just, like, sitting down, just shaking and that.

Q.    Were you able to see who was giving this assistance
     to the people on the pitch? A.   There    was, like, a
     few fans were helping and there were Police Officers
     helping as well.

Q. Did you see other Police Officers?          A.         What doing?

Q.   At the back of the goal   bythat pen?      A.         Yes.

Q.   What were they doing?     A.   Kicking the fence in.

Q. Kicking the fence in.   I think,       in fact, you met up
   then again with your father.           A. Yes.

Q.    And I think you went away,  did you not, fairly soon
     afterwards?     A.   Yes, we met up with him - a minute or
     two, something like that.

                   Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Burke, can I ask you about your arrival at the
   ground.   You had been the year before, had you?
   A.   Yes.

Q. And comparing the two, you had got there about the same
   time this year and last year.  There was quite a difference
   I think you said there were not as many as usual?
   A.   No, the year before it was like filling up a lot
   quicker.   I think it had something to do with the
   motorways or something - there was roadworks.

Q. For whatever reason, you noticed that there was nothing
   like the sort of numbers present at the time you arrived
   compared with last year.   A.   Yes.

Q. And when you got into the ground, was that the same
   impression?   A.   Yes.
                                         I.   W.   BURKE



So they were all yet to come?       A.    Yes.

You   have said that   you went to the wing    up by the   Police
Box   to start with?    A.   Yes.

And having been there, you decided to move  to another
position.   That brought you - what - out of the gate
you had gone in and into the yard?    A.   Yes, back
round into the courtyard.

And   to the tunnel?    A.   Yes.




                                (And when you came...)
                               37


                                       I.W. BURKE


Q. When you came to the tunnel about what time would that be?
   - A. It was around quarter-past-2.

Q. And you said, I think, that you saw Stewards there? - A. Yes,
   they were like to the left of the tunnel, there is a kiosk.

Q.   There were a number of Stewards by the entrance   to the
     tunnel? - A. Yes, about four or five.

Q.   And the ground at     this time was   filling up as usual, wasit?
     - A. Yes.

Q. You went down the tunnel; no difficulty going down the tunnel?
   - A. None at all.

Q. And came on the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. And the general state was fine was it? - A. Yes, when you
   went through the tunnel you come down to the bottom of the
   tunnel and it was quite full at the back of the tunnel. You
   had to like push your way through and then once you got
   halfway down it was like empty.

Q. What time is this now when you are on the terrace? - A. About
   half-2.

Q. Did there come a time when you were down by Gate 4* in
   Pen 4? - A. Yes.

Q. Would that be at about 2.55? - A. Yes, we were at the front
   then.

Q.    And I think you said in relation to that when you wrote your
     letter:   "At 2.55 it was full in this section but it was
     not much of a crush” . It was the sort of crush that ga«e
     way and you could push back? - A. Yes.

Q.   Nothing surprising to you at     that time? - A. No.

Q.    2.55. - A. I think the teams had just come out then and    it
     was still like, you could still move around and that.

Q. Was this the time of their entrance immediately before the
   kick-off? - A. Pardon?

Q. Was this, the time that the teams had come out, was that
   the first time they had come on for their general warm up
   or for the actual game? - A. For the actual game.

Q. So they had had their warm up and gone back in? - A. Yes.

Q. They had come back on to the pitch.     Had they tossed the
   coins? - A. I would not know.

Q.   They had not chosen ends? - A. I think they were just warming
     up at the front or in the goals.
Ca   T-
                                         38

                                                I.W. BURKE


          Q. And at that time from your position in Pen 4 down at the
             front? - A. Yes.

          Q. The situation was such that it was perfectly acceptable and
             normal, not a matter of any concern or worry for you?
             - A. No, none at all.

          Q.   I suppose if you for some reason had not wanted to stay
               there at that time, if you had wanted to you could have moved
               away? - A. It would have took some time to get back out.

          Q. But you could have moved away if you did not want to stay
             in that spot?'- A. Yes, you could have moved along the
             front.

          Q. You say there came a point although there had been swaying
             and surging, the sort of thing that you would expect to
             happen, there came a point when the surge did not go back.
             Is that right? - A. Yes.

          Q. Had the game started by then? - A. I don't know. I was
             just trying to get my balance back and that so I would not
             know. I did not see any of the match at all.

          Q.   And there came a point when you were caught there.Is that
               right? - A. Yes.

          Q. And your pal in front was holding the fence to protect the
             little boy in front? - A. Yes.

          Q. You decided to climb out. Before that had you noticed
             whether there were any Police Officers in front of you
             beyond the fence? - A. Mo, I did not really notice at
             first and then as like we were getting squashed and you
             saw a line of them come along then from the North Stand.

          Q. There was a time when Officers came along the front of
             the North Stand? - A. Yes, they were telling us to get
             back and you could not move at all, you were just stuck
             in the same place and you were just thrown everywhere.

          Q. And the Officers when they arrived or when they were
             communicating with the crowd were sayings  "Back, back"?
             - A. Yes, because they did not really know what was
             happening at the back. They thought it was like a push
             at the front and they were telling everyone to get back
             and you could not move.

          Q. Their concern at that stage was to relieve v...    A.
             Tension on the front.

          Q. By getting people to go back, by getting everybody to
             go back? - A. Yes, but you could not move because like
             people were in the tunnel.

          Q. Obviously those at the front can't go back and it has
             got to start some way away? - A. Yes.
                                  39

                                       I.W. BURKE


Q. But their concentration was getting the message to get
   people, if they could do so, to move back and that was not
   being expressed at individuals, was it? - A. No.

Q. It was to everybody? - A. They were just like throwing
   their arms, going like that with their arms.

Q. So it was not any special instruction to you than to any­
   body else? - A. No.

Q. You decided to climb out? - A. Yes.

Q. And did climb up on to the top of the fence? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you up there for very long? - A. About 40 seconds.

Q. And during that time were the Police Officers still saying
   to peoples  "Get back. Get back"? - A. I did not notice.
   There was just one in front of me. I was sort of looking
   at her because she told me to get back in.

Q.   Was that something     which she said directly to you or   was
     that something she was saying to the people there? - A.
     Directly to me.

Q. She it would seem, if that is right, obviously did not
   appreciate why you had got out? - A. Yes.

Q. You did get out and jump down? - A. Yes.
                              v


Q. You have said there came a time when someone else was being
   passed over? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you mean coming     out over the top of the fence? -      A.No,
   it was like at the back by the tunnel they were getting
   passed over everyone's head.

Q. What right at the back up by the tunnel? - A. You know
   where the back of the tunnel is, there, she was getting
   passed over, people were passing her over.

Q. Up at the entrance to the tunnel? - A. Not right at the
   entrance to the tunnel, like a few people before it was
   getting pushed over the top.

Q. How far from the front, from the entrance to the tunnel
   are you talking about? - A. About by that barrier, there,
   where he has got the stick.

Q. By the first barrier down from the entrance to the tunnel?
   - A. Yes.

Q. What was happening there? - A. It was just like, you could
   not see really, just the heads and this fella was getting
   pushed over the top.
                                   I.W. BURKE


Which way was he being brought? - A. Brought down towards,
to the back of the goal, sort of thing.

Being brought towards where the pressure was? - A. They
were bringing him back down on towards the pitch.

And what happened to you, did you say something to somebody
or what? - A. I said to the Police Officer, I saids  "There
is someone coming down there now." She pushed me away and
said "Never mind thatrnow".

By this time there was a lot to do and be concerned with?
- A. Yes, but the person was like you could see he was hurt
and that.

Well if more people came out that was not something to be
minded about at that time, was it, they had to be got out?
- A. If somebody is being brought over you want to get them
out, don't you?

I see. But there came a point when everybody was trying
to get people out? - A. Yes.

Did you see the gate open? - A. No, I don't think so, no.
I can't remember.

You can't say one way or the other? - A. No.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much, Mr. Burke.


            WILLIAM HAMILTON COMERFORD Called
                Examined by BCR. GOLD SACK:

Are you William Hamilton Comerford? - A. Yes.

I think a Manager of a Public House by occupation? - A. Yes.

Mr. Comerford on the 15th of April what time did you arrive
at Leppings Lane? - A. Approximately 2.30. 2G-past-2/2.25.

Had you been the previous year? - A. Yes.

How long did it take you to reach the turnstile? - A. I
would say approximately 25 minutes.

How did that compare with the previous year? - A. The previous
year we had stand tickets.

I see, so you went into a different turnstile? - A. Yes.

Did you see the mounted Police in amongst the people whilst
you were queueing? - A. Yes.
                                 W.H. COMERFORD


What efforts were they making to control the crowd? - A.
Well at first they were way down into the crowd by the
turnstiles and a crush built up. Then two horses stopped
across the gates to stop people going in but the problem
is horses jump around and people got past them.

When you were close to the mounted Policemen yourself
were they actually speaking or shouting any directions
to the crowd? - A. One mounted Policeman shouted?  "Stop
pushing, there is nowhere to go".

"Stop pushing"? - A. Yes, "The® is nowhere to go".

Was that just said once? - A. No, a number of times.

Did anyone appear to take any notice of what he was saying?
- A. They weren't taking any notice because the crowd was
building up by then.

Still more people coming in at the back. Did you actually
go through a turnstile yourself? - A. Yes.

Do you know what time that was? - A. It must have been close
to kick-off time. It must have been close to 3 o'clock.

When you got through the turnstile did you know   where to
go? - A. No, you just saw the tunnel. At first    when we
got through the turnstile I went to the left to   buy pro­
grammes and then you saw the tunnel. There was    no one
there to tell us where to go.

At that stage how busy was the area between the turnstile
and the tunnel? - A. Well as we were going through the
turnstile they were going straight down the tunnel, there
was people walking across there all the time.

Were you aware of the gate to the right of the turnstiles?
- A. Once you got into the turnstile?

Yes, where the gentleman is pointing. Did you know there
was a gate to the right of the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Was that open or closed when you went through the turnstiles?
- A. Before we went through the turnstile it got opened
for a couple of seconds and then a couple of mounted Police
come down the side and closed them. A number of fans got
in through that gate.

What was the state of the tunnel when you went through it?
- A. It was not too bad. It was just people generally
walking through the tunnel.

And what was the state of the terrace when you got to the
other end? - A. There it was crowded. You could feel it
was not right as soon as you got into the terrace.
       \si   ^
 r,_

'''                                            42

                                                       W.H. COMERFORD


                 Q. To which part of the terrace did you go? - A. At first you
                    just got through the tunnel and got on to the steps and
                    you could feel it was too tight then, so we decided to
                    move to the left to see if we could get over the fence
                    into the next pen.

                 Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR; So you went into Pen 3 on the
                      right and then you decided to get over the fence. Is that
                      right? - A. No we come through the tunnel and stopped and
                      we moved to the left to see if we could get Rear the fence
                      but we could not get near the lence.

                 Q.         MR. GOLDSACK: So you in fact went into the back of
                      what is Pen 4? - A. Yes.

                 Q. Before going into the terrace did you know there were fences
                    running up the terrace as well as the front? - A. No, we
                    thought we would be able to get along to a corner somewhere.

                 Q. Could you see that towards your left there were less people?
                    - A. Not at the time,no.

                 Q. Did you at any stage discover that there was a gate at the
                    back of the terrace between the pen you were in and the
                    next one? - A. No.

                 Q. Well did you in fact make any progress towards the left or
                    not? - A. Well when we were trying to make a move to the left
                    the push come from behind and we got shoved right the way
                    down the terracing. We eased back a bit and there was a
                    crush barrier on our back so we thought we would be safe
                    here because we were looking at the pitch and the barrier
                    was behind us then so we thought we would be all right.

                 Q. So there is a surge that takes you halfway down and you end
                    up in front of a barrier? - A. Yes, our back against it
                    looking at the match.

                 Q. Was that the only surge? - A. Well a minute or two after
                    that there was another surge and we went down the front
                    then.

                 Q. By the time &he second surge came do you know what was
                    happening on the pitch? - A. There was people trying to
                    get out, climb out, walking across people's heads trying
                    to get out.

                 Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Can you help a moment about this
                      because one or two witnesses have said this: after the
                      first surge you got so that your back was against a
                      barrier? - A. Yes.

                 Q. Which should be a protected position? - A. That is right.

                 Q. Then you say a minute or two later there is a second surge
                    and you got carried down to the front? - A. Yes.
                              43

                                        W.H. COMERFORD


Q. Can you help us as to how you got carried down to the front
   if you had your back against the barrier? - A. Well when
   we first went past the barrier we missed it by a couple
   of inches and as we moved back we just got it, but with
   the push coming backwards and forwards we carried on
   down.

Q. The pressure that moved you from the barrier forwards did
   that come from the side or where? - A. It had got to come
   from the side because we were to the left of the tunnel
   and it come from behind us, because people coming in from
   the tunnel there was pressure and it was splaying out.

Q. It was "splaying out", is that right, where there was a
   gap between the barriers so that it dislodged you even
   from being in front of the barrier? - A. Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I see.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK: Did you at any stage get to see what
     was happening on the pitch? - A. Once we ended up at the
     front the crush was that tight you did not come back from
     the crush, you could see what was happening on the pitch.

Q. What was happening when you were down the front? - A. Where
   we finished up we would be about seven or eight yards from
   a gate just to our right which eventually opened up and
   people started to get pulled out but there were people
   trying to climb over the fence at the same time.

Q. How many people around you were trying to climb over the
   fence? - A. Well people were coming over our heads at
   that time.

Q. Walking over the top of you to get to the fence? - A. Yes.

Q. At that stage what were the Police doing? - A. At first
   they told them to get down and they shoved them back into
   the crowd.

Q. Did    you see how the gate to your right was opened? -A.
   No,    it was just opened. I don't know who opened it.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers near to the gate? - A.
   Yes, there was' a number of Police Officers.

Q. As far as you are aware was the gate opened just once or
   more than once? - A. As far as I know just once and it
   stayed open.

Q. Once it was opened how easily were the people able to
   get out as far as you could see? - A. It was very hard to
   get out. It seemed like ages before you got out.

Q. But you eventually got out through that gate yourself?
   - a . Yes.
A   ^'1
                                       44
                                                W.H. COMERFORD



          Q. I think you then left the area fairly soon? - A. Yes.

                   MR. GOLDSACK:   Thank you.


                           Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

          Q. May I deal with that last point. There came a time when
             everyone either as soon as possible or eventually realised
             what was going on. Would you agree that the exit via
             the front gate of the pens was totally inadequate? - A. Yes,
             it would only fit one person at a time through the gate.


                          Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

          Q. Mr. Comerford, when you arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance
             were you in a sort of steady stream of people or was it a
             big crowd that you were with? - A. It was a big crowd of
             people.

          Q. That would be at what time? - A. 25-past-2, 2.30.

          Q. Getting on for half-past-2, thereabouts, and the crowd that
             you were in and walking along with did, I don't know whether
             you paused to look behind you, but did you get the impression
             there were lots more behind you still coming on? - A. There
             was still people coming round, yes.




                                       /Q. You walked
) *
                                   45

                                                      W.H. COMERFORD



      Q. And you walked along the road and came to the entrance, coming
         to the entrance to Leppings Lane from the left or the right as
         you approached it? - A. Straight on to it.

      Q. Was it on your left as you walked along or on your right? Did
         you come over the bridge or the other way? - A. It was on our
         right.

      Q. You came over the bridge.  Did you have a look up the road and
         see people coming in the opposite direction? -A. There were
         some people coming heading towards the turnstiles.

      Q. You would be able to see round the corner a little bit as you
         got closer to it.    Was there much of a crowd coming along the
         pavements on that   side? - A. Yes, still turning up, yes.

      Q. So there was a considerable amount of people still making its
         way to the ground from both directions? - A. Yes.

      Q. The first thing that greeted you as you got to the gates, was
         that some mounted  Policemen? - A. Four mounted Policemen, yes.

      Q. They were outside the gates, were they? - A. Yes, outside.
         Outside the turnstiles.

      Q. Well, you were aware of the fence with the gates in it? - A.
         The two blue gates, yes.

      Q. Where was the first mounted Policeman you saw in this area? -
         A. At first the four were inside the two blue gates, but
         eventually two of them came out of there and tried to come on
         to the top of the alley, and two of them tried to block the
         gates off to stop the crush. The crushwas thatbad the
         horses could not make their way.

      Q. Forgive me if I take it more slowly than you can describe it.
         When you came to the gates was there a crowd of people outside
         the gates? - A. Yes.

      Q. Did you see any mounted Policemen   outsidethegates at   that
         time? - A. No, there were inside.

      Q. So you joined the crowd and started to go in to go through the
         gates? - A. Yes.

      Q. Before you got through the gates did you see any mounted
         Policemen? - A. Yes, they started, two eased their way out of
         the gates.

      Q. Would it be right, did they come out of the gates before you
         managed to get into the gates? - A. Yes.

      Q. And their purpose was what, to stop people coming in? - A.
         They tried to ease the pressure of the crowd at the front.

      Q. They tried to prevent those people that were still outside the
*


                                   46


                    «                                 W.H. CQMERFORD


         gates coming in? - A.^ Yes. They tried to close the gates at
         one time but it was not possible.

    Q. So the Officers came outside the gates to try and stop the
       crowd coming in through the gates into the bottleneck? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Did they have any effect? - A. No, none whatsoever.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I interrupt a moment. You
         say they tried to close the gates but it was not possible? -
         A. No.

    Q. Who was trying to close the gates? Officers on horseback or
       foot Officers? - A. The mounted Police, yes. There was not
       foot Police there, not that I saw, anyway.

    Q.        MR. WOODWARD:    The two Officers that came out through
         the gates? -A. Yes.

    Q. They were speaking to people, calling to them? -A. One of the
       Officers shouted, "Stop pushing. There is nowhere to go".

    Q. So there was pushing from outside, from the road, to go in? -
       A . Yes.

    Q.   Did the people stop pushing as the Officer asked, or not? - A.
         It was too far back into the crowd. People at the back would
         not have heard him.

    Q. It is outside the gates this is, is not it? - A. Yes.

    Q. When the Officer asked did the pushing stop or reduce or just
       carry on? - A. No, because people at the back would not have
       heard him.   They carried on crushing.  It was still a big
       crush outside.

    Q. There may be a reason for what happened, but I am asking you
       what happened.  Do you follow? - A. There was still a crush.

    Q. Did the efforts of those Policemen have any effect upon the
       crowd to stop pushing? - A. No.

    Q. The Policemen were trying to prevent people getting in by
       using their horses at the gate? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Did people continue    nevertheless to get in, round and
         under and squeezing up past the horses? - A. I did not
         see them underneath any horses. When they put the gates
         they were right in front of us, and I got a bit scare in
         case the horse started jumping around.

    Q. So the crowd did stop, did it? - A. At one stage, yes. Once
       they had gone across the gates, but then the horses separated
       again and people got past them.

    Q. Did you see any Policemen on foot at that time? - A. Not
3»
                                    47


                                                         W.H. COMERFORD


          outside the turnstiles, no, or in that area.

     Q. And we are talking now when you got through the gates at about
        what time? - A. Actually into the ground itself?

     Q. No, just in through the gates to go to the turnstile? - A. No,
        there were no Policemen.

     Q.   What time?   I am sorry. - A. About quarter-to-3, 10-to-3.

     Q.   About quarter-to-3 when        you go through the   gate?- A. Yes.

     Q. You had then got to get through the turnstile? -A. Yes.

     Q. How long did sit take you to get from the gate to the
        turnstile, bearing in mind it is quarter-to-3 when you come in
        through the gate? - A. It must have been 10 minutes, quarter-
        of-an-hour.

     Q.   So it is getting on for 5-to-3, 3 o'clock, by the time you go
          through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

     Q. Did you go straight to the terraces? - A . No, I went to buy
        two programmes and I went through the tunnel then to the
        terracing.

     Q. At this time it is close to kick-off, or had the kick-off
        occurred, do you know? - A. I think the kick-off had already
        occurred.  That is when we actually got on the terraces.

     Q. You think the game had started? - A. Yes.

     Q. You bought your programme and went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

     Q. As you were going down the tunnel, were you able to go down
        the tunnel? - A. There were quite a number of people in the
        tunnel, but there was no crush, just walking generally.

     Q. And as you were walking along the tunnels to go down there, no
        crush and you were not being pressed and forced along? - A.
        No, just walking a steady pace.

     Q. A normal, steady pace, walking in? - A. Yes.

     Q. You went in and you went to the left? - A. Yes.

     Q. Where did you get to? What position did you       take up to watch
        the game? Would you look at photograph 21,       please. That is a
        view looking from the tunnel down on to the      pitch, and you can
        see the goal. To the centre of the picture       one can see the
        end of the fence.  Just to the left of that      is pen 4. - A. We
        went to the left.

     Q. You can see barriers there, can't you? -A. Yes.

     Q. There is no way you can get down to thatgate without having
        to negotiate barriers, either having to go round them or under
                                48

                                                  W.H. COMERFORD


     them. There is just no way you can get down there, is there?
     - A. Not if you walk straight down, no.

Q. You have to go to your left and to your right and then weave
   your way to get down there. Can you see the position there
   that you took up? - A. No.

Q.   It is not on that picture? - A. It is further in to the   left.

Q.   Further intothe left somewhere? Would you look please at
     photographs 27 and 28. Do you see photograph 27? - A . Yes.

Q. That shows the yellow markings on the terrace just at the
   mouth of the tunnel.  Do you see the paint on the floor? - A.
   Yes.

Q. The hatching.    Now you can see that gate? - A. Yes.

Q.   In pen 4. There you see the barriers. There is no way you
     can get down to that gate going in a straight line, is there?
     - A. No.

Q. There are barriers you have to negotiate and weave round. Can
   you see the position you took up? - A. Judging by those, the
   crush barrier, the first one in the picture, the next one
   down.

Q. The one with the white flag hanging on it? - A. The next one
   down to that.

Q. The one in front of that. So you were down beyond that.         Can
   you hold it up and show us, please. (Witness points at
   photograph)

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Right in the middle of the
     photograph? -A . Yes.

Q.       MR. WOODWARD:    And you had that behind you? - A. Yes.

Q. You    and your friend? - A. There were three of us, yes.

Q. All   three of you were standing with that barrier at your back?
   - A . Yes.

Q. And beyond that, looking between you and the gate there is
   even another barrier? - A. Yes,    further down.

Q. And  there is no way you can get down to that fence without
   having to weave and move, is there? - A. At the time you don't
   know the barriers are there, do you?

Q. Pardon? - A. You don't know the barriers are there when there
   is such a crush, do you?

Q. What happened while you were at the barrier? -A. After that
   there was another surge and I got pushed further down.
                                  49

                                                       W.H. COMERFORD


Q. Had you had any difficulty getting into that position? - A.
   The first position?

Q. Yes, the one you have identified in front of the barrier? - A.
   We did not actually head for that position. We ended up in
   that position after the first push.

Q. You got into that position. Did you have any concern for
   yourself in getting to that position? - A. I am not with you.

Q.   Did it botheryou very much? - A. We thought          we would be all
     right with the barrier at our back.

Q. You thought you would be all right there. Did you see any of
   the game going on? - A. No, because we were getting pushed up
   and down. All I remember is someone saying, "Alan Hanson is
   playing", and that is all I remember of the game.

Q. Could you see what was going on on the pitch in the position
   you stood by the barrier? - A. You could have done, yes.

Q.   Did you? - A. No, because Idid not look at the pitch.

Q.   What were you looking at? - A. I was looking at the other side
     to see if I could get near the railings.

Q.   Were you aware there was    a nearmiss at the other end,that
     Liverpool nearly scored? - A. Not until after the game when
     someone told us.

Q. Did you see the gates open in the fence? - A. Yes.            I only saw
   them open once.

Q.   And it stayed open? - A. It mayhave opened   a number of times
     before that, but I don't know.   I could not say.

Q. You saw it open only once.          Were people trying to get out? -
   A . Yes.

Q. Were they having problems getting out? - A. Some were.            There
   was a young kid stuck, trapped by his legs.

Q.   Did you see any coins being thrown? - A.      No.,

Q . Thank you.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you, Mr. Comerford.

                      DIANE SUSAN CONNOLLY Called

                       Examined bv MR. PHILIPS:

Q.   Are    you Diane Susan Connolly? - A. I am.

Q.   And I think you are a nurse and you live in Liverpool, don't
     you? - A. Yes.
                               50

                                                  D.S. CONNOLLY



Q. And you went to the football match by coach? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you go with a brother and a friend   of yours? - A. Yes.

Q.   And you arrived at what time in Sheffield? - A. Quarter-to-1.

Q. On the way to Sheffield had the coach been stopped by Police
   at any stage? - A. We were stopped just as we came round the
   roundabout and a Policeman got on and he started saying,2 "I
   hope you have all got tickets". So we got our tickets out to
   show him but he never checked. Then he said, "There should
   not be any alcohol on", but there was not and he just got off
   and let us go then.

Q. You were asked to see if everyone had tickets and no alcohol,
   but you say he did not check anything? - A. No, we all got our
   tickets out but he did not come round the coach to check.

Q.   And you got into Sheffield at quarter-to-1? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was that at a coach park near to the ground? - A. Yes, about
     10 minutes, quarter-of-an-hour walk from the ground.

Q.   Did you go straight to the ground from   the coach? - A. Yes.

Q.   What time would you arrive there then?   About 1 o'clock? - A.
     1 o'clock.

Q. You had a ticket for the terrace, had you not? - A. Yes, B
   turnstile.

Q. And did you go straight in? - A. No, we were due to meet a
   friend at 2 o'clock outside, so we waited opposite the
   turnstile and leaned on a wall opposite.

Q. On the other side of the road? - A. Yes.

Q. Of Leppings Lane itself? - A. Yes.

Q. How long did you stay there waiting for your friend? - A.
   About 10 minutes, because we got moved over to the side of the
   road, and we waited inside the gates out of the way of
   everyone, and a Policeman came over and told us to get in in
   no uncertain terms.

Q.   This was between 1 o'clock andwhat time? - A.    10-past-l.

Q.   Were there many people arriving at that time? -A. There were
     no queues. There was quite a lot of people outside, but there
     were no queues to get in.

Q.   Did you eventually go intoground? - A. Yes, at quarter-past-1
     we went in.

Q.   You would no trouble going through the turnstiles at    that
     stage, would you? - A. No.
V
                                  51

                                                     D.S. CONNOLLY



    Q.   You said you had been moved across the   road? - A. Yes.

    Q.    To stay on that side. Had other people been  moved as well? -
         A. Well, there were buses arriving. They must have been
         coming from the train stations, and as they got off the buses
         they were herded across the road and told to cross the road,
         "We don't mind what happens once you are across the road. You
         can go anywhere", and some people just cross back to lean on
         the wall.   Then they came up to us and asked us if we would
         move across the road. So we did.

    Q. Those who were told to cross the road, did they all take
       notice of what they were told? - A. Everyone crossed over.
       The Policeman stayed on the other side, but a few cross back
       and leaned on the wall.

    Q. Were there many Policemen about at this time? - A. About three
       or four mounted Policemen and a few on foot.

    Q.   Did you see any tickets being bought and sold outside the
         ground? - A. Not outside the ground, but as we were walking
         down there were people asking if there were any spare tickets,
         but I never saw any swapping.

    Q. People from Liverpool? - A. No, not a lot of them were from
       Liverpool.

    Q. Were not they? - A. No.

    Q.   Did you get asked if you had any spare tickets? - A. Yes.

    Q.   How    often were you asked? - A. Threeor four times.

    Q. Once you got into the ground where did you go to then? - A. We
       stood just in front of the tunnel because we had to wait for
       our friends to arrive. So we waited there. We never went
       straight in.

    Q. Did you see any Policemen or stewards about at that time? - A.
       There were about 7 or 8 stewards at the bottom of the steps
       leading to the stands. They were all talking and checking a
       few tickets.

    Q. Tickets of whom? - A. People going up to the stands.

    Q. Were there many people inside the ground in that yard when you
       were waiting there for your friend? - A. There was a fair
       number just going into the tunnel.

    Q. Did you in fact find your friend? - A. No, not until later on
       the pitch.

    Q. Did you see any of the outer gates open while you were there?
       - A. Yes, there was a steward on the gate, on that gate, and
       he was letting a few Policemen in, and he let a few others in.
       They must have been stewards.
                               52

                                                 D.S. CONNOLLY



Q. Did they have the distinctive jacket on of stewards? - A. A
   couple of them did. A couple of them did not.

Q. Can you say what time that would have been? - A. About
   quarter-to-2, 2 o'clock.

Q. Did you then at some stage find your position on the terrace?
   - A. Quarter-past-2 we decided to go in. When we get to the
   end of the tunnel we went to the right.

Q.   You went to the right atthe end of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was there any difficulty    in going down the tunnel at   that
     time? - A. No, we walked straight through the tunnel, but when
     we came to the end it was packed to the back.

Q.   Packed? - A. Yes, at the back of the terracing.

Q.   When you say you went to    the right, where did you go  to? -A.
     We got in and got pushed around, and I decided I wanted to get
     out because I didn't like the look of it then, but we couldn't
     get out. We just got pushed down and got pushed to the front,
     in front of the front barrier.

Q. Is that in pen 3, the one immediately to the right   of the
   tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. You got pushed down to the front? - A. Yes.

Q. How close to the front perimeter fence were you? - A. Just in
   front of the front barrier.  There was a line of men behind us
   and then we were just in front of them.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I ask you before that.
     Whereabouts were you when you made the decision you wanted to
     go back if you could? How far in were you? - A. We had just
     got into the tunnel.  We had just got out of the tunnel at the
     other end.

Q. What stopped you at that stage from going back to the tunnel?
   - A. We got pushed over.  It was too crowded to turn.  I tried
   to turn round to go out.

Q. There must have been quite a flow then through the tunnel, was
   there? - A. No, there was not a flow through the tunnel, but
   we got in and walked over to the right a bit, and then I
   decided I wanted to get out, and we got crushed and got pushed
   over and could not turn round.

Q.        MR. PHILIPS:    What was it that made you want to get out?
     - A. Just the crush.   It was not crushing.  It was pushing
     backwards and forwards.   I could not see us seeing the game
     from where it was.

Q. Did you feel in any danger at that time? - A. At one point I
   did because I moved over to the right and I felt as if I was
•'f
                                      53

                                                         D.S. CONNOLLY


           going to fall over the way the push went, and I nearly fell
           over.

      Q.   You say you   ended up down towards the front of that pen. Were
           you near to   the gate out on to the pitch?  - A. The gate was to
           our left.

      Q.   You were in   front of the front barrier of   that pen? - A. Yes.

      Q.   Did pressure in that pen get any worse? -A. About quarter-to-
           3 it built up a lot. When we first got to the front it was
           quite empty, but by quarter-to-3 it was crowded.   It was like
           an ordinary match day where it is packed.

      Q. Like an ordinary match day sort of crowd? - A. Yes.

      Q. Was anything happening out on the pitch when you noticed this?
         - A. No.

      Q. After this, after quarter-to-3, did things change? - A. I
         remember seeing the teams run out on to the pitch and then we
         just got pushed forward and we never went back again.     I kept
         getting pushed forward.  I d o n ’t remember anything on the
         pitch after that.

      Q. Was this when they ran out on to the pitch for the first time
         or the second time? - A. For the match, the second time.

      Q. Did you feel a particular wave or surge, or was it just a
         general build up? - A. The second time there was a surge.

      Q. The second time? - A. Well, from quarter-to-3.

      Q. You say you did not then see anything on the pitch after that?
         - A. No.

      Q. What happened to you? - A. I was concentrating on trying to
         breathe and get out.  I was looking round and there was no
         way; we couldn't move.

      Q. Were you close enough to the perimeter fence to touch it? - A.
         No.

      Q.   You could not breathe, you say? - A. Yes.

      Q.   Did you notice anybody round about you in particular trouble?
           - A. There was a girl just in front of me and she passed out.
           She was slipping to the ground, and there was a man trying to
           hold her up. She kept slipping down.   I don't know what
           happened to her.

      Q. Did you get assistance from anybody? - A. When we eventually
         out, I got pulled back into a space, and two men threw me over
         the spiked fence to the right.

      Q. So you were taken over the fence into pen No. 2, were you? -
         A. Yes.
                                           D.S. CONNOLLY



And what was happening round about you when this happened
when you were taken over? - A. Just before I got pulled
back I noticed to the left of me there was a pile of
people, men on top of each other, and then I just got
pulled back.




                      /Q. Were they near the gate
                                          D. CONNOLLY



Were they near the gate or some distance from it? - A.
Just in front of the crash barrier that eventually
collapsed.   I never saw that collapse.

You did not see that collapse? - A. No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The barrier you know did
collapse was in front of you was it?- A. No, it was
behind, but the men that were   on the floor, they were in
front of it.

      MR. PHILIPSs   You did not see it actually giving
way? - A. No.

Did you see after it had given way? - A. I saw the men on
the floor lying on top of each other.

When you saw these men lying on top of each other near
that barrier, was the barrier   in fact still there or had
it gone? - A. I did not see.     I got pulled back then and
taken over the fence.

Where did you go to when you were taken over the side
fence? - A. We made our way down to the front gate in
that pen, but could not get out because they were
bringing the dead and injured passed us and on to the
pitch, so we waited for five minutes, ten minutes,
possibly.

Did you see the gate from pen 3 to the perimeter fence
open? -A. Yes.

Did you see it being opened? - A. It was opened about two
or three times but the first couple of times it got shut
again by the Policeman.

Let's take the first time it was opened.   Could you see
who opened it? - A. The people at the front, just people
pushing on it.

From the track side or from the pen side? -A. From the
pen side.

Were you able to see as clearly as that that it was
somebody in the pen opening the gate? - A. Yes.   I could
see them leaning on it, pushing it, trying to get it
open.

Was there anybody on the other side of the perimeter
fence at that time near the gate? - A. There was a Police
Officer.
X

                                   56
                                                  D. CONNOLLY


    Q. Did you see that Police Officer do anything? - A. He
       kicked the gate shut again.

    Q. The next time you saw it open did you see who opened it?
       - A. People inside again.   A couple of people got out,
       but it was shut again.

    Q. Did one of them open the gate from the outside? - A. The
       third time the Police Officer must have realised what was
       happening because he opened it and people started to get
       out then.

    Q. Was this the same Police Officer on each occasion? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Was it male of female? -A. Male*

    Q. Can you give any better description of him? - A. I am
       sorry, I don't know.

    Q. Just a Policeman? - A. Yes.

    Q. This same person who had closed it twice was the one who
       opened it on the third occasion, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. When it was opened on the third occasion were people then
       getting out? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were they being helped out as well? - A. There were a
       couple of Police Officers helping them, pulling them out.

    Q. I think you then later went out on to the pitch yourself?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. You were in some distress as a result of what you had
       been through? - A. Yes.

    Q. You had of course been really close up against the side
       fence in this pen 3, had you not? - A. We were not right
       next to it, a couple of...

    Q.   Fairly close to it though? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You were taken out over   that fence? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Had you expected to see that side fence when you came out
         of the tunnel? - A. No.    We just thought you go through
         the tunnel and you could spread out once you got inside
         the ground.   There was no other - well, as far as we
         could see, there were no other entrances.

    Q. If those side fences had not been there you feel everyone
       could have spread out? - A. yes.
                                             D. CONNOLLY


            Cross-Examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

May we change to a different aspect of your afternoon in
Sheffield?   So it is quite clear, you are not a stranger
to standing on terraces? - A. Yes.

You have been to the Kop on many occasions? - A. Yes.

You set off with fifty supporters in time to get to
Sheffield by quarter to one? -A. Yes.

In fact that journey was delayed      almost an hour by    an
accident on the M 62? - A. About      twenty minutes.

Even with that delay you were in      Sheffield by quarter to
one? - A. Yes.

Thereafter you were off the coach in the area of
Hillsborough for something approaching an hour and a
half? - A. Yes.,

During that time you were amongst a number of supporters?
-A. Yes.

Did you see any incidents of violence, disorder,
drunkenness or the like? - A. No.

Any at all? - A. No.

During the time you were outside the ground in the
immediate vicinity of the turnstiles did you see any
incident of disorderly behaviour at all? - A. No.

           Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

Just a couple of matters please.   You eventually, in
order to watch the match, took up a position at about
2.45 down in the front of the pen? - A. About half past
two.

At that time, in the statement you made:

      "At this time it was reasonably empty and all three
      of us found space in order to view the game.   It
      became more and more crowded until by 2.45 it was
      packed full, although not dangerously so.,s

A. Yes.

You said in your evidence a little while ago that down
where you were, at the time you went to it, it seemed
like an ordinary match day crowd? - A. Yes.
                                              D. CONNOLLY


When you became concerned for yourself in that position
was that before any players had come out on to the pitch
or afterwards? - A. After they had run out on to the
pitch.

That was after they had come out on to the pitch just to
warm up or the run out on to the pitch to start the game?
- A. To start the game.

You were close to where the barrier broke? - A. Yes,        it
was just to our left.

Just to your left and a little behind you? - A. Yes,
about three yards.

      MR. WOODWARD;    Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Thank you.

      MR. GOLDSACK:    Mr. Garrett please.

                PETER J. GARRETT Called

                  Examined by MR. G O L D S A C K :

Are you Peter Garrett? - A. Yes.

A Police Constable with the Merseyside Police for some 11
years? - A. Yes.

A Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes.

Do you also have an official position with the Football
Supporters Association?   - A. I am currently the
Membership Secretary.     I am also the co-founder of the
organisation.

Did you travel on the 15th of April to Sheffield in a
group consisting of yourself, Rogan Taylor, Peter Jackson
and Larry Moran? - A. I did.

Are all four of those Officials    of the Football
Supporters Association?    - A. No, Larry Moran isn't.  He
is just a member.    Peter   Jackson and Rogan Taylor are
Officials.

At what stage did you arrive outside the Leppings Lane
entrance? - A.Somewhere between 2.15 and 2.25, I cannot
be more precise than that.

Had you been to the same match the       year before? - A. I
had indeed.
                             59-
                                             P.J,/GARRETT

Q. On this occasion what was the situation when you arrived?
   - A. When I arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the
   ground there was an awful lot of people milling about,
   mainly in the ante area between the turnstiles and the
   large blue gates.   There were also people standing
   around on Leppings Lane itself.

Q. From your experience of crowds are you able to put a
   figure on the number of people in that area when you
   arrived? - A. I would say certainly in excess of 1,000.

Q. What Police presence did you see? - A. When I arrived in
   Leppings Lane, walking down the roadway, I saw three,
   perhaps 4, mounted Police Officers on Leppings Lane, on
   the roadway.   When I joined the throng of people to
   enter the turnstiles for the North Stand, there were two
   foot Police Officers alongside the turnstiles.

Q. For which turnstiles were you heading? -A. The turnstiles
   for entrance to the North Stand.

Q. How long altogether did it take for you to gain entrance
   to the ground? -A. About 30 minutes.   It was about ten
   to three when I eventually got through the turnstiles.

Q. When you had joined the mass of people whereabouts were
   you?  Were you inside the perimeter gates or not? -A.
   Only.just.    Just inside the perimeter gate.

Q. During the 30 minutes or so that it took to reach the
   turnstiles were you in a position to see how the crowd
   was building up? - A.. Yes, there were more and more
   people coming behind me all the while.    There were
   people arriving by the minute.

Q. How were individuals faring in that mass of people? -A.
   There were some younger people, and females particularly,
   in distress.   People were shouting, "Stop pushing.  Stop
   pushing".    It was obvious that people were in distress
   at that point.

Q. From what you could see were people pushing or were their
   movements involuntary? - A. Most of the movement is
   involuntary.   I have been in a lot of football crowds
   and I do not think there is any deliberate pushing.    It
   is just the sheer volume of people that causes a
   condensing of bodies and an almost involuntary movement.

Q. The Police Officers that you saw did you know whether
   they were South Yorkshire or Merseyside? - A. I was not
   aware.    I think the two Officers on foot were South
   Yorkshire Police Officers.    I was not aware until later
   that the mounted Officers may have been Merseyside
   Officers.
                            €0

                                          ■P.J.:GARRETT

Q. What did it appear to you during that 30 minutes that the
   Police were attempting to do so far as the mass of people
   were concerned? - A. The two Police Officers by the
   turnstiles were trying to do nothing because there was
   absolutely nothing they could have done, even if they had
   wanted to.   The mounted Officers at the back, I was not
   aware of what they were trying to do because I was facing
   the turnstiles.   I was not looking behind, as it were,
   to see what the mounted Officers were doing.   I was
   hoping that perhaps they would move across the gates and
   stop any more people coming into that ante area.

Q. How did that situation compare with what you had found
   the previous year? - A. The previous year there was
   certainly more orderly queuing, which was being organised
   both by Police and stewards.  I did not see any stewards
   outside the ground this year.   Last year I seemed to
   recall that certainly from the immediate Leppings Lane
   area there were people - Police Officers mainly -
   filtering, by asking to see tickets, ensuring that people
   had tickets, before they reached the gates to the ante
   area.

Q. What is your recollection as to where the stewards were
   last year? - A. The stewards, if I remember, and I could
   not be absolutely certain about it, but I think there
   were stewards and Police Officers outside the immediately
   entrances to the turnstiles.

Q. You say this year you saw no stewards present outside at
   all? - A. If there were stewards there I could not
   identify them.

Q. What was the position once you got through the turnstile?
   - A. Once I had gone through the turnstile I was quite
   surprised because I saw quite large numbers of Police
   Officers in the area leading from the turnstiles that I
   had gone through to the back of the Worth Stand.

Q. Can you just help us on the plan where you actually saw
   the Officers? - A. Yes, the pointer is actually pointing
   to the vicinity, right from the turnstiles to the back of
   the North Stand there were groups of Police Officers
   stood along at various points.

Q. Is that small groups of two or three? - A. Threes, fours,
   in one instance there was a group of five - a Sergeant
   and four Officers.

Q. Altogether how many Police Officers were there along that
   route to the stand? - A. I would estimate an excess of
   30.
                              61

                                            P.Jo, GARRETT


Q. Did you speak to anyone? - A. I did - not directly as
   such, to stop and have a conversation, but as I passed
   one group of Police Officers I did say to them,     You lot
   would be better outside.   I t ’s murder out there11.

Q. Did any of them reply? - A. Yes.   I do not know whether
   it was the Sergeant or a Constable, but somebody just
   said, "It's nowt to do with us".

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Was he saying it was nowt to
     do with you or nowt to do with them? - A. No, to do with
     them, "It's nowt to do with us", was the expression.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:   Could you tell whether any of those
     Officers had radios? - A. The Sergeant I am sure had a
     radio, yes.

Q. Did you see him   attempt to use it after you had made that
   comment to him?   - A. No.   I made that comment as I was
   walking passed.     I did not stop to have a deliberate
   conversation.     As I was walking passed I said, "You
   would be better   off outside".   They replied, "It's nowt
   to do with us",   and I continued at that point.

Q. Had you by this stage lost contact with the group of
   people you had gone with? - A. Yes.  Rogan Taylor in fact
   had left us previously as he was meeting another friend
   of ours.   I had lost contact with Larry and Peter
   Jackson in the melee outside the turnstiles.

Q. You made your way into the North Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there stewards on your approach to the stand? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Did they check your ticket as you went into the stand? -
   A. No.   My ticket was back in my  pocket.

Q. Did you find your particular seat? - A. I did.

Q. In the seats adjacent to you were the correct people
   there? - A. It was not until I came to sit down as the
   match kicked-off at 3 pm it was obvious then there was an
   extra person in the row.   There were three young men
   alongside me who tried to sit on the two seats
   immediately to my right hand side.

Q. Did you speak with them? - A. I did.   I told them quite
   strongly that if they did not have the appropriate
   tickets for those seats they had better move out rather
   sharply.

Q. What happened? - A. After an altercation saying they had
   tickets and I was saying, "Well, come on, show me the
                                  62


                                                P.J.- GARRETT

         tickets", and then I said I would call for a Police
         Officer they then moved away into the gangway.

    Q.   All three? -A. All three of them.

    Q. At about the kick-off stage were there any other people
       standing in the seated area? - A. Yes, in the gangways.

    Q.   Just the odd one or two, or quite a number? - A. More
         than I would have thought normal for kick-off time.




«




                                /Q. Was there a steward
                               63



                                         P.   3.   GARRETT



Q. Was there a steward present at that stage?   A.   Yes.
   In fact, to reach the point in the Stand where my ticket
   was allocated, which was C Block, Row 5, we had to go
   under the North Stand, up a couple of steps and then
   down towards Row 5.   Now, as you went up the steps from
   the passageway underneath the Stand, there were two
   stewards at the top of those steps.

Q. Did you see any steward attempting to move the people
   who were standing in the seated area?   A.   No, I didn't.

Q. I think, Mr. Garrett, you became aware that there were
   obviously problems over towards the Leppings Lane end.
   A.   Yes.

Q. I think you had had it drawn to your attention that the
   middle bits were crowded and the outer bits were not?
   A.   Well,yes, Peter Jackson had indicated --   That
   was the very first thing as I met  up with him inside,
   that he indicated the two centre sections but it was
   hardly necessary for him to do so because it was quite
   obvious to anybody observing from that point that the
   centre sections were grossly overcrowded.

Q. And there came a time when you appreciated that the
   situation on the pitch was serious.   A.   Yes.

Q. Did you at that stage, bearing in mind your own
   training, consider going across?   A.   I did.   That was
   the first thing that went through my mind - is there
   anything I can do to help?

Q. At that stage did you decide to go across or not?
   A.   No, I didn't.   The confusion on the pitch was probably
   already great enough without anybody else adding to it.

Q.    What was your impression at that stage of the response
     of the authorities, for want of a better word, to what
     was happening?    A.    I couldn't understand quite what
     was happening.    It would appear, or it did appear to me,
     that people were trying to come over the top of the
     fences and, dependent on how far over the fence they
     were, they were either being told to go back or being
     helped over.    Then there was a series of openings and
     closings of the gates on the pitch perimeter.      I saw
     one gate on the - as I was looking at it - the right-
     hand section being opened and then closed but then after
     a few minutes there was that many people in front of
     the fence that I couldn't really see if the gate was
     open or closed after that.

Q.   I think eventually you made your way back out of the
     stand into another part of the field?   A.   After the
     ground had been cleared, after the official abandonment
     of the game, I walked across the pitch towards the
                                64




                                               P.   J.   GA R RE T T



     Leppings Lane terrace with Rogan Taylor, yes.

Q. And it was obvious that amongst some people at that stage,
   understandably, emotions were running high.   A.   Indeed,
   in fact I was extremely emotional myself.

                   Cross-examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Garrett, again, there have been very many witnesses
   as to the incident in the terraces.    I want to ask you
   about other matters.    You and your group arrived in
   Sheffield at what time?    A.   Approxiamtely 1 o'clock.

Q.    Was that your intention - to arrive at that time - or
     were you delayed?   A.    No, we were delayed for about an
     hour.    Our intention had been, in fact, to arrive at
     about 12 o'clock.

Q. In particular, the motorway works on the M63 have been
   so severe over the last few months the Police Authorities
   have been using a spotter plane, have they not, to check
   the traffic delays each evening?   A.   I wasn't personally
   aware of that.

Q.   You were not aware of that?       A.   No.

Q.    The time that you spent   in Sheffield before youwent to the
     ground, where were you?      A.   In the public house called
     The Freemasons' Arms.

Q. During the time you were in that public house, did you
   see any incident of what you would describe in your
   official capacity as public disorder?   A.  None
   wh a ts oev er .

Q. Did you at any time prior to entering the ground, that is
   while walking, waiting or being pushed at the turnstiles,
   see any incident that you would describe as hooliganism
   or the like?   A.  None at all.

Q. In general terms, looking back, would you now say that
   there were very many Police Officers and stewards on the
   inside of the turnstiles but very few on the outside?
   A.   I would say that there was a disproportionate amount
   of Police Officers inside as to what I would have
   considered a requriement outside, certainly the
   immediate area outside the turnstiles, yes.

Q. At what time would you say you first noticed that the
   area outside was disorganised?    A.   As soon as I
   arrived, I could see that it was disorganised.

Q. What time was that?   A.          Between 2.15 and 2.25.            Probably
   nearer to 2.25 than 2.15.
                               65




                                            P.   3.   GA R RE T T



Q. May I turn to a completely new subject?     It is likely
   that we will hear evidence of people being abusive to
   Police Officers after the incident.   You yourself
   have described yourself as being emotional.    A.   Indeed
   I was, yes.

Q.    Mr. Garrett, I would like to askyou, did  you      in particular
     say something to a"Police Officer inthe heat        of the
     aftermath of this tragedy?    A.    I did.

Q. Thafeif said in other circumstances you would consider
   disgraceful?    A.   Indeed.  In fact, after I had said
   it, I wished that I had not said it.

Q.    Would you tell the Tribunal what you were driven to say
     after theincident you had seen that afternoon?     A.  When
     I walked across the pitch from the North Stand to the
     Leppings Lane and saw the debris on the terraces - clothing,
     shoes - I turned to a Police Officer and said, "I think
     you are party to a murder."

Q. Mr. Garrett, if that particular Police Officer or his
   colleagues who heard that took offence, would you, of
   course, wish to apologise?   A.   I would indeed, yes.

Q. And say that, as has been said by other people, that the
   events afterwards led people to say and do things which
   had got nothing at all to do with theincident itself.
   A.   I had never experienced such severe emotions
   personally as it felt for that period immediately after
   the official abandonment of the game.

Q. Would you say that there are a number of your members
   who have expressed the same point through you?   A.   Yes.

Q. Afterwards they did and said things that were, like you,
   caused by emotion?    A. Thesse were extreme circum­
   stances.

                   Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Garrett, your apology is accepted but may I ask you
   about what it was that inspired you to say those things?
   According to the statement that you made, that which
   inspired you to accuse those Police Officers of murder
   related to what they were not doing after this tragedy
   had occurred, is that correct?   A.   Yes.

Q. It did rot relate to anything that you had observed
   prior thereto, did   it?   A.   I am sorry, could you
   say that again.

Q. Well, let there be no misunderstanding about it, the
   reason for your accusation of the Police Officers in the
                               66


                                                 P.   J.   GARRETT



     terms to which you were emotionally wrought on that
     occasion, the reason for that was what you perceived or
     viewed as their conduct after this tragedy had occurred?
     A.     No, not after - throughout the entire afternoon.
     As far as it affected me arriving at 25 past 2 to the
     abandonment of the game a little after 4 o'clock, I
     felt that there were a number of Police Officers, either
     because they were not directed or because they were not
     inclined or because they did not know what to do, did
     no t hi ng .

Q. It related to the whole event?      A.         Yes.

Q. May I ask you a little bit about football and football
   supporters?    Do you belong to a supporters' association?
   A.   I co-founded the Football   Supporters' Association,
   yes.

Q.    Does it have a code of conduct or anything like that?
     A.    Yes, we have a full written rules and constitution.

Q.    Does it have in the code or in those rules any advice to
     fans as to how to behave or how to deal and conduct
     themselves in difficult times?     A.   Not directly,
     no.     the rules and constitution refer to the running
     of the Association and those people who wish voluntarily
     to join i t .

Q. But does' the Association, for example, take any steps
   to counsel that its members, the supporters, should
   recognise that at times the Policeman's work may be
   very difficult and that they ought to comply with his
   request, whether or not they think it at the time to
   be a reasonable one?   A.   Absolutely.   I mean, I
   have got a foot in both camps on that score.

Q. But does the Association advise?         A.        Where it is
   necessary, yes, we will advise.

Q. Are there any documents to that effect or not?
   A.   In terms of public statements?   £

Q. Yes.   A.   Certainly through our newsletters over the
   years there will have been reference to ---

Q. So you do your best to ensure that the fans, as it
   were, do not let the fans down?   A.   That's right.
   That is very much our philosophy.

Q. Is it unhappily your experience that there are fans
   that do let the side down?   A.   Very much so, yes.              '

Q. And unhappily those individuals spoil it for the rest.
                               67




                                          P.   J.   GA R R E T T


     A.   That would be the case, yes.

Q.   And on occasions it is those individuals who frustrate
     what the orderly fans want to do and frustrate the
     endeavours of everybody else who has tried to organise
     a happy sporting event.   A.   Yes.

Q. Is one of the problems that occurs related to drinking?
   A.   Not necessarily, no.

Q. Is that not one of the problems that yourrrecognise?
   A.   It is a problem if there is drinking to excess.
   I have yet to see too many people, certainly in terms
   of proportion of a full crowd, having drunk to excess.

Q. I am not asking about the greater proportion of a football
   crowd and I am not asking about those people who behave
   sensibly and with restraint enjoying themselvess.   I
   am asking about the existence of individuals who just
   go to extremes.   A.   In every walk of society, there
   are people who go to extremes.

Q.   And know no moderation.    A.   Indeed.

Q.    Andin that respect take more drink than they need?
     A.    That happens every Saturday night in Liverpool.

Q. And take the occasion of a football match as the occasion
   to abandon all restraint and abuse those who may get in
   their way?    A.  There are undoubtedly people who will
   do that, yes.

Q. Did you see anything like tht happening on the day in
   question?   A.   No, I did not.

Q. The public house that you stopped at, was it very full?
   A.    It was full but I wouldn't say it was excessively
   full.

Q. How long did it take you to get served?          A.       About
   15 minutes.

Q. Were you waiting at that time at the bar to get served?
   A.   Yes.

Q. In the statement that you made concerning your experience
   from the gates to go in through the turnstiles - to
   that stage - you said, "Being a fairly robust person, I
   didn't suffer any due discomfort personally."   A.   That
   is correct.

Q. Would you have the Inquiry understand that the state of
   affairs which you experienced going through the turnstiles,
   going from the gate to go through the turnstiles, was a
   similar sort of situation that you have experienced at
                               68



                                        P.   3.   GA R R E T T



     many  football stadia over a number of years?   A.    Yes,
     it was equivalent to other situations that I have been
     in.    I wouldn't say that it was a normal situation.
     Only  this week I was in a crowd of 38,000 and I arrived
     at the game 10minutes before kick-off and was able to
     get in quite easily but there have been situations -
     Wolverhampton in 1976, Wembley in 1986 - where I have
     been in similar situations, yes.

Q.    But "many football stadia over a number oTyears" - do
     you mean that? A.   Yes.

Q. What time was it that you arrived at the gates to go
   to the turnstiles?   A.    the outer perimeter gates or
   the turnstiles themselves?

Q. The outer perimeter gate.   A.   As I said earlier,           between
   2.15 and 2.25, but probably nearer to 2.25.

Q. From there to go through the turnstiles, how long did it
   take you?   A.   I would estimate that it was approxiamtely
   ten minutes to three when I actually went through the
   turnstil e.

Q. Did you see police officers there?        A.      Outside the
   turnstiles, yes.

Q.   What were they trying to do?   A.   Not a        great deal.
     There wasn't a great deal they could do.          They were
     pinned against the wall.




                               (They were pinned...)
                                     P.J. GARRETT


Q. They were pinned against the wall. Were these foot Officers
   or mounted Officers? - A. Yes, foot Officers.

Q / ,Did you see any mounted Officers? - A. There were mounted
     Officers behind me afid Leppings Lane.

Q. Did you see them trying to do anything? - A. No, I was not
   standing looking at those, I was looking forwards towards
   the turnstile.

Q. You must have passed them? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they doing anything as you approached them? - A. Not as
   I approached at 2.25, no.

Q. What were they doing, just sitting on their horses? - A. Yes.

Q. Taking no part in what was happening? - A. They were taking
   a part but the horses were not moving around. They were
   sat on their horses watching as the people came over and
   arrived towards the ante area.

Q. Were they taking an active part? - A. I did not particularly
   take a great deal of notice.

Q. You are a Police Officer? - A. Yes.

Q. It has been pointed out you did not observe them doing
   anything? - A. No, no, I was not acting in my capacity
   as a Police Officer on that day. My intentions were to
   get into the football ground.

Q. Forgive me, that had already been referred to, you see.

     Did you see anybody making any attempt to make a formal
     queue? - A. No.

Q. Were the fans doing anything in that respect? - A. Fans
   themselves try to organise themselves because don't forget
   they are the people that are in the uncomfortable position,
   if you like, and they will do their best to try and make
   sure their personal situation is one of most comfort.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs What did you see them doing
     in that regard? - A. Well it is quite normal ....

Q. No, what you saw on that day. You say they tried. What
   were they doing? - A. They were sayings  "Come on, boys,
   let's not be pushing. Come on, ease off" and of course
   there is the usual jocular comments like "There is a
   pregnant woman here, please let's take it easy", that sort
   of i-Cthing.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD: So even the fans were not being heeded
     by their colleagues? - A. Well it is very difficult in
     that situation. I am not aware if you personally have
                               70

                                         P.J. GARRETT


     attended a football match and been in that position, but
     you would know that there is not a deliberate intention
     to push or to crush. Just the sheer volume and numbers
     of people make it a situation that is neither avoidable
     or unavoidable. It just happens.   It just occurs.

Q. Did all those people ahead of you as you got through the
   gates go through the turnstiles before you or did you make
   your way through them? - A. No, no, I tried to hold back.
   That is why I lost contact with Peter Jackson and Larry
   Moran. As I got close to the turnstiles there was a couple
   of young boys in front of me and I was trying to use my
   strength, as little as it is, to try and hold back so there
   was not a pushing into the turnstile apertures so that
   people could have a little breathing space to get into the
   turnstiles.

Q. Was it your impression that the turnstiles, once people got
   into them, were taking a rather long time to get the people
   out the other side? - A. Yes, and I don't know why. It
   just seemed slow compared with other turnstile operations
   that I have witnessed.

Q. When you got inside you saw some Police Officers. Did you
   actually speak to them or was it a passing comment as you
   went along? - A. It was a passing comment as I passed one
   particular group.

Q.   Like "It is murder    outside"? - A. Yes, that is it.    What I
     said in fact was: "You would be better off outside because
     it is murder out there".

Q. Did you see any people urinating against the wall in the
   enclosure? - A. Yes, I did.

Q.   Whereabouts did you see that happening? - A. Just    the other
     side of the programme kiosk.

Q.   On the approach to the tunnel? - A. No, nowhere near the
     tunnel. The programme kiosk that I am referring to is down
     that passageway round about there.

Q.   Access to which isby Gate B? - A. The first set of gates,
     there is eight turnstiles a block, yes sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Gate A.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   Yes, I am sorry, it is Gate A? - A.
     Yes sir.

Q.   That is the way that leads to the North Stand? - A. Yes.

Q.   You did not observe that sort of behaviour in the area of
     the tunnel? - A. No, I did not see the tunnel area at all.

Q.   You did go through the tunnel, didn't you? - A.    Only after
     the game when I was coming out.
                                 P.J. GARRETT


When you went through Gate A and made your way up to the
stand you got into your seat about what time? - A. Possibly
three-minutes, two-minutes-to-three. I had no sooner
arrived than the game was kicking off.

So by the time you were in a position to view the terrace
the game had started had it? - A. It was just about to
start.

They were in position and the kick-off happened as you sat
down? - A. Yes.

Is that the sort of picture? - A. Yes.

It was very quickly after that that gates were opened in
the perimeter fence, wasn't it? Did you see any gates
opened in the perimeter fence? - A. I saw a gate being
opened. I saw people climbing over the top of the perimeter
fencing. I saw gates being opened and then closed again
and then a general melee of people behind the goal. I was
trying to watch the match; watch what was going on behind
the goal. It was unfortunate, perhaps, that I didn't have
two pairs of eyes at that time.

Afterwards when this had happened and people were doing in
their confused state or their rational state the best that
they could, did you notice the state of some Police Officers?
- A. Yes.

Were there many who were distressed? - A. Very much so.

Very hurt by what they had been party to? - A. I will
remember for a long long time one particular Inspector.
He was not a very old Inspector and he was totally distraught
There was nothing I could do to assist him. I made sure,
I went to one of his colleagues and said: "Look, just get
that lad back to the station. Get him sat down, a cup of
tea".

So it is right that as part of the whole picture the® were
Officers there who were beyond consolation? - A. Oh indeed.


              Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW;

Mr. Garrett, can you help us about the difficulties of
Police Officers assisting Stewards firstly with Stand
seating. Am I right in thinking that the control of
Stand seating is rather easier than terracing on the whole?
- A. Yes.

Somebody ought to be able to control, by reference to the
ticket number, precisely where the supporter is going and
if necessary, if he is a newcomer, the Steward can actually
show him physically where hit row aid the seat is?
- A. It is standard practice at most football grounds.
                                 P.J. GARRETT


We heard, coincidentally yesterday, from a supporter who
was in the Stand entering the North Stand at approximately
the same time as you were. He saw two Police Officers,
two Policemen and a Policewoman on the staircase and two
Stewards. Were they %here when you went up that staircase?
- A. There was certainly two Stewards. I don’t recall if
there were any Police Officers. No, most of the Police
Officers that I had seen I had encountered between the
turnstiles and the passageway underneath the North Stand.

Can I just ask you this practical question because we had
a description yesterday of fans actually pushing their
way past Police Officers in their position. What does
a Police Officer do if one or two of them are assisting
Stewards in controlling a Stand and a number of fans simply
push their way past. What practically does that Officer
do? - A. Practically there is not a great deal he can do
because it is not easy to perhaps chase somebody along a
row of seats where there are people standing waiting to
sit down. The customary practice at most football grounds
is that people don't actually sit in their seats until the
whistle is blown for kick-off, so you have people standing
in front of their seats. It is quite impractical to chase
after somebody who has pushed past.

Mr. Garrett you yourself and your friends had arrived
to find trespassers, if I may put it that way, in your
seats? - A. Not in my seats, no.

I am sorry, generally they were in the area where they
should not have been? - A. There were threeyoung men who
tried to sit down on two seats immediately to my right-
hand side. I had not realised at that stage. Because
everybody was stood up rather than sat down I had not put
into place that there was one extra person on that row
of seats. As the whistle blew for the start of the game
as you take down your seat, sit on it, three of them
tried to sit on two seats alongside me. Then I realised:
"Hang on, one of them has not got a ticket" or at least
one may have had a ticket for another part of the ground
and wanted to be with his two friends, so I challenged
them.

And because of your natural authority and bearing you
were able to have an influence on them that perhaps a
lesser supporter might not have? - A. Well I don't know
whether that is quite the way but they left, yes.

I am sure you have a way of telling people to leave that
is difficult to argue with, Mr. Garrett.   It was successful
in any event? - A. It was successful, yes.

And in addition to that there were already people sitting
in the aisles who presumably had no business to be there?
- A. They were not sitting in the aisles, they were
standing.
    is
                                       73
&
                                               P.J. GARRETT


         Q. I apologise, there were people in the aisles who had no
            business to be there? - A. Yes.

         Q. It is reasonable to assume that all those people without
            tickets had passed the Stewards? - A. Yes.

         Q. Who you saw. And if the witness is accurate who told us
            about the Police Officers yesterday, may or did pass at
            least three Police Officers as well? - A. Yes.

         Q. May be I was wrong in thinking there was some criticism
            in what you were saying about the failure of the Stewards
            to control the people in the Stand, but what I wanted to
            know from you is what do the Police Officers or the
            Stewards do at that stage in the game if a quantity of
            fans simply ignore them and force their way past? - A. I
            would think that there is very little that they can do.
            What the situation needs is for everybody to be sat down
            and then you can identify within the seating areas where
            the problem is. You try to keep track of where people
            dodge around. The three young fellows that were alongside
            me were perhaps 16 or 17 years of age. At that age they
            are quite adept at getting into places, I can assure you.

         Q.    I am sure you have had experience of this yourself,
              Mr. Garrett, in policing grounds yourself. Is that
              correct? - A. I used to police both Liverpool and Everton,
              yes.

         Q.   And    you would alsoknow that the Operational Orders that
              day which vary slightly from match to match, will provide
              for the divisions of Police units into serial numbers of
              probably ten or eleven men under a Sergeant with specific
              pre-match, match and post-match duties? - A. Yes.

         Q. And once the match is underway, at least in the Stand areas,
            those who have been outside, those serials that have been
            outside which are moved inside under the control of their
            Sergeants, can deal with identifiable areas where there are
            people who should not be once the sitting down has started?
            - A. That is right.

         Q. But during the stage when the fans are moving into the
            Stands particularly, there is almost nothing that the
            Stewards and the POlice can do if their physical presence
            and their oral instructions are physically ignored? - A.
            No, because you can't leave your post, as it were. If
            you are checking tickets and people coming through and
            two or three or four people run past, what you normally
            find is people why try to get in the Stands without
            tickets almost like gorilla like tactics, they will
            infiltrate one at a time rather than in groups but they
            will all get in or try to get in.

         Q. And that, Mr. Garrett, is in the Stands where at least
            there is numbered seating? - A. Yes.
r   *



                                     74

                                             P.J. GARRETT


        Q. And in the terracing there is not even that? - A. No.

        Q. And if people approach in their ones or twos, they will
           probably use what you call "gorilla tactics" to get in
           even if they have not got a ticket? - A. You normally find
           that Police Officers are usually, certainly at Liverpool
           and Everton they are, are more aware of the probability
           of people trying to get into the terraced areas because
           of the total anon|mity that can be obtained, so you are
           probably more vigilant as a Police Officer for people
           trying to get into the terraced areas rather than the
           Stands.

        Q. But Mr. Garrett, if for the most understandable and best
           reasons in the world people approach those terraced areas
           not in ones and twos but in hundreds at a time, there
           is nothing that can be; xlone? - A. I am not quite sure fhat
           you are implying?

                 MR. GLASGOW:   I am not implying anything.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Where is this approach being
           made, Mr. Glasgow; at tehat stage? Are you talking about
           before they get to the perimeter gates; before they get
           to the turnstile; before they get to the tunnel. When
           are you talking about?




                                  /MR. GLASGOW:   At any stage
                              75

                                             P.J. GARRETT



         MR. GLASGOW:   At any stage, sir:

Q. I am comparing the situation, Mr. Garrett, with a position of
   you say of policing individuals who are trying to get into a
   stand which is difficult enough, and I would ask you to
   accept that the difficulties for the Police and the stewards
   in controlling waves of people in hundreds is impossible? -
   A. You are suggesting that people arrived in their hundreds
   without tickets? I would not have thought that was the
   case.

Q. Have you actually seen the pictures, either the moving
   pictures of the static pictures of what happened when the gate
   was opened? - A. I have seen some television reports of it,
   yes.

Q. You did see that on the television? - A. I have seen pictures
   on the television of the crowds of people around the
   turnstiles, yes.

Q. I am inviting you to assume as we are all prepared to do that
   the decision to open the gate is entirely bona fide and
   understandable. - A. Totally.  I probably would have done the
   same thing in the same circumstances.

Q. For present purposes let us agree upon that, but at least you
   would also agree that the results in the waves of scores and
   probably hundreds of people coming in is impossible for
   individual Officers or stewards to control once they are in? -
   A . Yes.

Q. Thank you. - A. I would like to add to that the point if there
   were going to be hundreds of people arriving through a gate
   when it is known certain sections of the ground are already
   full, I agree with counsel there it would be impossible for
   individual Officers, but had there been some organised
   barrier, either I believe there are gates on the outside of
   the tunnel leading to the two centre sections, if they had
   been instructed to have been closed prior to the gates outside
   being opened or a line of Police Officers or stewards put
   across the mouth of the tunnel to direct the wave of people
   coming in to either side of the West Stand, yes, I think that
   could have been done.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    But that is after they have got
     through this open gate? - A. Yes, but I do agree with counsel
     when they do arrived as was suggested, when they come through
     the open gate, individual Police Officers or stewards would
     have no chance to stop them.

Q. What I was going to ask you was this. That assumes that the
   flow through the open gate included a large number of people
   without tickets? That is the assumption? - A. I would suggest
   the numbers of people without tickets is not as large as the
   media or other people have made out.
If*-   •*   '*
                                                76

                                                              P.J. GARRETT


                 Q. What I was going to ask you as a Police Officer is how
                    effective an operation, given that there are hundreds of
                    people arriving at a fairly late stage in the area of the
                    ground, how effective an operation can the Police mount a
                    little distance away from the gates to monitor only people
                    with tickets get up to the turnstile area? - A. I think it
                    can be reasonably effective as it was last year.   I walked
                    from the Freemasons' Arms. I am not sure of the name of
                    the road, but it is through the main shopping area of
                    Hillsborough, across up the hill and past the bowling
                    green and dropped down on to Leppings Lane. Between the
                    traffic lights at the junction near to the Freemasons'
                    Arms and Leppings Lane there were groups of Police
                    Officers every 50 yards or so.    Using those Officers to
                    filter football fans, because football fans are quite
                    identifiable in their nature by wearing colours or
                    whatever, just a frequent check along the line, "Let's
                    have a look at your ticket, boys", could easily have
                    sorted out an awful lot of people.

                 Q. So you say effectively you try   and weed out the non-ticket
                    holders before they get to the   ground? - A. Yes, indeed. In
                    fact the system is done very successfully in Europe.
                    Certainly the European Cup Final in Rome and the European Cup
                    Final in Paris, where they have an outer ring of stewards and
                    Police Officers to filter the non-ticket holders from even
                    reaching the gates.

                 Q. One of the problems is the confined housing area immediately
                    round the ground? - A. That is right.  I am sure it could not
                    be done in exactly the same manner, but the approach roads are
                    available.

                 Q.         MR. GLASGOW:    If I may ask one question as a result of
                      that.May I grasp one difficulty with you and see if      you can
                      help.     Will you please accept as we all are trying to that
                      there is an insuperable problem at the time when the gate
                      is opened and that it has to be opened. Whether that is
                      right or wrong is obviously not for us to comment on. Let
                      us make that assumption still. But once you know that
                      there    is going to be not the steadyflow through the
                      turnstiles but a mass entrance of a very large number of
                      fans, whether with tickets or without tickets, is it not
                      essential to ensure that those inside the ground who are
                      responsible for security know in advance that that
                      decision is going to be made, even if only a matter of
                      minutes, so that they can prepare for that onslaught? - A.
                      I would have thought that would have been the first
                      communication from outside to inside, "I am now going to
                      open this gate. Be ready".     I would have thought that
                      would have been the very first message that would have
                      been relayed.

                 Q. If not, and if it takes anybody on the inside by surprise
                    other than those immediately on the gate, there is nothing the
                    stewards or the Police Officers inside can do to contain that
                    situation, is there? -A. No, I would not have thought so.
JjJP   r tf   '**■




                                                    11

                                                                    P.J. GARRETT



                     Q. And the last matter I feel I must put to you, the suggestion
                        that perhaps they could have closed the gates across the
                        tunnel, I wonder if you would care to reflect upon that.
                        Would you seriously have closed the gates on that tunnel
                        knowing that there were some thousands of people on the other
                        side of against whom they would have to be opened in the event
                        of their being a crisis on the pitch? Would you ever have
                        done that? - A. It is one of those situations, sir, I think if
                        we all had the answers this tragedy would not have occurred.
                        What I am saying is if you have got the information that parts
                        of the ground are already full to overflowing, seriously over­
                        crowded, the last thing you want to do is to allow any more
                        people into that section. Unfortunately, with that end of the
                        ground, as you come through the turnstiles your automatic
                        reaction is to go to that tunnel.

                     Q. I entirely accept that, Mr. Garrett. - A. What I was saying is
                        perhaps there should have been when the decision to open the
                        gates was made, there should have been some barrier put across
                        the tunnel to ensure that the extra people that were not
                        coming in did not already join the overcrowded sections in the
                        centre of the Leppings Lane terrace. There perhaps should
                        have been a line of Police Officers or the gates closed,
                        whatever it may have been, some form of barrier to ensure that
                        nobody else went down that tunnel, that as those people came
                        to those gates they were directed to either the right or the
                        left to go round the outside of the West Stand tojoin the
                        wing sections of the terracing.

                     Q. Which comes back to the same point, does not it, Mr. Garrett,
                        what is vital is that those on the inside know what is about
                        to be done from the outside? - A. Indeed, yes.

                     Q. Thank you very much'.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you very much, Mr. Garrett.

                             We will break now until 2 o'clock.


                                           (Luncheon Adjournment)
INQUIRY     INTO      THE      HEI L L S B O R O U G H

       STADIUM               DISASTER




                     Bef ore


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                       and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                       At

                The Town Hall,

                  Sheffield,

                       on

           Thursday, 18th May, 1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
               (Afternoon Session)



     From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                      (Afternoon Session)

                                             Page

D. HARTLEY Called
     Examined by Mr. Philips                  78

T. B. MATTHEWS Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                80
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        King       84
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Jackson    85
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Woodward   87
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Glasgow    91

D.T. JONES Called

     Examined by Mr. Philips                 92
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward          99

P. MCCAFFREY Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                102
     Cross-Examined by Mr.    Woodward       109
     Cross-Examined by Mr.    Glasgow        113
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins              114

D.S. MOORE Called

     Examined by Mr. Philips                 116
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson           124

M. ROSS Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                 125
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Woodward   131
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Glasgow    133

A .C . SMITH Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                134
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Jackson    136
     Cross-Examined by Mr.        Woodward   136

S. ALLEN Called

     Examined by Mr. Philips                 140
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward          147
              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)




P. MAHEW Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward

M.G. HILL Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins
                           78
                                             D. HARTLEY




               FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               THURSDAY. 18th MAY, 1989

                 (AFTERNOON SESSION)

      MR. KING;   I have been asked by Mr. Hicks who gave
evidence if, through myself, he could express thanks to
the Inquiry for the sympathetic reception which obtained
when he gave his evidence and afterwards and he said he
felt very strongly he wanted that conveyed to you. It
was something which meant a lot to him, the sympathy he
received.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you.

      MR. PHILIPS:   David Hartley please.

                 DAVID HARTLEY Called

               Examined by MR. PHILIPS:

Are you David Hartley? - A. Yes.

Do you live in Nelson in Lancashire? - A. Correct.

I think you want to tell the Inquiry about an incident on
the way to the match on the 15th of April? - A. That is
right.

Did you travel by motor car? - A.    Correct.

Did you go down the M 62 and down the M 1?       - A.That is
right.

Did you come off the M 1 at Junction 36? - A. Yes.

Which is the A 61 into the north of Sheffield? - A.
Right.

At Tankersley? - A. Yes.

You have very helpfully drawn a map on the back of your
statement showing the very simple configuration of roads
from the M 1? -A. That is right.

After you go down the A 61 for a mile or two       you come    to
a roundabout? - A. That is right.

Would you now tell the Inquiry what occurred at that
roundabout? - A. As we were entering - my wife and I
obviously go together - as we were entering the
                                       79
fv ’                                                 D. HARTLEY


            roundabout and I got on to the roundabout, the normal
            direction I would take, which was the first left down to
            the ground, as I know it, there was a Policeman stood on
            the right directing the traffic in the opposite direction
            down the Stocksbridge/Manchester road.   As I entered the
            roundabout I hesitated and virtually stopped.   At this
            stage the Policeman saw me hesitate and the indicator
            arrow board he moved to the right direction where it
            should have been, or where I thought it should have been.

       Q.   What sort of board are you talking about? - A. Just a
            normal type of board with arrow on.

       Q. Was there any writing on the board? - A. I think it may
          have said something like "Football Traffic91.

       Q.    Was that on a post or was he holding it in his hands?   -
            A. No, it was a typical typeboard stood on the road.

       Q.   Where do you say it was pointing to? - A. It was pointing
            in the direction of the next road, which I believe is the
            Stocksbridge/Manchester road.

       Q. You say he moved it when you approached him? - A. Yes.
          Only because of hesitation from my point of view.   He
          looked at the board and then he moved the arrow.

       Q.   So you in fact knew the right way anyway? - A. That is
            right.   We had been there on several occasions and knew
            the journey very well.

       Q. You were going down the A 61 towards Sheffield? - A.
          That's right.

       Q. That in fact is the second turning off the roundabout,
          not the first?   The one straight ahead? - A. Yes, that
          is right.

       Q. What time of day was this? - A. It would be approximately
          five past two.

       Q.   What time did     you arriveat your parking place in
            Sheffield? - A. I would say approximately quarter past
            two.

       Q.   So you had no difficulty   from there to the place where
            you wanted to park? - A.   No, the traffic was moving in a
            very stead flow.

                  MR. PHILIPS:   Yes, thank you.

                  MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, we only had notice of this
            statement last night.   I am not in a position to cross-
            examine this witness upon it, nor is it a matter that is
■fib                                  80
                                                     D. HARTLEY


         heralded by any of the communications that have hitherto
         been given.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        I appreciate that.

               MR. WOODWARD:   It may have been a mistake by an
         Officer, we do not know.   As I understand it, it is not
         suggested there was any deliberate misleading of people.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Of course not.   If you want
         to call evidence about it it is up to you, but I see you
         cannot cross-examine at the moment.   I doubt whether it
         is worth this witness coming back at a later stage.

               MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, if there is material in
         relation to that which is considered relevant and
         important then, of course, sir, it will be provided.

               Sir, whilst I am on my feet might I also make the
         observation that whilst we are proceeding apace and there
         is goodwill from everybody to get as much done as they
         can consist with getting some sleep, we have not had the
         opportunity yet to read all the statements that have been
         served upon us for today.   Statements were given to us
         this morning in relation to some witnesses that have not
         yet been called and even more statements were given at
         lunchtime.

                We understand how that can happen.       It just makes
          it difficult to be able to be helpful.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Woodward, if you are in
         difficulties about cross-examining any witness and you
         think it is very important we will see what can be done.
         It may be that the witness could come back tomorrow
         morning and be cross-examined tomorrow rather than today.
         I leave it to you to use your discretion as to whether
         you can proceed or not.

               MR. WOODWARD:   We are grateful for that, sir.
         The point that is made is that we do not know whether
         that which is to be said will be a matter which should
         occupy the time of detailed enquiries at the back.
         Thank you, sir.

                MR. GOLDSACK:   Mr. Matthews, please.

                      THOMAS BENTLEY MATTHEWS Called

                        Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

       Q. Are you Thomas Bentley Matthews? - A. Yes.

       Q. From North Wales? - A. Yes.
                         81
                                   T. B. MATTHEWS



You came across to the match on the 15th of April? - A. I
did.

Had you been the year before? - A. Yes.

This year what time did you arrive at the entrance in
Leppings Lane? - A. This year?

This year. - A. Approximately half past two.

Was that the same time as last year, or different? -A.
No, different from last year.   Last year we did not
arrive until about five to three due to traffic problems
in Stockport.

This year when you arrived were there many people
outside? - A. A considerable number, yes.

Did you have a ticket? - A. Yes.

For which part of the ground? - A. For the Leppings Lane
standing, through B entrance.

Did you manage to get in through the right place for the
entrance? - A. No.

Where did you find yourself? - A. I found myself queuing
in the entrance to turnstiles marked C.

That is the other side of the wall from where you should
have been? - A. Yes.

Having realised you were the wrong side of the wall did
you try to alter your position? - A. Well, we looked at
the situation and realising the magnitude of people there
it would have been impossible for us to get back to find
section B.

So you carried on until you got to turnstile C? - A. We
did.

Once you arrived at turnstile C, what did you say, if
anything, to the steward, the person on the turnstile? -
A. On approaching turnstile C there was a Policeman
outside who physically was unable to do anything.    The
friend I was travelling with approached the turnstile
before me and was questioned by the steward as to why he
was coming in turnstile C.    He said we were caught in
the crowd heading towards there and we could not get back
and so he just let him.    I just followed through and I
physically tore my own ticket and passed it to him.
'   /
                                      82
                                              T. B. MATTHEWS


        Q, Was your ticket in fact checked by anyone? - A. I just
           passed it to the steward who just accepted it.

        Q. You say there was a Policeman by the turnstile? -A. Yes.

        Q. Why couldn't that person do anything? - A. Due to the
           size of the crowd in that area.

        Q. Was it a Policeman? - A. There was a Police Constable
           standing by the turnstile entrance, yes.

        Q. He was crushed as well? - A. Yes, there was a severe
           crowd there.

        Q. Once you had gone through did you go through the tunnel?
           - A. I did.

        Q. That meant you had to go through to the right? - A.
           Having been previously to the Sheffield Wednesday ground
           I knew there was an entrance through which we could gain
           access to the standing area and to go through to the
           tunnel.

        Q. Did you know there was any other entrance apart from the
           tunnel to stands? - A. On the sides, yes.

        Q. But you wanted to go through the tunnel, did you? - A.
           Well, last year, when we got in at five to three and
           approached the tunnel area there was a line of Police
           Officers across that tunnel.   We were directed to go to
           the sides.   This year there was none so we naturally
           assumed there was room.

        Q. Did that assumption turn out to be right? - A. No.

        Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Last year there was a line
             ofPolicemen in front of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

        Q. Telling you not to go in? - A. Yes.     Obviously the place
           was full at the time.

        Q. That was a bit later, you said, last year? - A. It was
           about five to three.

        Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:    Last year did they tell you there
             were other ways in? - A. They pointed us to the sides and
             we used our own discretion.    We know the ground anyway.

        Q. This year when you arrived at the pitch side of the
           tunnel what did you find? - A. After coming through the
           tunnel we were sent forward.   Myself and the friend I
           went with were split up and then due to the normal
           reactions of the crowd whereby you find your way on to
           the terracing, I ended up behind the crush barrier.
                         83
                                  T. B. MATTHEWS


Do you know which is pen 3 and pen 4?- A.   Yes.   Pen   4
is the left hand side one.

Where did you finish up? - A. In pen 4.

Do you know which crush barrier? - A. Approximately on
that line somewhere where he is pointing out.

About half way down the pen? - A. Yes.

Did you end up with the crush barrier in front of you or
behind you? - A. In front of me.

What time was it when you were inthat position?    - A. I
said in my statement I think it would be about quarter to
three, ten to three.    I would imagine it to be about
that time.

Some time before kick-off? - A. Definitely, yes.

In the middle of pen 4 what was the situation then? - A.
At that time it was very compact.   I looked to see if I
could find my mate, but I couldn't.   I couldn't move
backwards or push back at all because it was so compact
in there at that time.

Apart from being compact did you see signs of people
actually being in distress at that stage? - A. After
realising I was split up and I could not find him, I
looked around and I notice there were a number of lads
crushed up against the barrier who were in some pain.

What was the next thing of any particular note that
happened to you? - A. Well, I remember thinking to myself
on seeing these lads against the barrier that I did not
want to get caught up in it myself otherwise I was going
to get crushed.   Then it was as if there was a sudden
surge.   I just naturally assumed from what has happened,
from what has been reported, that it was they opened the
gates.   I went past the barrier and forward to the
front.

How did you eventually get out of it? - A. On going past
the barrier and arriving towards the front I was able to
reach up to the railings, the fence, and virtually drag
myself up on that.



                         /Q. So did you climb
                                84


                                            T.   B.   MATTHEWS




Q. So did you climb over?       A.   Yes.

Q. Did anyone try to stop you getting over at that stage?
   A.   No.

Q. Did anyone help you to get over?  A.   No.   Once I
   reached the top of the fence, I found I couldn't get
   my leg over due to the nature of the fence coming back
   on itself so the only way for me to get over was to
   throw myself forward, which I did, and there was a
   Policeman below there and I landed on top of him.

Q. I think after that you assisted with helping the injured?
   A.   Yes.

Q. And at some stage you were round in the gymnasium area?
   A.   Yes, that is correct.

Q. Where doctors had gathered?       A.      Yes.

Q. And were you present when one of the doctors looking after
   a casualty asked for oxygen?   A.   I was.

Q. Was oxygen provided?   A.   There was firemen there
   bringing oxygen cylinders in and one was brought to the
   doctor and it was found to be empty.

Q. Can you help at all as to the time of that incident?
   A.   No.

                     Cross-examined by MR. KING:

Q. In your statement, sir, you say this on the last page,
   "The way the doctors were organising the situation inside
   was very good."   A.   Yes.

Q. 'It seemed to be the first time anything had been organised
    properly at all.   Certainly outside there was no obvious
    organisation within the Police.    Nobody had taken charge
    of the Police as such and they did not seem to be doing
    anything helpful at all."   I am sure you do not mean
    that in the sense of no help at all but was that the
    picture, of lack of organisation outside among the Police?
    A.   Yes, I would definitely say there was definitely
    lack of organisation, otherwise people l i k E R m y s e l f would
    not have taken it upon themselves to stretcher them people
    across on hoardings, etc.    Otherwise, I know that some
    Police did administer mouth to mouth but there was a
    considerable amount of Police and I felt they should
    have taken the upper hand, myself.
                                     85


                                                     T.    B.   MATTHEWS



                      Cross-examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Matthews, may we ask about last year.   You mentioned
   in particular that you were later last year and by  the
   time you got to the tunnel entrance Police blocked your
   way and redirected you.   A.   Yes.

Q. I wanted to take you before that outside the ground
   last year.   Was there any check of your ticket before
   you arrived at the turnstile or the area before it?
   A.   I donTt recall any check on tickets, no.

Q. Do you remember making a statement about this matter?
   In your statement you say, "Last year* before we actually
   got to the gates there were Police Officers stopping
   the fans andfiltering everyone slowly through        towards
   the entrance  and ffie turnstiles."    A.     Yes, I remember
   that.   At the turnstile you were stopped before going
   into the turnstile, yes.      The Policemen on the turnstile,
   if you get what I mean.      There'was n o b o d y      Are
   you talking about outside the gate area?

Q. Outside in Leppings Lane itself,                 was there any check on
   your ticket?    A. No, but when                  we got inside that
   gate area there, yes.

Q.   Where the gentleman is pointing at this moment? A.                    Yes.

Q.   There was a check there?             A.        Yes.

Q.    How far from the turnstile would you say that was?
     A.   Well, there was a number of Police there and I would
     think possibly half way to quarter of the way, I couldn't ---

Q. Somewhere about half way between the perimeter gate and
   the turnstiles?   A.   Yes.

Q. You were checked by a casual Officer or by what apparently
   was a group of Officers carrying out that task?
   A.   There was a number of Officers there that day.

Q.   May I return you to this year and the use of theA, B, C
     and where it took you?   A.   Yes.

Q. Your ticket was marked --- ?                A.     B.

Q. As you approached the turnstiles, did you know exactly
   where the B turnstiles were?   A.   No.

Q. Did y o u s e e   the letter A?        A.        I did,yes.

Q. Did you make any assumption as to the position of turnstiles
   marked B in relation to those marked A?    A.   Well, if
   I -----   Itis natural thinking in my way, anyway, that if
   A is there, B follows, and this is the way that I naturally
                              86


                                          T.   B.   MATTHEWS



     assumed it.   It wasn't until we were in the position that
     we couldn't turn back that we found out that we were in
     Turnstile C.

Q.   No doubt somebody somewhere does not follow A     by B but
     you thought that was the natural thing to do?      A.    I
     would assume so, myself, yes.

Q. Having made that decision, what was the effect on;>our
   journey towards the ground when you realised that
   the Turnstiles B were not next to Turnstiles A?    A.          What
   do you mean?   The nature of the journey?

Q.    What did you do?   Did you stop, turn round?   A.  Well,
     you know, obviously there was a mass of people and you
     can't just go rushing through but we turned and we noticed,
     we could see that there was a mass of people behind us and
     to get outwould hqve been an impossibility, I would have
     thought, without fighting your way out.

Q. Is it fair to say that you were more slowly entering the
   ground than you would have done if you had gone straight
   to Turnstile B?   A.   I don't ---

Q. Did you have to stop?   Did you check?    Did you speak
   to an Officer?   What did you try and do?    A.   We
   didn't speak to any Officers at all.   The Police were
   patrolling the area outside, which I said in my statement,
   on horses and generally they were adding more to the chaos
   due to the movement of the horses because if a horse is
   backing towards you you move out of the way of it - well,
   I do, anyway, you know.

Q. I really meant in this sense:   when you realised that you
   had got a ticket marked for a turnstile to which you
   were not approaching ---  A.   Yes.

Q. What did you actually do?   A.    Well, we attempted to turn
   round and go back but we realised that the nature of the
   crowd, that we would be unable to get back to Turnstile B.
   We knew the lay-out of the ground and we knew that if
   we were allowed through that turnstile  that we could
   actually get into the area where B was.

Q. When you got to the turnstile with the wrong letter on
   your ticket, what happened?   A.   As I said, the lad
   who was with me, he gave his ticket to the turnstile
   collector and he said that, "You have got the wrong turnstile
   here" and he said, "Well, there is no    we can go back­
   wards, you know" and he said, "Oh, well, go through and go
   right" and then Tjust chucked my ticket in afterwards and he
   accepted it.
                                   87




                                               T.   B.   MATTHEWS



            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        I think we have had all this,
     Mr.   Jackson.

Q.        MR. JACKSON:    What I am seeking to enquire from you
     is that the fact of the tickets being wrongly numbered r
     slowed the movements through the turnstiles themselves.
     You see, we have heard of the turnstiles, for a reason
     no-one has yet explained, it seems that Sheffield
     turnstiles on that day apparently worked more slowly
     than thennrmal.    I am seeking a reason for that.    Did
     you see any reason wtyj^people were going through the
     turnstiles even more slowly than they did normally?
     A.   No.  The only reason I can say that we went through
     slower than normal was because my mate was checked in
     front ofme.   Myself, I moved through quicker than he
     did.   Yes, so ---

Q. As far as you are concerned, you can till us that one
   reason - your friend in particular was more slowly
   through because of that particular reason?   A.    Yes.

          MR. COLLINS:    If it helps - it may save a bit
     of time - there will be evidence as to why there was
     slowness ofmovement through the turnstiles in due course.
     I have only just seen it and my friends have not but
     there will be such evidence which explains to some extent,
     I think, why this happened.

          MR. JACKSON:     Sir,    I apologise if I have taken
     unnecessary time.

           MR. COLLINS:    No, of course.

                    Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Matthews,     you are a long time supporter of Liverpool?
   A.   Yes.

Q.   And you have been to many,many of their games, home and
     away, and you went to this Semi-Final in 1988? A. I did.

Q. Did you enjcy the game?         A.     Yes, we won.

Q. I want to ask you a little bit about that.   The time you
   arrived last year, was it a little bit later than this
   year?   A.   It was.

Q. And last year when you arrived did everything seem to be
   well organised and well run?   A.   In which respects?

Q.   In order to get you into the ground?    A.             On the
     turnstiles, yes, I would think so, myself.
                              88


                                                  T.   B.    MATTHEWS



Q. You had your ticket checked,       you say?          A.        I did,

Q. That was at the?actual approach to the turnstile entrance?
   A.   Yes.

Q. There was a policeman there asking you for your ticket and
   you showed it and if you had got it you went in?   A.   Yes.

Q. I want to ask you how that compares with your experience on
   this day in 1989.   First of all, the number of people that
   were there.   This time you were a little bit earlier?
   A.   Yes.

Q. How did the crowd that you saw present round the turnstiles
   and in the entrance and approach to the gates compare with
   what you found last year?   A.   I would say that there
   were more people around that area this year than there was
   last year.

Q. There were crowds more, were there not?                   A.      Yes.

Q. And by the time you arrived on this occasion things had
   got very difficult.   A.   I would say so,yes.

Q. Nothing like that occurred in 1988,            did it?          A.       No.

Q. And the system that was working in 1988 appeared to be
   coping well?   A.   Yes.

Q.May I ask you about when you went inside in 1989?    Having
   gone through the entrance gates in 1988 you say that there
   was a cordon of -----   I beg your pardon, through the
   turnstiles, there was a cordon across the mouth of the
   tunnel?   A.   There was, yes.

Q. Are you sure about that?      A.         Well,      I saw a cordon there.

Q. Can you describe to us what you mean by that?   How many
   Officers were there?   A.   I can't remember the number but
   I would certainly put there was more than five at least.

Q. And how were they standing?         A.         Across the entrance
   of the tunnel.

Q. Shoulder to shoulder, side by side, physically barring
   the way?   Is that what you mean?   A.   Yes.

Q. A solid line of Policemen across the mouth of the tunnel?
   A.   Yes.

Q. You are quite sure about that?            A.        Well,      I saw thst with
   my eyes last year.
                                       89




                                                         T.   B.   MATTHEWS



Q. What time would that have been last year?   A.   Well,
   it must have been about five to three, 3 o'clock time,
   you know.

Q. When you arrived at the ground last year, had the kick-off
   started or not?   A.   By the time we got on to the terrace,
   the kick-off had just started, yes.

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Where did you fetch up last
     year?      A.     Where did we end up, do you mean?

Q. Yes.        A.        On the right-hand section as you look at the
   pitch.           That area, yes.

Q.   The wedge at the corner?               A.    Yes.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:          You went        round the back,     did you,
     to get to it?   A.          Yes.

Q. This year when you came in and got to the terrace, that
   would be about what time when you came out of the tunnel
   to go on to   the terrace?    A. I would imagine it to be
   round about quarter to three.

Q.   At that stage, would it be right to say there                    were no
     players on the field?   A.   N6.

Q.   There were no players?           A.         Not th± I noticed,     anyway.

Q.    At that stage, when you got through the tunnel, did you
     have any concern about the number of people?     A.   Yes.

Q. As you had gone along the tunnel, were you just walking
   normally or were you rushing and running or what?
   A.   We were walking down with some -- with a number of
   people behind us, yes.

Q.   You vere in a s t e a d y    ?        A.     Flow, yes.

Q.    Flow of people going along but it was not uncomfortable
     or difficult?     :~A.   I wouldn't say it was uncomfortably
     difficult, no.      There was room there.

Q. Is this the picture that you have, that immediately you
   got to the tunnel exit on to the terrace, you could see
   that the crowd down in the area where you were thinking
   of going was very densely packed?   A.   It  is normal ---
   in my experience when you go to a football ground and
   you are coming out on to the terracing, the section is
   normally packed round there anyway and you would have to
   push your way in there anyway.

Q. In the statement that you made at that time, were you
   intending to describe this time when you say, "It was
                               90


                                        T.   B.   MATTHEWS



     worse than anything I had ever been in before"?         A.   That
     was while I was on the terracing, that was, yes.

Q. Was that very shortly after you got in?      A.    On getting
   in, as I have said prior to that, I lost my mate and I was
   sent --  I went down forward and once I had got down a
   couple of the terraces, I ended up going down with the
   nature of the crowd, yes.

Q. You make an observation about seeing that there were two
   lads trapped against abarrier.   A.    I did.

Q.    Had the teams yet come out when you saw that?     A. I
     would imagine they had done.   I can't honestly remember
     that, you know.

Q. You do not recall seeing any players on the field?
   A.   I was more concerned with myself than what was happening
   on the pitch at the time.

Q.   Did you see the teams come out?     A.I just said       that
     I d i d n 't .

Q. Did you see them at any time come out?          A.   I can't recall
   that, no.




                                             (And this situation...)
                                    91
(
                                             T.B. MATTHEWS


    Q. This situation that you describe was in the position that
       the Usher is indicating, round about the centre of Pen 4?
       - A. Somewhere round about there, I would imagine so, yes.

    Q.    Were you conscious of any suddensurge after thator not?
         - A. Yes, that is what took me past the barrier and well,
         probably saved my life.

    Q. But was it before that surge occurred that you were already
       aware of people in difficulty? ~ A. Yes.

    Q.    People trapped before the surge, as you described it,
         occurred? - A. Yes.

               MR. WOODWARD j   Thank you.


                       Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

    Q. Have you got a bundle of photographs in front of you there,
       the big fat one? - A. Yes.

    Q. It is called West Midlands 2 on the outside.          Is that the
       one? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would you go to page 14 please? - A. Yes.

    Q. When you came into thf* ground last year, did you come through
       the same turnstile? - A. No, *B* turnstile.

    Q. So you were approaching the scene that we see in Photograph 14
       from somewhere just on the 1eft-hand^side of the photograph?
       - A. Yes.

    Q.   And as soon as you got into that      open area, which    Mr.Poole
         is very kindly showing us on the plan there, when you got
         through the turnstiles .... A. This is talking about
         Turnstile B now we are talking about?

    Q. When you got inside the area can you remember was it very
       crowded? - A. There would be a number of people there but
       not packed.

    Q.   Nothing like this year? - A. No.

    Q.   On your left you saw the line of Policemen across the
         entrance that we can just see on the left of the photograph?
         - A. I did, yes.

    Q. Was there already a stream of people walking away in front
       of you or could you see where to go yourself? - A. There
       was people already. They realised we could not go there.
       They were heading for the corner.

    Q. It was very obvious that you could not go down the tunnel,
       they were standing shoulder to shoulder? - A. Yes.
                               92

                                        T.B. MATTHEWS


Q. If you look at the photograph, in the distance do you see
   the furthest corner post of the structure underneath the
   asbestos sheeting in the far right-hand corner? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see the white notice board two-thirds of the way up
   the exposed part of the stanchion? - A. Yes.

Q. That notice in fact as we know says "Standing" on it.        Did
   you in fact see that? - A. No.

Q. Did you even notice it this year? - A. No.

Q. But that is the corner to which you went simply because
   other people were walking there? - A. That was last year.

Q. It was fairly obvious, was it? - A. It was obvious there
   was no room there and we were directed that way. I should
   say that knowing the nature of the ground I naturally
   assumed that from there we could have gone to behind the
   goal but it seems that we could not due to the ....

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You thought there would be
     no dividing fences? - A. No, we knew there was pens there
     but we thought the top end would be open>.but it wasn't.

Q.        MR. GLASGOW! It is quite a common structure in
     football grounds that at the terraced open end that you
     can approach the terrace either through a central tunnel
     or through ways round the sides? - A. Yes.

Q. And that is the sort of design that almost any experienced
   football supporter would expect, isn't it? - A. I would
   imagine-so, yes.

Q. The difference I think that you are drawing our attention
   to here is that you did not anticipate until you saw it
   the first year the vertical pen fences? - A. Yes.

           MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, thank you very much indeed.      Thank
     you sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.   That is all.   Thank
     you very much.


                          DAVID THOMAS JONES Called
                          Examined by MR. PHILIPS:

Q. Are you David Thomas Jones? - A. I am.

Q. Do you come from Preston in Lancashire? - A. I do.

Q. Did you go to the match on the 15th of April this year? -
   A. I did.

Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. I would say
   round about half-past-11.
                                 D.T. JONES


You had had no trouble getting herefrom where you were
coming from? - A. No,no trouble at all.

What did you do when you got into Sheffield at 11.30? -
A. We parked up and we were looking for a public house
to have a few drinks before the match.

Did you find one? - A. Yes, round about 10-to-12 we managed
to find one. I don't know unfortunately the name of the
pub.

Is it near to the ground? - A. Yes, within five minutes
walk.

Was it open to the general public? - A. Ho, we just knocked
on the front door. Somebody opened the door, saw there
was only a few of us and then l^fe us in.

Were there other people inside? - A. Yes, it was quite
crowded.

How many people would you say were in there? - A. I would
say around about 200/300 people.

Did they appear to you to be supporters of both teams? - A.
No, exclusively Liverpool.

What time did you leave this public house? - A. I would say
round about five-past, ten-past-two.

How much had you         had to drink? - A. Well the problem
I had was although my friend had actually driven us to
the ground, I had to get to his house In Warrington so
obviously I had to drive back so I had two bottles of
Newcastle Brown, that is all.

When you left at 10-past-2 were there others there still?
- A. Oh yes.

Still drinking? - A. Still drinking, yes, having a generally
good time.

Did you have tickets for the match? - A. Yes.

Where were those tickets for? - A. Mine was for the Leppings
Lane end and the three friends who were with me were all
in the North Stand.

Were you going to the terraces or to the West Stand? -
A. I was going to the Leppings Lane terrace whilst they
made their way to the North Stand.

Having left the public house did you have something to
eat on the way to the ground? - A. I did indeed, yes,
we dropped off at a local chippy to get something to eat.
                                94

                                        D.T. JONES


Q.l What time did you get to the Leppings Lane entrance? - A.
  I I would say round about 25-minutes-to-3, thereabouts.

Q.\ What did you see when you got there? - A. Masses of people.

Q. Could you say how many people, could you estimate? - A. Well
   only an estimation, I would say at least 3,000-4,000.

Q. Were    there people behind you still approaching the ground?
   - A.    Well to be honest with you after I got into the main
   body    of the queue I was not really bothered about anybody
   else    coming behind me.

Q. As you were approaching the main body of the ma&s of people
   were there people coming up the road behind you? - A. Well
   as I say I did not look behind me. Once I got into the
   queue I was only really bothered about myself then.

Q. You mentioned the word "queue" twice. Was there a queue?
   - A. Well in a strange sort of way I suppose you could
   interpret it as a qusue. I mean I have seen far better,
   put it that wap.

Q, Were people in straight lines or orderly linestwaiting for
   each turnstile? - A. No, it was mass panic really, sort
   of jostling for a general position to maintain your
   balance as much as anything else.

Q. Were you doing that? - A. Yes.

Q. Were other people doing that? - A. Yes, everybody all round
   me was all huddled together virtually like sardines.

Q. Did you see any Policemen there? - A. I saw two mounted
   Policemen.

Q.   What were they doing? - A. Not really a great deal.

Q.| Can you tell us what they were doing? - A. They were
    attempting to try and get the mass of people into some
    semblance of order quite unsuccessfully.

Q.   The mass of people did not want to be put into order, is
     that it? - A. No, I don't think you are right there.  I
     think people generally are quite happy to try and get
     into some form of queueing system because it is obviously
     easier on everybody then, isn't it. I mean people don't
     enjoy being huddled together.

Q.   Did     you   see anyPolicemen on foot? - A. No.

Q.   Did     you   see anychildren in this crowd? - A. One ortwo.

Q.   Were they staying    there or were they being taken out
     of the crowd? - A.   Well asthe queue was so, what is the
     right word for it,    intense, so packed, obviously the
     children were with    their parents and the parents had
                                 D.T. JONES


enough sense to try and get the children out from the main
body of the queue. The adults obviously had enough trouble
trying to keep themselves in the queue. It would be far
too difficult for them to keep an eye on the children as
well so they were trying to pass them over to get them
out of the main body of the queue outside the Leppings
Lane end.

In which direction were they passing the children out from
the crowd? - A. Well to my right-hand side. There was a
wall to the right-hand side      and a big gate as well and
they were sort of passing   them up and over and   out.

Would you like to look at   the model behind you  and tell us
where you were when you saw this happening? - A. It is
difficult really from the model.

Do you see Leppings Lane there on the extreme right-hand
side? - A. Yes.

And the forecourt and then the gates to the ground itself?
- A. Yes.

And then there is a wall you see which divides off the terrace
turnstiles from the stand    turnstiles? - A. Right.

Where were you? - A. Towards the right.   I   was   sortof
round about there.

And children were being passed over, were they? ~ A. Yes,
to the right-hand side where the Clerk is pointing to.
There was a little wall there.

On the bank of the river? - A. I must admit I am not
an expert in the geography of Sheffield unfortunately.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: But were the children being
got into the ground or just passed to the side? - A. No,
they were being passed to the side because we were not
moving, the queue was not gaining any momentum at all.
We were just being crushed and obviously there were more
people joining in the back of the queue so the queue was
becoming more and more tight, more and more crushed. We
were hardly moving at all.

A parent was staying in this crush moving slowly towards
the turnstile? - A. Yes.

And the child was being passed out to the side? - A. Yes,
out of the main body of the queue.

      MR. PHILIPS:   Did you get to a turnstile? ~ A.
Eventually.

How long did it take you to get there? - A. I got through
the turnstile round about 5-to-3.
                              96

                                      D.T. JONES


Q.    So how long had it taken?"you to get through the mass of
     people to the turnstile? - A. I would say round about 20
     minutes approximately, obviously with great relief when
     I managed to get to the turnstile because I was aching
     then with the pressure on my chest.

Q.   Had you got through taking your turn with everybody else?
     - A. Sorry, I don't follow you?

Q. Had you got through the crowd to the turnstile in front
   of others who had been in front of you? - A. No.

Q. You    had    taken your turn with the others? - A.    Yes.

Q. Did you     have any difficulty going through the    turnstile
   itself? - A. Yes, I got forced through the turnstile. In
   actual fact all my ticket was actually retained by the
   chap on the gate. I did not have a chance to get my stub
   back, I just got forced straight through then, but
   ob viously there was some relief    becauseI knew once I
   got to the turnstile I was in and hopefully I thought
   that was the end of it.

Q. What did you see on the    other side of the turnstile?- A.
   Well I went to the general toilets and from there I
   moved on towards the main body of the tunnel obviously
   with a view to getting out on the terracing.

Q.   Did you see any gates open at anytime? - A. No.

Q.   When you got to the other side of    the turnstileswere any
     gates open? - A. Not to my knowledge, no.

Q. Did    you    go through the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you     see any Police Officers or Stewards in theyard
   between the turnstile and the tunnel? - A. No.

Q. What were the conditions like in the tunnel? - A. Reasonable.

Q. Were you able to walk down it? - A. No problems.

Q. Were you able to see the pitch as you went down the tunnel?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Were there any players on the pitch? - A. Yes, they were
   warning up and obviously just getting ready for the off.

Q. Did anything happen as you went down the tunnel? - A.
   No.

Q. You just carried straight on? - A. Yes, carried on and then
   I decided obviously to get into the main body of the
   terracing with a view to trying to obtain the best possible
   standing position that I could.
                                97

                                                D.T. JONES



Q. And which way did you go when you got to the end of the
   tunnel? - A. Slightly over to the right and joined into the
   back of the terracing. I am not, to be honest,sure   whether
   it was B, C, D or whatever.  I just the players as I was going
   through the tunnel, and made to the right-hand side to try and
   get the best position that I could.

Q. So you made over to the right-hand side? - A. Yes, slightly
   over to the right.  I was virtually behind the goal.

Q. That would put you into pen 3, would not it? - A. I am not too
   sure whether it was 3 or 4. I have later learned it was
   either 3 or 4.

Q.   Did you stay in that first pen that you went into?   - A. Yes.

Q.   I wonder if I can get this clear.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        21.

         MR. PHILIPS:   Thank you very much, sir:

Q. Look at photograph 21, please, in the larger bundle. That is
   a view of the end of the tunnel. As you are coming down the
   tunnel that is the view you see. You see there is a fence in
   the middle and a pen on either side? - A. Right, Yes, I do.

Q. Which side of that fence did you go? - A. Right-hand side.

Q. Then if we look at photograph 23, do you see there the pen
   that is on the right-hand side. Those yellow markings are at
   the tunnel entrance itself. - A. Yes. I see that.

Q.   Where did you go in that pen? - A. Virtually behind the right-
     hand goalpost as we look at the picture, about three-quarters
     of the way up. That is where I started off.

Q.   Were you nearto a barrier? -A. To be honest with you I never
     saw a barrier at all.

Q. You did not see a barrier at all? - A. No, not until after the
   incidents.

Q. You were three-quarters of the way up towards the back of the
   pen? - A. Yes.

Q. And on the left-hand side of the pen, towards the left-hand
   side? - A. Virtually directly behind the right-hand goalpost.

Q. What were conditions like in that pen at the time? - A.
   Chock-a-block.

Q. Was there room for anybody else in it? - A. No, certainly not.

Q. Was it uncomfortably crowded? - A. Very.    Very much so.
                               98

                                                  D.T. JONES


Q.   Did things change? - A. No.    It just got bad to worse.

Q.   Did you notice any specific surge? - A.    I did not notice any
     specific surge, no.

Q.   And you say things got worse? - A. Yes.

Q.   How bad did they get? - A. It to so bad at one time that it
     was pretty difficult to breathe.   To be honest with you I
     thought, "This is it", it got that bad.

Q. Did you stay where you had started off, three-quarters of the
   way up the pen? - A. No, I got pushed down.

Q.   How far down did you get pushed? - A. About half    the way down,
     a good half the way, may be even more.

Q. Did you hear anybody shouting or screaming? - A. Yes,
   everybody all round me was screaming for the Police to open
   the gate.

Q. Did you see any Police there in front of the crowd? - A. Yes,
   I saw several Police. The problem was once I actually got
   moved down from about three-quarters probably a good 20 or
   30 yards further down I then got moved, so I actually ended
   up facing the other way towards the people actually in the
   stands over us. So after that time I could not really see
   a great deal because I had my back to everything, so all I
   could really hear then was screams.

Q. Were you able to turn round at all once you had been put in
   that position? - A. No. I was actually locked firm.

Q.   Did you seepeople leaving the terrace? - A. No.

Q.   Did you see anybody getting into the stands? - A. Yes, people
     were being dragged up from the terracing over into the stands
     above.

Q.   Did the situation improve? - A. No.

Q.   How long was it this sort of crush? -A. I would     say for a
     good 10 minutes.

Q. You were looking towards the back of the terrace then from
   where you were? - A. Yes.

Q.   Were people still coming down the tunnel? - A. I can’t really
     answer that to be honest with you.  I had my mind on other
     things.

Q. Of course.    Did you get out of that pen? -A. Eventually I did,
   y es.

Q. How did you get out? - A. I got out through the gate in the
   middle of the perimeter fencing when it was eventually opened.
   I managed to jump out and got on to the pitch.
5   '

                                       99

                                                        D.T. JONES



        Q. When you got out, the terrace, had it been pretty well cleared
           by then? - A. There was a fair amount of people then had been
           moved, and people could then move around quite freely because
           the majority of them were on the pitch.

        Q. And you were out on to the pitch. Were you in fact injured in
           that crush? - A. My chest was aching.  I had a bit of
           difficulty breathing, but obviously there were a lot more
           people worse than me.

        Q. Did you do anything to help? - A. Yes, I was helping people
           carrying the makeshift stretchers up and down the field for a
           few times, but to be honest I was really walking round in a
           daze at that stage.  I did not really know whether I was
           coming or going.

        Q. While you were doing this, while this was happening, did you
           hear any announcements over the loudspeaker system? - A. Yes,
           I heard an announcement from the Tannoy probably about a
           couple of minutes before I managed to make my way through the
           gate, I heard something come over the loudspeaker telling
           people to get off the field, to get off the pitch, to get back
           off the pitch.

        Q. Were there many people on the pitch at that time? - A. Yes,
           people were spilling over by the hundreds and getting over as
           quickly as they could, every direction they could, either
           through the gate or anyway they could.

        Q. Thank you very much.

                           Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

        Q. Mr. Jones, when you arrived at the ground you had already been
           to a public house? - A. Indeed.

        Q. And that public house had closed doors? - A. Yes.

        Q. And it was a public house that was packed, was it? - A. Yes.

        Q. And there were already people in there when you arrived, and
           you were not the last out? - A. Certainly not.

        Q.   And they were still merrymaking after you went   on to go to   the
             ground? - A. Yes.

        Q.   What time did you leavethe public house? - A. Round about      5-
             past, 10-past-2, approximately.

        Q.   And you got to the ground about what time? Would it be about
             2.40? - A. Round about that time.   I could not be any more
             precise than that.

        Q.   And the scene that met your eyes then was one of a great crowd
             of people, was it? - A. Yes,an enormous crowd  of people.
                              100



                                                D.T. JONES


Q. Which way did you approach the ground from? Did you come
   over the bridge or along the road from in front of the shops?
   - A. Along the road from in front of the shops.

Q.   Were you amongst a considerable number of other people
     still making their way to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. Had you been the year before? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you get there last year? - A. I got up to the
   ground about 10-to-3.  I was actually in the stands then that
   day. This time I was in the terracing.

Q. Was there anything different this year from last year? - A.
   Other than the fact there was more than 6 minutes played last
   year, no, not really.

Q.   When you got to the ground to go through the gates you saw
     there was a great crowd of people ahead of you between you and
     the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Did it take you very long to get to the turnstiles? - A. Round
   about 15 minutes approximately, may be a bit more.  I did not
   really have a lot of chance to look at my watch.

Q. You say people don't enjoy being huddled together.  Who was
   doing the huddling, Mr. Jones? - A. I don't think people enjoy
   being crushed together like sardines.

Q. Did you force your way through to the turnstiles? - A. No more
   than anybody else that was round me, no.

Q. Did you pass people on your way to get to the turnstiles? - A.
   I imagine I did, yes, but I could not identify any of them.  I
   really went in line with the flow of everybody else that was
   moving towards the turnstile.

Q*   Did they seem to be moving steadily through or some people
     being a bit greedy and selfish? - A. No.

Q. No? - A. Everybody was fending for themselves trying to get
   through as quickly as possible, to try and get out of the
   crush. I think anybody in their sense would try and do that.

Q.   But when you came upon this crowd you added to it and crushed
     into it, did not you? - A. I did to the crowd, yes.

Q. When you went through the turnstiles in your statement you
   talk about using brute force to get through? - A. No more than
   normal.

Q. What is normal brute force, Mr. Jones? Normal to do what? -
   A. Put it this way, I don't assault people obviously.  I just
   generally get in the queue and try and get to the front as
   quickly as possible without harming anybody.

Q. And that is what you describe as just brute force, is it? -A.
                                                 D.T. JONES


     I think the words "brute force" is probably taken out of
     context here.

Q. I will put it in the context in which you used it, and it may
   be we have not used it in exactly the context which you
   intended.  - A. I don’t think you have.

Q.        "After about 15 minutes I got through the turnstiles by
          brute force - just by brute force".

     - A. I can’t recall saying "brute force".   It certainly was
     not the intention in the statement.

Q. What were you intending to describe? - A. It was rather
   difficult to get through the crowd because there were so many
   people in it.

Q.   "It was difficult to get through the crowd? -   A. Yes.

Q.   And whatever phrase you used for it, you made   your way through
     the crowd? - A. Eventually, yes.

Q. When you came along to go into the tunnel what time would that
   be? - A. Round about 5-to-3.

Q.   The teams were already out? - A. Yes.

Q. And you could see that as you went along the      tunnel? - A. That
   is right.

Q. The crowd of people ahead of you did not obscure your view? -
   A. No, once I had got through the turnstile going up the
   tunnel it was reasonably easy, going up there.

Q. So you were not part of any surge going down the tunnel? - A.
   No.

Q. And if you had wanted to you could have turned round and come,
   back - if you had wanted to? - A. There was not much point
   after queueing up to get there.

Q. No, if you had wanted to it was free enough for you to be able
   to turn round and come back, was it? - A. If I had wanted to,
   yes.

Q. And having got to the end of the tunnel you could see the
   state of the terrace? - A. I could see it was rather full.

Q. Did you know where it was you were intending to go to? What
   sort of position did you want to take up? - A. Sort of as
   central to the goal as possible to get a reasonable view.

Q.^ So you decided to make your way through that crowd? - A. Yes,
   j to try and get as good a view as I could.

Q.j Would it be right to say you pushed forward to get into that
  i position, through the crowd? - A. Yes.  I certainly did not
4
                                     102



                                                         D.T. JONES


         intend on staying at the back of the crowd, put it that way.

    Q. Had the game started by the time you got to the position you
       had chosen? - A. It was just starting, and then I got moved
       around and then I got turned round in the force.  I only
       actually saw one kick of the game.

    Q. One point, if I may, before I sit down. When you had come
       through the turnstiles you say you went to the toilet? - A.
       Yes.

    Q.   And you knew where that was and had no difficulty in finding
         it? - A. Not to the best of my knowledge, no.

    Q. Thank you.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much.

              THE WITNESS:     Could I perhaps may be add something
         before I finish?

    Q.      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, please do. - A. As far as I
         am concerned I think really the disaster was caused by two
         central themes, really, the lack of co-ordination and control
         outside by the Police, and second of all, the lack of
         stewarding within Hillsborough.   I think really if they had
         had a couple of stewards in the tunnel telling people it was
         so full in the two pens and to go round the side, I think the
         disaster could have been averted, and there would have been 95
         more people going home.

    Q. Thank you.

                              PAUL MCCAFFREY Called

                             Examined bv MR. GOLDSACK:

    Q. Are you Paul McCaffrey? - A. I am.

    Q. A resident of the Wirral? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you came across on 15th April. Did you visit a public
       house before going to the ground? - A. I did.

    Q. How much did you have to drink there? - A. 2-and-a-half pints.

    Q. What time did you leave the public house? - A. About 20-past-
       2, 25-past-2.

    Q. Did you know how long it would take you to get to the ground
       from there? - A. Yes.

    Q. How long? - A. Last year it took us about 10 minutes.

    Q. At the time you left the public house were there other
       Liverpool supporters still there? - A. As we were on our way
       three or four supporters were coming in.
?'
                                 103
                                                    P. MCCAFFREY




     Q. There were still people coming in when you came out? - A. They
        were the only other supporters in there, though.

     Q. What time did you in fact arrive at the ground? - A. Round
        about 20-to-3.

     Q. And you no doubt saw the mass of people we have heard
        described? - A. Yes.




                                        /Q. Did you join that.
                          104
                                    p . m c c a f fr e y



Did you join that mass? - A. Yes.

Did you stay part of it? - A. No.

What did you decide to do? - A. I climbed over the
fencing alongside the river bank with my friend.

The fence right along by the side of the river? - A. That
is right.

Had you gone through the outer perimeter gates? -A. Yes,
I must have.

You were in those heading towards turnstile B? - A. Yes.

Then you made your way across to the right and over a
fence by the side of the river? - A. Yes, we saw other
supporters doing the same thing so we just followed.

Would you look at some photographs so we can identify
where you mean?    It is the smaller bundle of "West
Midlands 1”.    If you would look at photograph 5.   You
see there a number of gates, large blue gates? - A. Yes.

Immediately behind the right hand side gate there appears
to be a fence? - A. Yes.

Is that the fence over which you climbed? - A. No, sorry,
we must have got over it.   We got back over there.   We
must have got over the fence before then.

Somewhere before going through the perimeter gate? - A.
Before the perimeter, it must have been.

You say other supporters were also going over that fence?
- A. That is correct.

Can you give us some idea of the number? - A. About ten
in front of myself and my friend.

Where were you hoping that would lead you? - A. By the
turnstiles.

In other words, you wanted to go over the fence, along
the side and back over? - A. That is right.

Is that what in fact you did? - A. Yes.

Can you help us on the plan where you came back over the
fence? - A. Very close to the turnstiles, more or less
alongside.

To the right...
                             105
                                        p . Mc Ca f f r e y


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         You came over that fence, is
that right? - A. Yes.

      MR. GOLDSACKr   Were you conscious as you came back
over that fence that there were barriers just to your
right? - A. No.

Did you see what is gate C as you got back over the
fence? - A. Yes.

Ware you opposite that or nearly opposite? - A. Yes,
directly opposite.

At the time you came back over the fence was that gate
open or closed? - A. It was open.

Had you seen it being opened? - A. No.

At what stage, if at all, were you conscious of people
going through that gate? - A. We were one of the first
through it.

In effect had you jumped the queue by going round the
fence? - A. Yes.

Once you had gone through that gate did you head for the
tunnel? - A. Yes.

Had you been to the ground before? - A. Quite a few
times, yes.

Did you know there was any other way on to the terrace? -
A. Yes.

So it was choice you went through the tunnel? - A. Yes, I
went last year so I just had every intention of standing
where I did the     previous year.

Did you   in fact   go straight through the tunnelordidyou
stop on   the way   through? - A. We did stop.

Why was that? -     A. We stopped and both urinatedonthe
tunnel walls.

Were you the only people doing that in the tunnel? - A.
No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         In the tunnel? - A. In the
tunnel.

      MR. GOLDSACK:   How many were doing that in the
tunnel as you went through? - A. There was a line at the
side all along the tunnel.
                           106
                                   p . m c c a f fr e y


All along one side? - A. No, along both sides.

Both sides.   When you got to the end of the tunnel, in
to which pen did you go? - A. On the right hand side, pen


How far down it did you go? -A. As we made our way into
the back of the tunnel, from the back of the tunnel in to
the ground, we just managed to get through the first few
people and then within minutes we were pushed to the
front.

When you say to the front, how close to the front were
you? - A. We were pushed against the last barrier between
the fence at the front and ourselves.

So the row of barriers closest to the perimeter fence? -
A. Yes.

Were you aware there was also a fence at the side of the
pen? - A. No, not at the time.

When did you become aware that there was a fence there? -
A. Later on.

Can you tell us how far from that side fence you were? -
A. Well, we were standing by the barrier that snapped, so
how far that is from there, I don't know.

Let   me approachit from another direction.    Could you
see   the gate in the perimeter fence? - A. Yes.

Was that directly in front or to one side? - A.No, to
our left.

How much to your left? - A. About from me to you.

When you were first taken down through the crowd by the
surge from behind, which side of the barrier did you end
up? - A. With it to our chests.

Were you happy with that position? - A. No.

What did you do to alter it? - A. I said to my friend,
4,We are not going to stay here.  We will get
underneath".

Were you able to do that? - A. Yes, Terry got through
first and I followed him.

Were you then standing with the barrier immediately in to
your back? - A. That is right.
                           107
                                  p . Mc Ca f f r e y


What was the next thing that happened? - A. Well, while
we were getting under the fence ourselves a couple of
other.fans did the same thing and then usually when the
fence is behind you, the barrier, you are usually OK,
but this was not the case.   There was still quite a lot
of pressure on us and within minutes the barrier snapped.

What did you actually hear or feel that told you the
barrier had cracked? - A. We heard quite a loud crack and
the barrier hit me on my left leg.

What effect did that have on you physically? - A. We went
further forward.

Did you remain on your feet? - A. Yes.

What about people around you? - A. People behind us fell
face forward.

Face forward behind you? - A. On to the floor, yes.

Do you know how many people fell face forward when the
barrier went? - A. Quite a few.

Could you see whether there was anyone by the perimeter
gate at that stage? - A. Yes.

Who? - A. There were some Policemen there.

Some Policemen? -A. Yes.

Was any effort being made at that stage to attract their
attention? - A. Yes.

By just one or two people or by a number? - A. Quite a
considerable amount of people were trying to attract
their attention.

What was being shouted? - A. "Help", "Let us out".

Do you recall hearing anyone shouting anything about a
barrier collapsing? - A. No, only myself to my friend.

At first what was the reaction of the Police by the gate?
- A. They were just looking in at first.   I do not think
they realised what was going on.

Did you see that gate open? - A. Yes.

Just once or more than once? - A. Twice.

How many people went out the first time? - A. Not very
many.
                             108
                                     p . Mc Ca f f r e y


Q. Who closed it? - A. The Police.

Q. When it was opened the second time did it stay open? - A.
   Not for long.

Q. Who closed it the second time? - A. The Police again.

Q. Do you know whether it was the same Policeman or a
   different Policeman? - A. Yes, the same.   There were two
   or three Policemen there so which actual one I do not
   know.

Q. Then did it open a third time? - A. I do not know.

Q. Did you remain conscious? - A. Yes.

Q. How did you eventually get out? - A. The cleared all the
   people from behind us.

Q. So the pressure went from behind rather than in front? -
   A. Yes.

Q. When you were able to see what had happened around you,
   what was the situation immediately near you? - A. We
   could not physically move out ourselves. We were trapped
   by our legs with bodies.

Q. How many people did it appear to you had fallen as a
   result of the barrier collapsing?   Could you estimate
   it? - A. About 20, possibly more.

Q. Of those who appeared to have fallen forward at that
   stage, do you know whether any of those were able to get
   up at all? - A. No, not to my knowledge.

Q. So you had to wait until other people had moved those
   people away before you could get out? - A. Yes.

Q. I think once you were clear yourself you helped to clear
   others? - A. That is right.

Q. Immediately before you heard the crack of the barrier go,
   had there been any significant movement of the crowd? -
   A. Yes.   As we came through the tunnel, we had only
   taken about five or six steps and then it was just as
   though somebody had pushed you in the back and we did not
   stop until we got to the barrier.

Q. That was the surge that took you to the barrier? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You then got yourself in front of the barrier? - A. Yes.
                                   p . Mc Ca f f r e y


Were you then conscious of any further surge at the
moment the barrier went? - A. Yes, it just did not cease.
It was just like someone turning on the pressure.

           Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

I am not sure you have mentioned this in your evidence,
but when you arrived at the ground   you saw the crowd
ahead of you? - A. Yes.

But despite that I think you were able to see there were
uniformed Officers present who were not mounted, they
were on foot? - A. By the turnstiles, yes.

You could see at the time you arrived a number of
uniformed Officers by the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Those were the turnstiles you were intending to go
through? - A. No, they were more for the stands.

You could see across the fence? - A. Yes.

Did you notice whether there were any Officers down by
the turnstiles for the terracing? - A. There may have
been but I cannot recall.

You got to there at about   2.45? - A. Yes.

You decided to go over a fence and    by the side of the
river to cut out those who were waiting? - A. Yes.

You weren't the only one who did that, were you? - A. No.

There were quite a few people who did that? - A. Yes.

Was that because you were anxious to get in to see the
start of the match or what? - A. Yes, and to get out of
the crush as well.

Were you in the crush whilst you were on...- A. Yes.

Where were you in a crush before you got over the fence?
- A. It must have been just outside the perimeter fences.

Do you mean outside the railings on Leppings Lane, on the
pavement? - A. Yes.

There was already a crush  there which you decided to get
through.   You had gone through that, had you? -A.
Through where?

That crush. - A. No, we went to the side.

Had you come over the bridge? - A. Yes.
                          110
                                     p . Mc Ca f f r e y


So you decided not to go into it but hop over and through
the vegetation? - A. Yes.

And then over the fence? - A. Yes.

A difficult journey to make? - A. Not really, no.

What were you intending to do then once you had got over
the fence? - A. To get back into the terraces.

That would have meant that having got over the fence, if
the gate had not been open, you would have thrust your
way into the people waiting to go through the turnstiles?
- A. Yes, probably.

How many were with you at that time? - A. Just me and my
friend, but other people had climbed over the fence the
same as us.

You were not the first to do it and there were obviously
a number of people who all had that idea? - A. Yes.

Both before you and after you? - A. Yes.

Having got in to the ground through the gate you then
made your way towards the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Is it to be taken from what you describe that was
happening in the tunnel that there was not a great surge
of people going down it? - A. Yes.

There was time to stop and do whatever people were doing
there? - A. Yes.

Is that a clear picture that you have, of men along both
sides of the tunnel behaving in that way at this time? -
A. Yes.

Had you been to this ground before? - A. Yes.

How many times? - A. Three or four.

Do you know where the lavatories are? - A. No.

Having gone along the tunnel, if you had chosen at that
stage to go back and out of it could you have done? - A.
Yes.

You decided to go on and at the mouth of the tunnel you
observed the state of the terrace? - A. Yes.

Were the teams already out on the field? - A. Yes, they
were.
                           Ill
                                   p . Mc Ca f f r e y


Preparing to start the kick-off? - A. Yes.

So far as you were aware had the ends been chosen? - A.
Yes.

So it is after the toss and moments before the kick-off.
Was Grobbelaar in goal? - A. Yes.   As far as I know.    I
did not actually see Bruce Grobbelaar.   The only player
I noticed was Alan Hanson.  It came as a surprise to see
he was playing.

Your friend said something to you about the state of the
crowd in the terrace? - A. Yes, he said it was quite
full, "What are we doing in here?"

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   He said what? - A. He said
it was very full, "What did you want to come here for?"

       MR. WOODWARD:  What did you say to that? - A. I
said, "This is where I stood last year.   It is a good
spec."

So you were intent, notwithstanding the state of what was
plain for you to see and your friend to see, to make your
way into it? - A. Yes.

How did you do that if it was that full? - A. When you
say "that full", it wasn't that full where you could not
make your way through.

How did you make your way through it? - A. Just by
pushing through.

Were   you the only onedoing that? - A. No.

What position did you come to? - A. After a few steps
inside after we had pushed through a few people, we were
pushed to the front.

You pushed to the front? - A. We were pushed to the front
with the surge.

What surge? - A. The surge of people from behind us.

Did there come a time when you took up a position from
which you were moved by something? - A. No.

You came to near where a barrier failed? - A. Yes.

Was that behind you or in front of you? - A. It was
behind us when it failed.
                               112
                                         p . Mc Ca f f r e y


Q«    In some manner you got down across the whole of that     pen
     to a position in front of that barrier which failed?      - A.
     Yes.

Q. By the time you got to that position had the game
   started? - A. I cannot remember.

Q.    I do not know whether you are aware that there was a near
     goal at the Forest end? - A. Not until after the game,
     no.

Q. Did you see anybody on that barrier that failed, did you
   see anybody at any stage jumping up and down on it? - A.
   No.

Q. Standing on it? - A. No.




                                     /Q. Did you see
                                  113


                                          p.   m   .   Mc C a f f r e y



Q. Did you see anybody on the barriers round there climbing
   up on to the barriers and, as it were, diving into the
   crowd?   A.    I could see people coming over the top
   of us, yes, but I didn't know, obviously, they were from
   behind, so ---

Q. Larking about, standing on the barriers and diving into
   the people?   A.   No.

Q. You did not see that?     A.         NO.

Q. Whilst you were approaching the ground, did you hear any
   public address telling peoplenot to join the crowd
   outside the Leppings Lane terrace turnstiles?   A.   No.

Q. Did you hear anything from a police vehicle?                           A.    No.

Q. Did you notice a Police vehicle outside?   A.                          Just the
   usual vans that they have and motorcycles.

Q. That may be because of the time which you were there.
   A.   Yes.

                   Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. McCaffrey, I wonder if you would look at Photograph
   17 in the blue bundle in front of you.  17 in the large
   bundle, thank you.   That is the photograph of the view of
   anybody approaching the tunnel, is it not?   A.  Yes.

Q. I fully appreciate that it is clearer now on that photograph
   than it was on the day but I am sure that you will agree
   with me that the signs for all three toilets, the   two
   Gents and the one Ladies, could hardly be more clearly
   indicated.     A. Not in that picture, no.

Q. You have been to the ground on numerous occasions?
   A.   Well, as I say, three or four times, yes.

Q. In different conditions on each time?   A.    Well,                         last
   year and then the Semi-Final against Arsenal.

Q. Is it really your evidence that it is an inability to
   know where the toilets are that causes you and others to
   do what you did in the tunnel?     A.  Not always, no.

Q. Sometimes it is really done asa matter of almost bravado,
   is it not?     A.I wouldn't say that, no, really.   It
   is more desperate, really, you know, when it comes to a
   stage where   youcan't hold on any longer, you just ---

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Least deviation from your
     route?   A.   Probably, yes.

Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   The deviation required in this case
     would be one of approximately 6 ft., I think, on a route
                            114



                                       p.   m   .    Mc C a f f r e y



   that has taken you for a mile or more?           A.      Probably.

Q. Forgive me, I do not wish to prolong your embarrassment,
   particularly when you are the one person who has had
   the candour to admit what happened, but I do want to
   face the consequences because much has been written about
   the inadequacy of provision of various facilities for
   football supporters.  It is a fact, is it not, that on
   this occasion the men urinating against the side of
   this tunnel lined both sides for the entire length of
   the tunnel?   A.   Best part of the entire length, yes.

Q. You could see both sides - both lengths of the tunnel,
   both sides?   A.   Yes.

Q. And that is not an uncommon sight when going through
   that tunnel.   A.   I wouldn't know, I don't go every week.

Q. But on the occasions when you have been, that has been
   the common sight.   A.    I couldn't say that.  That
   is the first time I have ever done it there.

Q. You would accept that the consequences of that quantity
   of men behaving in that way are extremelyunpleasant for
   everybody standing on the terraces below the prescribed
   or steep slope?   A.   Yes.

Q. And I am sure that having unpleasantly had to face those
   consequences now, you would wish to say that it is something
   that neither you nor any football supporter should do
   again?   A.   Correct, yes.

        MR. GLASGOW:   I am grateful to you for your candour,
   thank you.

                  Re-examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. Can I explore a little bit more this barrier that broke?
   Forgive me for having to into it but it may be important.
   Can I ask you to look at Photograph 26 in the big bundle,
   please.   The one that has got a front like this.   No. 26,
   have you got it?   A.   Yes.

Q. Yousee there the barrier that has gone?   In fact, there
   appear to be two sections that have gone.   And you see
   that in front of the barrier it is a little bit difficult,
   perhaps, from this angle to get a true picture.  Perhaps
   in order to get the angle we can have a look at Photograph
   45, which is taken from above.   Do you see that roughly
   directly in front of the barrier or the part that has gone,
   if you compare those two photographs, is the gate?   Do
   you see that?   A.   Yes.
                                    115


                                                  p.   m   .   Mc C a f f r e y



Q. Can you help us as to where you were in relation to that
   gate?   A.  Probably quite near it.

Q. Do you remember seeing it?             Perhaps you do not?                 A.    No.

Q. And you were, you think, how far in front of that barrier
   when it went?   A.   It was directly behind us.

Q.   Immediately behind?       A.     Yes.

Q.   And you were aware of this crack?           A.        Yes.

Q. And immediately you heard the crack did you feel something
   going into your back?   A.   Yes.

Q.    I think you told us that — was it your leg that   gotcaught
     up in the barrier?     A.I thought it was the barrier     that
     hit my leg, yes.

Q. You thought it was the barrier that hit your leg?
   A.   Yes.

Q. That presumably would be the cross-section ----                           A. Top
   s e c ti on .

Q. Top section cross-bar, as it were, of the barrier.  Did
   you get thrown forwards when you got hit in the back?
   A.   Yes.

Q. And on your leg.   Did people in front of you fall down?
   A.   There was alreac^ people on the floor in front of me.

Q. Even before the barrier broke, there were people on
   the floor in front of you?   A.   Yes.

Q.    Do you know what   had caused them to fall to the floor                      or
     go to the floor?     A.    No, probably exhaustion.

Q.   Just the crush?      A.   Yes.

Q.    But when the barrier broke, did you        fall on top of them?
     A.    No.

Q. Were you sort of catapulted forward then?                     A.       On top
   of them.

Q. On top of them.   Did you go right down to the perimeter
   fence or just, as it were, go on top of them?   Which was
   it?   A.   The latter.

Q. Does thatmean that effectively you vvere lying on top of
   them after the barrier broke?   A.  Standing.

Q. STanding on top of them?   So you sort of were knocked
   upwards, as it were, to end up standing on top of them?
                                      116



                                                        p.   m   .    Mc C a f f r e y



     A.   When you say     "upwards", no.             The bodies were all
     round our feet.       Our legs were,           like, in between the
     bodies.

Q. Upwards is wrong because, of course, the terracing goes
   down so the bodies would have been at a lower level than
   you.   A.   That's right, yes.

Q. And you sort of were pushed forward,                as it were,             but you
   remained upright?   A.   Yes.

Q.   And there were people in front of you, were there?                                  A.   Yes.

Q.   Remaining upright    too.        A.      Yes.

Q. Maybe you were not aware but do you know what happened to
   the people behind you who had been the other side of the
   barrier when it broke?   A.   No, other than them falling
   over, no.

Q. When you had got out and escaped, did you come back at all
   and look at the pen at any stage, when it was emptier?
   A.   When I was pulled out?

Q. Yes.     A.   I turned round and helped pull other people out.

Q. Did you see any parts of the broken barrier when you did
   that?   A.   No.

                     DAVID STEPHEN MOORE,              called

                          Examined by MR. PHILIPS:


Q.   Are you David Stephen Moore?              A.     Yes.

Q. And are you from Wallaseyin Merseyside?                       A.         Yes.

Q.   And did you go to the match?              A.     Yes.

Q.    What time did you arrive at the area of the                      turnstiles?
     A.    The area of the turnstiles at 2.30.

Q.    What was the situation when you got there?   A.   We had
     arrived at 2.30 to meet a family friend who was middle-
     aged.   We had a Stand ticket we were going to give to
     him - we had travelled down with, myself and eight
     of my friends.    We all had similar tickets.

Q. You all had --- ?  A.   Similar tickets for the same
   sort of area of the ground.

Q. What area was that?           A.        Leppings Lane,        Entrance B, standing.

Q. The terrace?      A.      Yess
                              117



                                           D.   S.   MOORE



Q. But you had also got with you a STand ticket for a friend
   of yours?   A.   Yes.

Q. Did you meet your friend?   A.   Yes, and we needed the
   ground ticket he had to give to one of the fellows that
   was travelling with us because he wanted that ticket to
   get into the ground.

Q. You were going to swop?    A.    Yes.

Q. When you got there at 2.30, you were concerned, of course,
   to get on to the right-hand side of the entrance, were
   you not?   A.   Yes.

Q. Did you know where you were going to go?           A.     Yes.

Q. What was going on on the right-hand side of the entrance
   when you got there?   A.   There was quite a crowd
   pushing and jostling but it was -- it appeared to us to
   be no more serious or more hazardous, shall we say, than
   n o rm al .

Q. Did yousee any policemen about?   A.   When you approach
   the terraces from theLeppings Lane end, when you go
   through the perimeter gate, I saw two, one Mounted
   Policeman and one on foot.    The one on foot was
   virtually right up against the wall by the terraces.
   The Mounted Policeman was ---   It actually does not
   show it on the diagram but there is a crash barrier
   about 3 ft. high that runs the length -- towards the
   end there, that's right.   There was a Mounted Policeman
   on the other side of that, between that and the River
   Don.   Wemade our way down towards that.

Q. You went down towards that crash;* barrier? A.   Well,
   went down towards those turnstiles to get in, and the
   policeman drove his horse at the crash barrier, forcing
   quite a lot of people to jump out of the way.

Q. Can you just explain that a little bit more, please?
   You say he drove his horse at the crash barriers?
   A.   Yes.  Sideways at the "people. I don't know whether
   he realised there was a crash barrier there but I think
   what he was trying to do was trying to bring the people
   that were going down by the River Don, push them in
   towards the turnstile.

Q. These were people on the other side of a crash barrier,
   were they, and he was trying to get them away from there.
   A.   Yes.

Q. Back into the main yard?    A.    I think so, yes.

Q. And was there just one crash barrier or a set of crash
   barriers away from the wall there?   A.   I only saw one.
                                 118


                                           D.   S.   MOORE



          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can we see that on Photograph
     4 of the slim bundle, West Midlands 1?

          MR. PHILIPS:     Yes, that is right!

Q. There seem to be fixed barriers there,        is that right?
   A.   That's right.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR: Is it   the   onebeside    the   van?
     A.   By the white   van, yes.

Q.        MR. PHILIPS: And there are    something like five
     uprights, I think, before you get to the wall?   A.    Yes.

Q. And you say people were going to the right-hand side of
   that barrier?   A.   Yes.

Q. And the man on horseback was also on the right-hand side
   of that?   A.   Yes, as you are looking at the photograph,
   he was on the right, yes.

Q. In which direction was he going then, with the horse?
   A.   His horse was facing towards us as we were going
   in, so it would be away from the ground.

Q. Yes.   How was the horse moved?   A.   It is difficult
   to say, sort of edgeways on, sideways on, parallel to that
   bar, pushing the people that way.  Whether or not he knew
   the bar was there, I don't know.

Q. What happened to it?     Did it strike the bar, or what?
   A.   Well, the horse actual ly struck some people who
   were by the side of this bar and we were quite near it
   and myself and two of my friends managed to duck
   underneath the bar.     People were making way for you to
   get in out of the way of the horse, really.

Q. What happened?   Did this have any effect on the rest
   of the crowd on the other side of the barrier?   A.   Yes,
   it compressed them towards the wall.   We were fortunate,
   we ended up about ten or twelve people? away from the
   turn sti les .

     And were you able to go through the turnstiles?          A.    Yes.

     How long had it taken you to get through there from
     getting to the ground?   A.   From meeting our friend
     at half past two at the end of Leppings Lane through to
     inside the turnstiles, ten minutes.

Q. Did you find that the crowd you were in moved forward
   at all?   A.   Not really, no.   As I say, we were fortunate
   to get into the ground because of the actions of the
                                           D.    S.   MOORE



     police horse.   We didn't know there was a barrier there
     until the police horse sort ofmoved us towards it and we
     got in virtually without any trouble.   There was quite
     a lot of pressure at the back of us, but we got in
     without too much bother.

Q. Did you have any difficulties going through the turnstile
   itself?    A.   Yes, because they were so narrow and the
   force behind you, you were sort of having to use your
   arms like this to force yourself away.    As soon as you
   let go, you were through the turnstile.

Q.   Did you give up your ticket?   A.   Yes.

Q.   Did you get part of it back?   A.    Yes.

Q.    And you were then in the yard on the other side of the
     turnstiles?     A.   That's right.   As I say,we travelled
     down with several other people.     We got through the
     turnstiles and I was through -- I think I was through
     first and virtually at exactly the same time one of my
     friends came through and we decided to try and wait
     for the rest of our friends.     Within a minute we found
     a third member of our party and we decided to wait
     about 5 yards behind the turnstiles on the ground side
     to see whether we could recognise anyone else.

Q. So you were waiting about there in that yard on the
   other side of the turnstiles.   Could you see that
   Gate C - the large concertina gate?   A.   Yes.

Q. Did you see anything happen with that gate?   A.   Yes,
   we had been in the ground about 2 minutes and the concertina
   gate opened about 5 ft. or 6 ft.   Nobody came in.   We
   wondered why it was open.

Q. Did you see anybody go out?     A.   No.   We thought it
   was just to let some policemen in because thet appeared
   what happened.   The gate closed.     We were still looking
   for our friends, obvioasjtyy r so our attention was more
   directed at the turnstiles.     Within the space of the
   next few minutes the gate was opened again and between
   100 and 200 people came in.

Q. Could you see why it was opened on the second occasion?
   A.   No.

Q. Did you see anybody being taken towards the gate before it
   was opened?  A.   N6.

Q. You saw it being opened?   A.   We saw it open.  The first
   time we saw it opened for no reason.   The second time
   we saw it open, as I say, about 100 or 200 people poured
   in.
                                 120

                                                 D.   S.    MOORE



Q.    Was it opened fully or just part of the way?                  A.   No,
     the second time about 10 ft., I would think.

Q. Between 100 and 200 people came in?   A.   Yes,                  it was
   only opened for seconds and then closed again.

Q. Did you see what was done to close it?     A.       No, we
   were just ---   The people were running towards us.
   We were on the same level as them and obviously the people
   were ---   Well, they didn't actually run, they walked
   in the first time, or it seemed to us t h e y w a l k e d in
   the first time, but at the front of it people^were having
   to go a bit quicker because of the press behind them and
   somebody fell over and broke his glasses and his watch and
   he went off to find a policeman.    He said, "I am going
   to tell him it is a bit dangerous." And he went           off
   and we didn't think anything of it and he came back and
   he just said, "Well, that policeman has just abused me
   there" and he just disappeared.

Q. But you say it was only open for a few seconds and then
   it was closed.   A.   Yes.

Q. While it was open, did you see anything on the far side
   of the gate?    A. The only thing you could notice on
   the far side of the gate, really, was police.

Q.   A lot of police?     A.   Yes,    I would   say a lot of police.

Q.   Were they mounted or on foot?       A.      They were on foot.

Q.    Did you see a Mounted Policeman on the far side of the
     gate?    A. No.       There may have been one there but
     it was onlyopen for a few seconds.

Q.    Alright, so after this 100 or 200 people came in,             where
     did they go for?       A.  The majority of them went            through
     main Turnstile B because as you come through the                ground
     that is the first thing that hits you.      It says,            "Standing"
     and then "B" on the only entrance that is visible.

Q.    You mean the tunnel?  A.   Yes, the tunnel.                 The only
     entrance that is visible is the tunnel.

Q. These people went into the tunnel?            A.        Yes.

Q.    Did you see that gate again?  A.    Yes.   I said about
     two or three minutes after it was opened for the second
     time it was opened again for a third time.    This would
     be about tento three then and a lot of people   came in
     then, I would think possibly 400 or 500.

Q. Was it opened completely then or just part of the way?
   A.   I would think again about 12, 15 ft.   It was opened
   slightly more each time.   When we saw the rush of people
                                                D.   S.   MOORE



     coming in then, we decided to go into the ground.

Q.   You went into the   ground?    A.     Yes.

Q.    You joined the people who were coming through the
     gate?     A.   No, we let that initial rush through go and
     then we decided to go into the ground.

Q.   But you joined the mass of people who were coming through
     the gate, and did you go through the tunnel?    A.   Yes.

Q.   And did you get to the terrace?       A.        Yes, we did.

Q.    Andwhich side did you go when you got          to the terrace?
     A.    Right-hand side.

Q. Right-hand side,      into Pen No. 3?     A.       That's right.

Q.    Where did you go to in Pen  No. 3?   A.    When we got
     about 2 or 3 yards through   the tunnel onto the terracing::
     it was obvious that there appeared to be too many people
     in the ground and we decided to make our way if we
     could possibly to the back on the right-hand side to try
     and get out of the way of the people coming through
     the tunnel.   This wasn't possible and we were forced down
     at a' slight angle to the front.

Q.    Where were you actually aiming for then?     A.  AT the
     back.     That's it, there.   We were aiming to try and get
     there.

Q, Did you see a gate into the next pen at the back?                A.   We
never got there.   We were pushed down at an angle.

Q.   I know you never got there.    I asked whether you saw a
     gate at the back there?     Did you know there was a gate
     at the back there?   Had you been on a previous occasion?
     A.   I had been last year but I had a Stand ticket for
     last year.

Q.    You were just hoping to get to the back wall and you say
     youwere forced down  at an angle?   A.   Yes.

Q. How far down the terrace did you go?   A.   We ended up
   about 7or 8 ft. no more than 10ft. from the front.

Q.   From   the front?   A.    From the perimeter fence,          yes.

Q.    How near were you tothe gate that opened on to the pitch?
     A.    It would be about 8, 9 yards to our left.

Q.   To your left?        A. Yes, as you were looking at the pitch.

Q.   Were you close then to the railing fence that divides
     that pen from No. 2?   A.   Yes, we were fairlyclose to
     that.
                                  122


                                                   D.   S.    MORRE



Q. Were you near to a barrier?          A.   Yes, we were near
   the barrier that collapsed.

Q. Were you near to the part that actually went or to the
   other part of the barrier?    Do you understand?
   A.  We saw one barrier that collapsed.    Whether or
   not it is the one that you mean, I don't know.

Q. Let us look at it, shall we?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Trythe plan.

          MR. PHILIPS:    Sir, yes, that is an idea but             I
     do not seem to have a copy ^immediately in front of            me.
     I have one now, thank you verymich:

Q.    You have got a set of plans there andthe second of
     those, Drawing No. 2, shows the terrace, and it shows
     the barriers as well.    Do you see where the gate is?
     A.    Yes, I can show you now where we were.   We were
     there.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Just behind ---?            A.      The
     first barrier that is solid.

Q. Just behind the stanchion where the barrier went but a
   bit of it was left?   A.   That's right.

Q.        MR. PHILIPS:   Yes, and just to show you that on
     a photograph, would you look at No. 26 in the larger
     bundle, please.   Do you see that?   A.   Yes.

Q. Do you see there there is the end, the stanchion that
   is standing seems now to have some black plastic or tape
   wrapped round it.   A.  Yes.

Q.   Is that about where youwere standing?         A.        Yes.

Q. Where you showed us?      A.     Yes.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Somebody thinks they have
     seen you on a photograph.

          MR. COLLINS:    10(a).




                                        (Have" you got a bundle...)
                                   D .S . MOORE


Have you got a bundle of South Yorkshire photographs,
Composite Album 2, phonograph PR1/10A. Do you see
that photograph? Do you think that is you? - A. It is.
I know it is because I can recognise my friend that is
next to me.

We see there that you are indeed to the left of the gate
that opens up on to the pitch, aren't you, and about the
position that you have described to us. That is taken,
it seems, at 2-minutes-past-3.

      MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, the corrected time is 15.02.

      MR. PHILIPS:    Thank you very much, that is very
helpful.

Can you tell us please exactly what did happen when this
barrier broke. Wereyou conscious of it breaking? ~ A. No,
we weren’t really because my friend that was next to me
on the right was supporting through his arms, you cannot
sea her there, a girl who had actually died in his arms.
I had my arm up like that trying to get extra space. He
had the same but the girl did actually die there. She
was dead then and we were trying to shout to the Policeman
on the railings at the side of the pen that there were
dead people because she was not the only one that was dead
by then. In front of us on the floor were people who
were dead then.

We see at the time this picture was taken, certainly
there appeared to be people low down below the perimeter
fence. Were people in fact lying down then? - A. Yes.
I had hold of somebody's hand in front of me like that
andthey just slipped through my grasp and I was looking
down for him and I looked down at somebody who was dead.

Did you hear anything that you afterwards associated with
the collapse of the barrier? - A. Mo.

Did you in fact eventually get out of the pen that you
were in? - A. Yes, there were people climbing up over
the top. We were pulling out people who were injured
but stuck in between. It is hard to describe* People
were five or six deep in front of us the. Just after
that picture was     taken everythingwas flattened in front
of us, five or six people dead. There were people under­
neath them who were injured. We were just pulling them
out. We pulled this big fellow out and he was alive.

Which way were you pulling him out? - A. lack.

Back to the terrace? - A. From the front back up the
terraces.

Was there space then to do that? - A. Yes.
                                  D.S. MOORE


Were you getting assistance from anirjsody? - A. Just generally
other supporters. A couple of Policemen had climbed in from
the side.

What from number 2 Pen? - A. Yes, the one on the right.

They climbed over the side? - A. Yes, we physically dragged
two of these Policemen to help us carry this chap out on
to the pitch. We got him out on to the pitch and St. John’s
Ambulance came and he was okay.

And you yourself, how did you get out on to the pitch? - A.
We carried this fellow out through the front perimeter gate
that was open.

Now I know that you in fact spent a lot of the rest of the
afternoon carrying people from there and from the pitch to
the Ambulance Room that had been set up, didn't you? - A.
Yes, we went back in. Aidan, this is my friend's brother
was still inside the ground and so we thought, and as I
say we were missing five or six friends, so we decided to
push our way back into the ground and help as much as we could.

You did what you could to revive people who had been crushed
and injured. Did you have any training yourself in first
aid? - A. No, I know how to give people the Kiss of Life,
that is all.

Yes, well I don't want to go over all the details of that
but of course in not going over those details I don't want
you to think I am making light of everything that you did.

I think eventually you were able to leave the ground. What
time did you leave? - A. We got outside the ground, right
outside the ground at 20“to-5.

      MR. PHILIPS;   Yes, thank you very much.


              Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON;

Just one matters  I want to emphasise what has just been
said, you took a particularly active part in assisting
with the rescue attempts to be made later, did you not?
- A. Yes, a lot of that was to keep my friend's mind off
his brother.

Perhaps thererare many reasons for it.

May I just deal with one matter: after the event you saw
a number of Police Officers, after your friends had gathered
together? - A. Yes.

In the light of what you had seen did you make some remark
to the Police Officers? - A. I didn't, one of my friends did.
                                   D.S. MOORE


He went over. Well a lot of people were shouting to the
effects  "Where were you? If you had been here beforehand
this would not have happened". One of the Officers, I
don’t know his rank but he had a flat hat on saids "We
were only called in 20 minutes ago".

He said he was only called in 20 minutes ago? - A. Yes.

Can you tell us what time that exchange took place? - A.
It would be 20-to-5, quarter-to-5.

Again we are dealing in generalities. Is it fair to say
that the complaints being made were not that the Officers
had not assisted as best they could when the real events
were realised, but they had not been present before? - A.
To those Policemen outside who could not really have
assisted inside there was not jmuch point in that, but there
were Police, as I have said in my statement, on the inside
of the ground just milling about, but then again so were
a lot of supporters.

It is a different matter. Just to deal with it now you
have raised it, you are saying, are you, that even when
there was obviously a need for assistance a number of
Officers were present and no doubt desperate to help but
apparently not able to, did not know what to do, there was
no command structure or the like? - A. I don't know whether
"desperate to help" is the right phrase really because the
older Police Officers, I don't know, seemed to know what
they were doing. The younger Police Officers .... We in
fact took a boy of about 14 who had been injured off a
Policewoman who was crying. We consoled two or three
Policemen after the game. One of my friends, again this
is just report, one of my friends said the Police Officer
he spoke to saids  "I have only been in the Force eight
weeks".

      MR. JACKSON:   Thank you.

      MR. WOODWARD: Sir, I don't propose to cross-
examine this witness.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I would like to thank you
for all you did.

      THE WITNESS:    Thank you sir.


                     MAXWELL ROSS Called
                 Examined by MR. COLLINS;

Mr. Ross, you are Maxwell Ross.    Is that right? - A. That
is right, sir.

You come from the Wirral. I think you are a senior Officer
of Customs and Excise? - A. Yes, that is true.
•>*
  dc
                                   126

                                           M.C. ROSS.


       Q. Are you a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes, I am a Kop season
          ticket holder.

       Q. And you had a ticket, I think, to the semi-final.   Is that
          a terrace ticket? - A. Terrace ticket, yes.

       Q. I think for one reason or another you got delayed getting
          to Sheffield that day? - A. Yes,that is true, roadworfis
          principally and Stockport, heavy traffic.

       Q. Eventually did you find somewhere to park with some diffi­
          culty on the Nottingham Forest side of the ground, as it
          were? - A. Yes, that is right. I was taking my wife and
          daughter with me. They were not going to the match, they
          were going to Sheffield, so we preferred to park outside
          but we were forced to stop by traffic congestion and ended
          up trying to get as near to the ground as possible.
          Fortunately it suited us both for our respective purposes.

       Q. How far from the ground was it that you parked. How long
          did it take to get there? - A. Some distance down the A61.
          It took me about 20 minutes or so.

       Q. By the time you got to the ground I think you arrived at
          the Kop end, that is the Penistone Road North end? - A. That
          is true, yes.

       Q. What time was it when you got there, roughly? - A. Because
          of the delays I think I parked somewhere round about half­
          past-2, so realising I was late I made as much speed as I
          could along the road hoping to get there before kick-off.

       Q. What time did you eventually get there? - A. I ' think I got
          there some time between 10-to and 5-to-3.

       Q. Did you ask a Police Officer for directions to the right
          end? - A. Yes.

       Q. Did he say something to you about timing? - A. No, he
          directed me up by the main stand towards the Leppings
          Road end.

       Q. Did you see another Officer at another point as you were
          going round? - A* No, I ran up to that end and I was told
          at that end they would not let me through because there
          was chaos round the corner and the "horses are here" was
          one comment that was made, "You will have to come in at
          the north side", so I ran back down to the Kop end. I
          asked I think it was the same Officer who said, I asked
          him the quicke&t way from that point and he saids  "I
          cannot tell you I am from the Doncaster Force"> so I went
          to his neighbouring Policeman and asked him if he was
          from a local Force. He said he was and directed me via
          the roundabout.

       Q. Did anyone say anything to you about kick-off? - A. Yes,
          as I moved away from himfi I was obviously concerned by now.
                                 M.C. ROSS


People were moving in the gates by the Kop end, but he did
says  "You are okay, they have delayed the kick-of^ 15
minutes to let the crowd in".

He said that positively? - A. Yes.
                       i
And this was the Officer you spoke to next door to the
Doncaster Officer, was it? - A. That is right, yes. He
was standing by the Kop turnstiles.

Did you make your way round to the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes,
some distance round because the neighbouring roads were
barriered off.

Did you hear noises from inside the stadium which suggested to
you that the kick-off had not been postponed? - A. Yes, there
was a roar shortly after I set off which indicated that the
players had come out.

So when you reached the Leppings Lane end what sort of time
was it? - A. Well it was shortly after 3 o'clock. I would
estimate between 5-past and 10-past.

Were there any people still waiting to get in when you
arrived there? - A. There were not many people around. I
went up the road which was virtually empty to get to the
ground and when I turned the corner into the turnstiles I
expected to find a queue but was pleased to see there were
few people about.

Was Gate C, that is the gate at the right, still open? - A.
That is the yellow gate?

$o, it is the blue concertina gate which is beside the turn­
stiles just round to the right of the turnstiles? - A. The
gate to the right of the turnstiles appeared to be partially
open.

You I think went through one of the turnstiles, Turnstile E?
- A. Well I thought it was F but I d&n't see a letter F on
those turnstiles, but I went to the end turnstile. My ticket
Sid not have a letter on it but that one said it did not
matter.

You went through one of the seven turnstiles on the right-
hand side. Is that correct? - A. That is right.

And when you got through the turnstile where did you try
to go to get to the game? - A. Well I prefer to see the game
from as high up as possible.  I went to the steps to the
right-hand side almost opposite the ....

Can I ask you to look at a photograph please, the big bundle
of photographs. Look at number 14 if you would, the West
Midlands bundle. That 1 think is the scene that met your
eyes as you came through the turnstile approximately? - A.
Yes.
    V    *
.   4°
                                           120

                                                   M.C. ROSS

             Q* That is the one with "Y,Z" on it? - A. Yes.

             Q.   When you got there was anyone ...     A. YSs, there was a
                  Steward at the bottom and he saids   "You can't come ih
                  here.   This is for seats only" and pointed me to the tunnel.

             Q.    Which tunnel? - A. The one which just appears on the centre
                  of the stand.

             Q.   Remind uss by now it is what sort of time? - A. Well it
                  is round about 10-past-3 I suppose.

             Q. Certainly after kick-off? - A. Oh yes.

             Q. Now when you got to the tunnel were there any others going
                down it? - A. There were a few people around, other late­
                comers .

             Q. Were there any Police that you could see at or around that
                tunnel at that stage? - A. No, I did not see any Police
                in that concourse at all.

             Q. What about stewards? Were you aware of any stewards in
                or around that tunnel? - A. There was a steward, as I have
                explained.

             Q.    Apart from the one you have told us about. - A. Down the
                  tunnel with others, a man I assumed to be a steward. It
                  was very dark in there of course but I think he had a yellow
                  tunic. He saids    "Ho hurry. There are fans on the pitch
                  and the players have gone off".

             Q. When you say you think he was a steward, what made you,
                apart from his dress .... A. I think he had a yellow
                jerkin on.

             Q.    Do you know where he came from? - A. Well I made comments
                  to him about the organisation and he saids   "Don't blame
                  me mate. I am from your side"     I assume he was a
                  Liverpool steward.

             Q. Could you tell from the accent? - A. I was not particularly
                attentive.

             Q. Anyway did you get down the end of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

             Q. What did you see when you reached the end of the tunnel?
                - A. Igot on to the terrace with reasonable ease and
                was struck and shocked to see people climbing over the
                fence both on to the pitch, or endeavouring to climb on
                to the pitch and climbing to the left.

             Q. Was the game still in progress when you reached the end
                there? - A. I was not aware of any players on the field.
                I think there was far too many other things. My attention
                was drawn to far too many other things. I did not notice
                any players.
                                 M.C. ROSS


Were the spectators already spilling on to the field of
play? - A. Yes.

I think you realised that there was something very badly
wrong and rendered such assistance as you could. Is that
right? - A. Mot initially.  I moved to the side, the left
side of what I now know to be Box 4 and assisted people
climbing up into the Stand, because although it was not
terribly crowded in there people were putting their arms
up and getting a bit of a lift to release what pressure
there was and one of the people in the crowd said that
somebody may have died at the front. That caused a
certain amount of consternation and the people in that
area or quite a number of them decided that was enough
for them and they made for the tunnel. That released it
further and then other people were assisted back through
the crowd.

So there began to be a general movement back through the
tunnel,did there? - A. Yes.

Was that a movement which started spontaneously, by which
I mean fans by themselves decided to go back, or was there
any Police or any other official attempt to get people to
move back through the tunnel? - A. Mo, there was no
officials in the area. It was local consternation really
in that area that caused people to leave.

When were you first aware of any Police presence either in
the tunnel or at or around the tunnel? - A.Mot until much
later.

What do you mean by ’’much l$feer"? Where was it? - A. Well
so many things were happening that I had no time to look
at watches. I would have estimated about half-past-3
before there were any signs of activity at the back of the
Stand.

Anyway to you an appreciable time lapse before there was
any Police activity at the rear of the^tunnel? - A. That
is right.

By then you had got, had you, into that concourse at the
back of the tunnel? - A. Well people were being brought
up through the crowd or struggling themselves and we were
assisting them back on to the concourse where they were
l^iiif down or being laid down.

Did you youseeIf speak to any Police Officer in the con­
course? - A. Yes, there was a senior Police Officer by
the partly open gate and I went to him and said to him
that we could do with Police presence within the ground
because there was chaos on the terrace and it needed
their help to get some sort of control.

What was his reaction? - A. Well he looked at me blankly
and turned away.
sjb.                              130
                                           M.C. ROSS


       Q. Did you ask specifically - you say inside the ground - did
          you mention specifically down the tunnel to this Officer?
          - A. Well I think it was quite clear really. This was
          where people were spilling out of the tunnel and lying
          down on the floor, sitting against the wall, that sort
          of thing.




                                        /Q. You say
-*■ I 'f-OP*
                                              131

                                                               M.G. ROSS



               Q.   You say he did not react? - A. No.

               Q.   When you say     a senior Officer,   did he have flat capor... -
                    He had a chequered hat on.

               Q.   I think that is all I need ask you.   You appreciate your
                    statement is before the Inquiry, sonot every detail need be
                    gone into. - A. Yes.

                                  Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

               Q. Mr. Ross, when you arrived at the ground you had some
                  difficulty in finding the right entrance.  Is that correct? -
                  A. I was misdirected.

               Q. Yes, and because of that you had some difficulty? - A. Oh,
                  yes.

               Q. And eventually you got round to the Leppings Lane gates? - A.
                  Yes.

               Q. In the statement you made at page 3, section 15, you say this,
                  and I will read what the words are precisely.-

                         "I had earlier heard a Tannoy message for Liverpool fans
                         to move away from the entrances because there had been
                         some crushing".

                    Now, do you remember saying that? - A. Yes, or writing it.

               Q. That was something that came over the Tannoy? - A. I think so.
                  I was running along the road outside at the time, and to hear
                  something like that when you are late is something which
                  registers and you are glad to hear there may be some movement
                  away from the entrance if you arrive there.

               Q. This is something you heard before you had reached the
                  Leppings Lane gates? - A. I think so.

               Q. Do you remember how far away from the gates you were at   that
                  time? - A. Not precisely, no.

               Q. Did you come over the bridge or from the opposite direction? -
                  A. I came from the roundabout, which I think is the opposite
                  direction.

               Q. So you came along Leppings Lane past the shops? When you
                  arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance you were able to get in
                  obviously at that time without any difficulty? - A. Yes.

               Q. And at that stage, up to that time, as you were aware you had
                  not criticism of anybody except you had been sent to the wrong
                  place? - A. Yes, and I had also met a large party of Police
                  going down Leppings Lane away from the ground at the time, who
                  rather ridiculed me for having gone to the wrong end, as they
                  put it.
1 1 _.
                                        132

                                                         M.C. ROSS



         Q. They joshed you for being late, did they? - A. They said,
            "You've been to the wrong end, have you?".

         Q. You went in through the turnstile, through the tunnel? - A.
            Yes.

         Q. When you went in through the tunnel was that relatively free
            of people? - A. Yes. Free movement.

         Q. Do you know what time it was you came out of the tunnel on to
            the terrace? - A. I would say roughly 10-past-3.

         Q. Could you see the goal when you got out on to the terrace? -
            A . Yes.

         Q. There were a lot of people already over the fence and down on
            the pitch by that time? - A. There were some people on the
            pitch and a lot of people on the fence, which made it
            difficult to see how many people were on the pitch because
            that obscured the view.

         Q.   There were scores of people round about the goal and beyond
              the perimeter fence by this time, were not there? - A. What do
              you mean by "scores"?

         Q.   It may be difficult. - A. There were quite a few.

         Q.   Have you got the composite album No. 2 there. The last
              photograph in it, PR2/17. Now, the camera time on there - the
              last photograph in the bundle. - A. Yes.

         Q.   The time according to the camera is 15.07, but the corrected
              time, the actual time, is 15.06. That is a few minutes before
              you get out of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

         Q.   Was that the sort of scene you observed? - A. Something like
              that, yes.

         Q. Scores of people around? - A. I would not say scores of
            people.

         Q. Well, that is just one section right by the goal. - A. They
            were mainly congregated round by the goal.

         Q. People by that time were doing what they thought they could do
            to help? - A . Yes.

         Q. You make reference to not seeing a Police Officer in the
            enclosure before the tunnel or in the area of the tunnel as
            you made your way to go to the terrace? - A. That is true.

         Q. Do you say you did not see a Police Officer in the area to the
            rear of the terrace, either in the tunnel or in the enclosure
            area, until a long time after you had actually gone to the
            terrace? - A . Yes.
                              133

                                                M.C. ROSS


Q. What time do you put it at? - A. I did put it at approximately
   half-past-3.

Q. Could you be mistaken about that? - A. Certainly. There was
   no time for checking times at that point. Quite a lot of time
   elapsed while people were being attended to in that area, and
   when a number of Policemen, I put it at five, did eventually
   appear, they were greeted with great relief, but at the same
   time asked why they had not been there earlier.

Q. Thank you, Mr. Ross.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. Ross, one matter. You heard a Tannoy message outside the
   ground? - A. I have not heard anybody else say so, but I did
   feel I heard a message.  I was relieved to hear it.

Q. That is what I want to ask you. When you got inside the
   ground was there more noise than is usual even in a football
   ground? - A. I would not have thought so. Of course at that
   stage I had assumed the game was in progress and just normal
   noise, I suppose, but once on the terrace there were just
   screams and shouts for assistance from the Police.

Q. I am sorry, that is what I meant.  I did not make myself
   clear.  It is my fault. Once you emerged through the tunnel
   and joined the other spectators the noise level was horrific?
   - A. The screams and cries and shouts for help.

Q. But the message which you had heard over the Tannoy, what, two
   or three minutes earlier? - A. I put it a bit earlier than
   that.  I was probably halfway up Leppings Lane I would have
   thought at the time, somewhere running towards the ground.  I
   was not just approaching the turnstiles at that stage.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   About what time do you think it
     was? - A. 3 o'clock.  Possibly 5 minutes earlier. Possibly
     about 5-past-3.
                   /


Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   And to the best of your recollection ....-
     A. It might have been nearer 3 o'clock.  I could not really
     say.

Q. But to the best of your recollection the message was for
   Liverpool fans to move away from the entrances because there
   had been some crushing? - A. Yes, I assumed that was to allow
   any latecomers, of which I would be one, to get an entrance to
   the terracing.

Q. I accept you may have thought that, but the reason given for
   the announcement was that there had been crushing? They were
   being asked to move away because there was crushing? - A . Yes,
   that is a normal announcement made at football grounds,
   though, where people do congregate in the entrance, and
   latecomers can't get in, and there is often plenty of space
   within once that crush at the entrance is cleared.
                                 134

                                                     M.C. ROSS



Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You mean it was move up the bus,
     not get out of the bus? - A. Pardon?

Q.   You took it to mean they should move further in? - A. Oh, yes,
     move further in.

Q. Not get out of the way? - A. And allow people to come. There
   was no suggestion at any time while I was there for anybody
   to leave the terrace.  I did hear an announcement for people
   to leave the pitch and get back off the pitch, but I don’t
   remember anybody saying, ’’Leave the terrace” .

Q.       MR. GLASGOW:    The impression you had when you were
     outside in the road was that there might have been crushing in
     the entrances? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got into the ground itself and through the tunnel it
   was quite obvious the crushing was at the front? - A. Right.

Q.   Was it then quite obvious to you that the message must have
     been for people to move away from that crush? - A. No, I think
     the normal football announcement which is common at most
     grounds five minutes before kick-off time or around that time,
     "Would people move away from the entrances".

Q . Thank you.

          MR. COLLINS:     I have no re-examination.

                   ANTHONY CHRISTOPHER SMITH Called

                         Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Q. Are you Anthony Christopher Smith? - A. Yes.

Q. From Liverpool? - A. Yes.

Q. Mr. Smith, I think you came over by coach? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. About 1 o'clock.

Q. Did you park or your coach park fairly close to the ground? -
   A. About 10 minutes away.

Q. Was there any Police activity when you got off the coach? - A.
   There was a Policeman at the door of the coach who just asked
   if we had tickets.

Q. They were checking for tickets at that stage? - A. Yes. On
   our way up the Police stopped the coach and got on and checked
   if everyone had a ticket and to see if there was any alcohol
   on the coach.

Q. That is before you reach Sheffield? - A. Yes.

Q. But when you were in Sheffield were you also asked about
m—   *
1;
                                        135

                                                          A.G. SMITH



              tickets as you got off the coach? - A. We were just asked if
              we had one.

         Q. What time did you actually reach the entrance in Leppings
            Lane? - A. About half-2.

         Q. Was there already a substantial build up of people? - A. Yes.

         Q. I want to ask you about your impression at that stage of the
            horses.   What did it appear to you the horses were doing? -
            A. The horses were bolting, jumping about with there that many
            people there the crowd was swaying towards them, and the
            horses were getting nervous, and they sort of bolted and
            everyone swayed back one way again, and then they would go
            back again towards them.
                  I
              Did you have the impression that the mounted Policemen were
              able to control their horses at that stage or not? - A. No.

         Q. I think you actually gained entry to the ground by the gate C
            which was opened? - A. Yes.

         Q. How would you describe the way that people went through that
            gate? - A. Just like a flow like running water. When that
            gate opened it was just a relief and everyone just went
            through.

         Q.   What about the people at the back of that group who went
              through? - A. I was not there.   I could not see at the back.
              I think they were still going forward.

         Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. No, it was the first
            time I had ever been.

         Q. Did you go through the tunnel? - A. Yes, I went through the
            tunnel.

         Q. Why? - A. Because that was where the gate opened it was the
            first thing you seen.

         Q.  And when you got to the end of the tunnel where did you go? -
            A. We just got pushed halfway down the terrace, and then I
            tried to go to the right then to try and shuffle across to the
            right because it was just totally compact.
                                                                1
         Q. So intopen 3? - A. Yes.

         Q.   How fardown did you go? - A. Just further than halfway.    Just
              more than halfway down.

         Q. Was that from choice? - A. No, the pressure getting pushed
            down.

         Q.   Was it a gradual pressure or a particular surge? - A. It was a
              surge. As soon as we got through the tunnel there was a surge
              and we got pushed to the centre, dead centre behind the goal,
.i:   »
le>
                                          136

                                                             A .C . SMITH


               and I liked to shuffle across to the right, and then another
               surge came and then that was it.

          Q. I think you were trapped for some minutes and eventually
             passed out? - A. Yes.

          Q. And when you came round it was to find someone was putting you
             over the perimeter fence? - A . Yes.

          Q. One other matter I would like to ask you about, Mr. Smith.
             You were taken on to the pitch somewhere near the goal, were
             you? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Did you receive treatment whilst you werestill     inthat
               position? - A. Yes, I was given oxygen.

          Q . Do you know by whom? - A .N o .

          Q.    You don't know whether it was a Fireman, St. John's,        Police? -
               A. I could not really say.

          Q. But someone gave you oxygen in that position? - A. Yes, and
             then into the gymnasium.  I got taken into the gymnasium and
             given oxygen there.

          Q. And I think you spent a day or so in hospital? - A. Yes.

                              Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

          Q. Just one matter.  It seems, does it not, once that gate was
             opened you were going to go on to the terracing behind the
             goal whether you like it or not? - A. Yes, I did not know
             there was that many people in the terracing.  I didn't think
             there was that many there.

          Q. When you got to the point of being able to see how many people
             were behind the goals could you have turned back? - A. No.

                              Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

          Q. Mr. Smith, you have just been asked by Mr. Jackson about going
             through the gates.  I want to ask you about things a little
             bit earlier. When you were coming to Sheffield and had
             arrived, did you notice anything about the attitude of people
             to get in and get to the ground? - A. No, it just seemed
             normal.

          Q. In the statement you made, and I am not sure quite to what it
             is you are referring, you said there was far too much
             impatience on the roads. What were you referring to? That is
             at the end of your statement. - A. I don't know.  I don't
             remember saying that in my statement, to be honest.

          Q. You are Anthony Christopher Smith of                                 are
             you? - A. Yes.

          Q. And then you say:
                                 137

                                                   A .C . SMITH



          "The traffic could have been diverted and Liverpool could
          have had the bulk of the tickets. The fans were mingling
          the street anyway".

     - A. Yes, they were mingling in the street.

Q. When you talk about impatience on the roads do you mean to
   describe the fans as they were in the area of the ground
   walking to it? - A. Yes, just hushing and running along.

Q. They were running all over? - A. No, just hushing along.

Q. Pushing along? - A. They were hushing.

Q. Hushing?    I am sorry.    What does that mean? - A. Very quickly.

Q. In a manner which you did describe as impatient in the
   statement? - A. I thought so.

Q.   You thought so?   Thank you. On your way to the ground       did
     you notice a number of public houses? - A. Yes.

Q. And those public houses being very, very busy? - A. Yes.

Q. With many people drinking? - A. Yes, there were a few people
   in the pub, yes.

Q.   You got to the ground at about what time? - A. Half-past-2.

Q.   You made your way into the ground by gate C? - A. Yes.

Q. At the side? - A. Yes.

Q. You say as you went through that gate you did not see any
   Police or stewards? - A. I saw the two mounted Police, that is
   all I saw.

Q. How long was it before you got from the outside perimeter
   fence, the tall blue railings, down to where you went through
   the concertina gate? - A. I would say about 10 minutes.

Q.   Was the concertina gate fully open? - A. I could not say, to
     be honest.

Q.   You went then across    the courtyard? - A. Yes.

Q.   These were the words you used in your statement.      You say:

          "Across the courtyard it seemed OK".

     Is that right? - A. Yes, it seemed fine walking up.

Q. So you were not being driven along in a great crush.  It
   seemed all right to you going across the courtyard? - A. Yes.

Q. You got into the tunnel.      Was there anything different about
V   ‘
                                       138

                                                         A .C. SMITH


           going through the tunnel compared with going adross the
           courtyard? - A. No, not really.

        Q. You would describe it as OK, would you? - A. Yes, it was not
           too bad. There were people in front and people behind.

        Q. If you had wanted to stop you could have done, could you? - A.
           I would have had to struggle to get back out.




                                 /G.         not to struggle against.
        *

\ K ^                                      139


                                                     A. C. SMITH



            Q.   Not to struggle against it, but if you had i^anted    to stop
                 you could have done? - A. Yes.

            Q.   If you had wanted to? - A. Yes, if I had wanted to.

            Q.   Then you got on to the terrace? - A. Yes.

            Q. Where were you making for?   Any particular spot? - A.
               No, I was not making for any particular spot.

            Q. Did you want to be behind the goal or a bit to the right
               or a bit to the left? - A. A bit to the right of the
               goal.

            Q. Which was did you go? - A. The right of the goal.

            Q. You choose to go that way, did you? - A. Yes.   Well, not
               at first.   We got pushed straight into the middle.

            Q. I am sorry? - A. We got pushed straight down into the
               middle.

            Q. You were pushed straight down into the middle? - A. Yes.
               As soon as we got out of the tunnel we went straight down
               into the middle.

            Q. Did you come up against a crush bar or anything? - A. No,
               not that I was aware of.

            Q. Did you get pushed straight down or diagonally, or was it
               a bit of this, a bit to the right and a push in different
               directions?   A jostling rather than a pushing? - A. Yes,
               a jostling rather than a pushing.

            Q. So you were not part of a great tide or current?    You
               were being jostled and moved, a bit forward, a bit to the
               right, a bit forward, a bit to the right, a bit along,
               that sort of thing? - A. Yes.

            Q. That is a fair impression of what you experienced? - A.
               Yes.

            Q. Not coming down in a great torrent, but a push here,       a
               move here, a step there?    Is that right? - A. Yes.

            Q. Were you anywhere near where the barrier collapsed? - A.
               I would not know.   I did not know a barrier had
               collapsed.

                       MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you.
                                  S. ALLEN



      MR. PHILIPS:   Steven Allen please.

                 STEVEN ALLEN Called

               Examined by MR. PHILIPS:

Are you Steven Allen? - A. Yes.

Do you live in Bootle, Merseyside? - A. I do.

You went to the match.   I think you got there quite
early, didn't you? - A. Yes, it was the same as last
year.   I made sure I got in quite early.

The same as last year?   What time did you get to the
ground? - A. Well, we went through the turnstiles at two
o'clock.

Was there any number of people outside the turnstiles at
that time? - A. No.   There were a few people walking
around but I was in a queue of only five or six, so it
was only a second or two and I was in.

Had that been the same the previous yearat that time? -
A. At that time, yes.    I took it on past experience
that if I turned up at two o'clock I would...

If you turned up at two o' clock you would get in very
quickly? - A. Yes.   The thing was there was not the same
filtering this year.   When I got to the roundabout at
Penistone Road in 1988 there was a barrier across
Leppings Lane and I was asked to produce a ticket but
this year I wasn't.

You had had to produce a ticket? - A. Yes.

Now this barrier you mentioned at the roundabout at the
junction of Penistone Road and Leppings Lane, was it all
the way across the road or just across the pavement? - A.
I could be sure to be honest.   I just remember a
Policeman stopping me and saying, Have you got a
ticket?6'

Was there any metal barrier there or just a Policeman as
a barrier? - A. There was a barrier there I remember, but
I cannot be too specific. I remember being asked to
produce a ticket.

On this occasion this year you just walked along Leppings
Lane? - A. Just walked straight along to the turnstile.
I even noticed touts very close to the turnstile selling
tickets.
                                   S. ALLEN


Touts selling tickets? - A. Yes.    I saw two touts.

Had you seen any the previous year? - A. I could not say,
not to my knowledge.

Now you went through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Where did you go to then? - A. Well, I bought a programme
and I looked at the ticket and it was section B of
Leppings Lane, so I looked around and saw that section B
was through the tunnel so I made my way through the
tunnel on to the terrace.

Section B refers in fact to the turnstiles that you would
go through and which you had already been through. - A.
Well, I was in the same section as last year so I knew
where to go.

You went through the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Which way did you go at the end of the tunnel?   To the
right or to the left? - A. I went to the left the same as
last year.

Same as last year? - A. Yes, I was about half way in
between the perimeter fence and the West Stand wall and
nearer to the double partition fence.   Stood on the same
spot.

When you   talk about the double partition fence you mean
the left   hand fence? - A. Yes, between...

Of pen 4? - A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Were there people in that
narrow area which you call the double fence, gate 5? - A.
A handful of people.   They chose to stand there and
looked as if they were going to watch the match from
there, yes.

      MR. PHILIPS:   Did you see any gates into that
narrow double fence area? - A. I did not notice at the
time but eventually I did because that was the fence that
I got on to the pitch through.

I do not mean gatesat the pitch side but at  the top end
near the West Stand wall? - A. No, I did not notice that.
I presumed there was a fence either side, which separated
all the pens.

You were fairly close to that fence, were you, about half
way down? - A. Yes.

You say you had stood there the previous year? - A. Yes.
                                  S. ALLEN


Had you been able to see the match satisfactorily the
previous year? - A. Yes, it was quite packed but it was
OK.   It wasn't too uncomfortable.

How many people were in the pen when you got there just
after two o'clock? - A. Not that many.   I would say it
was half full because I remember being able to sit down
and have a quick flick through the programme.

Did it get busier as the time wore on? - A. Yes.   I
remember some of my friends, we ended up standing as a
group and at about twenty past two there was a very big
surge from the tunnel.

Twenty past two? - A. Yes.   We were all pushed down and
slightly to the left so I was pushed closer to the fence.

You had been joined by some other friends before that
happened? - A. Yes.

Did these in fact include a girl Pam? - A. Yes.   I stand
next to Pam and the others at the Spion Kop at Liverpool
so we are all good friends.

You say the surge came at twenty past two.   Where did it
take you to? - A. We were pushed down towards the
perimeter fence and left towards the partition fence.   I
ended up a lot closer to the double partition fence.

How far away from the perimeter fence were you then? - A.
I was about two-thirds of the way down.

Were you near to any barrier? - A. Yes, but I was not on
top of the barrier.   It was two people in front of me.

It was two people in front of you? - A. Yes.

Did anything happen after that surge at twenty past two?
- A. Well, it started to build up and it was later on
around the time the players came on, without even
realising it I looked down and ray feet were off the
ground.   I was actually being supported by the people
around.

That was when the players came on to the pitch? - A. Yes.
It dawned on me then that things were really starting to
get very busy.

Until that happened had the pen been uncomfortably full?
- A. No.   Full but not overcrowded.

What was the event that you remember immediately after
which you were off your feet and being supported?   Was
there a surge before that happened? - A. I would not say
                                   S. ALLEN


surge but there was definitely a large influx of fans in
a very short space of time, as opposed to an actual
surge.

After the players came out, did it get any worse? - A.
Yas.   I remember trying to clap as the players came out
and I had to struggle to get my arms free.    All the time
I was getting moved further and further left.

Towards the fence? - A. Yes.    I ended up crushed against
the fence.

Were you back on your feet by then on the ground? - A.
Yes.

How was Pam coping with it? Were you next to her? - A.
Yes, I was about   a foot and a half or two feet away from
Pam.   She was in a great deal of stress.

Did she say anything about it? -A. Yes, she said that she
would have to get out very quick.

Were you able to look around? - A. Only a certain degree.
I could not look  at the pitch so much because I was
turned side on.     I was looking towards the North Stand.
If I wanted to see the pitch I had to turn my head ninety
degrees.

Were you able to turn your head through ninety degrees? -
A. Yes.

When you looked at the North Stand could you see the
corner pen? - A. Yes.

What was that like? - A. It was half empty.    I could not
believe it.

Were you able to do anything about getting Pam out of the
crush you were in? - A. I got out of the pen shortly
after that and that was the last I saw of Pam.    That was
the last thing she said to me, '"I have got to get out of
here".    I got separated.

Tell us hov? you came to get out of the pen. - A. I was
very lucky.    There was a very large gentleman next to
me.   He managed to climb over the fence and just as he
did I managed to jump into the space he had left behind
and straight back over the fence with him in one motion.

This is side fence? - A. Yes into the space between the
double fences.

This big chap and you both climbed over into that space?
- A. Yes.
                               144


                                        S. ALLEN


Q. Were there many people in that space when you climbed
   over? - A. Yes.   My friend Paul was there as well.   He
   was helping people over and then when I got over the
   fence 1 was helping people over as well, using myself as
   a support.   I stood there for a short while to get
   people out.

Q. How wide is that space between the two fences? - A. Five
   or six feet maybe.   It wasn't very wide.

Q.   The people who were being helped into that space,where
     were they going to? - A. Well, I noticedeventually    there
     was a gate at the bottom of this partition.    We all
     walked down towards the gate and on to the pitch.

Q. That gate was open, was it? - A. Intermittently.   When I
   did go down to the gate and tried to get through the gate
   a Policeman put his arm on my shoulder and said, "You
   should not be getting on the pitch", and I took no notice
   and walked straight on the pitch anyway.   I remember the
   gate was closed after that, behind me, but later it was
   opened and closed a few times.

Q. You went out on to the pitch itself? - A. Yes.

Q. I think it is right you had had a bit of training in
   First Aid? - A. Yes, I was given a St. John's course at
   work in February.   I had a certificate.

Q. In February of this year? - A. Yes.

Q. A matter of a few weeks earlier.   Did you pitch in and
   help? - A. Yes.   I had not presumed at this point there
   was that much wrong and that people had fainted etc. so I
   was walking round asking people if they were all right
   and putting them in the recovery position and things like
   that.   I did not think anything else beyond that at the
   time.

Q. When you got out    of the space between the two fences, did
   you look back to    the terrace that you had been in? - A.
   Yes.

Q. How were the people in it then? - A. It was horrible.
   The wire mesh was bellied.

Q. Did you do anything about that wire mesh? - A.
   Eventually.   Not at the time.   The first thing I did
   was to walk over and climb up the fence.   I was stood on
   like a stanchion on the fence and myself and other
   supporters and Policemen were all lifting people out over
   the top of the fence.
                                  S. ALLEN


Policemen were there with you doing that, were they? - A.
Yes.

Did you see whether the gate was open in that fence? - A.
The one I came out of?
        $
Yes. - A. I could not say. I was preoccupied with
getting fans out of that section.

Did there come a time when the fencing itself was taken
out? - A. Yes.   I heard another supporter shout that the
best thing we could do, as the fences were not wide
enough to get a lot of people out, was to rip the mesh
off.   We all mucked in again, Police and supporters.
We had to push the fence back and forth in unison to try
and rip it off, or roll it up, or whatever.




                          /Q. Did anybody think to
\i ~ x 0 \
                                          146


                                                     S.   ALLEN



             Q. Did anybody think to look for any tools to do that with?
                A.   I did ask the Policemen if there were wire-cutters
                or hammers or anything available.   He said there weren't,
                so we had to use our hands.

             Q. And you did manage, I think, to pull the fence away?
                A.   Yes.   We managed to rip one out and others we rolled
                up and tied with rope or scarves or whatever.

             Q. And then people were able to get out more readily,
                were they?   A.   Yes, people were able to climb out and
                casualties were passed out.

             Q. And then I think you did a lot of work on the pitch
                and again I do not want to make light of it at all but
                it probably will not help to go into all the details of
                everything that you   did. Did there come a time when
                ambulances arrived?     A. Yes.   I have estimated on
                my statement what it was but, to be honest, I couldn't
                be totally sure within five or ten minutes but an
                ambulance did cross the pitch and park up next to us on the
                track behind the goal.

             Q. Did you get assistance then with what you were doing from
                the ambulance crew?    A. Yes, oxygen.

             Q. I think they had oxygen with them,    did they not?
                A.   Yes.

             Q. And the crew was able to take over some of the things that
                you were doing.   A.      Yes, they relieved myself and the
                St. John and the Policemen who were - the three of us were
                trying to revive t h e ’two casualties.

             Q. Did you hear at any stage any announcement on the Tannoy
                system?   A.   No.   There may well have been but I was
                two wrapped up in what I was doing.   I don't recall.

             Q. Was it still noisy when you were busy trying to help
                people out of the pen?   A.    Yes, a lot of shouting.

             Q. Did you hear the announcement   from Kenny Dalgleish?    A.   Yes,
                I remember that.

             Q. Was it still as noisy then when the announcement was made
                as it had been earlier?   A.   No, when Kenny spoke it
                went very quiet.

             Q. I see.    I think then eventually that afternoon you left
                the ground and went home, is that right?   A.   Yes.
                                   147



                                              S.    ALLEN



                   Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Allen, I just want to ask you about one matter,          if
   I may.   A.   Yes.

Q. It is about your experience in 1988 compared with
   1989.   A.   Yes.

Q.   Do you follow?    A.   Yes.

Q.    And I want to ask you about your progress   to the ground.
     You say that on the way to the ground in 1988 someone checked
     you for a ticket?    A.    Yes, a Policeman, at the end of
     Leppings Lane at the roundabout with Penistone Road.

Q. Right at the far end?      A.         Yes, where there is a garage
   there as well.

Q.    Can you just say what it was that you saw there and   what
     it was that happened there,   please? A.      I cannot be
     too specific but I remember seeing a barrier and a couple
     of Policemen and I was asked to produce a ticket.      I
     did and I was let through.

Q. It is right that there were barriers in 1988 and 1989 at
   various points along the way along Leppings Lane, blocking
   off access to the side streets?   A.   To the side streets,
   yes.

Q. You recall seeing those, do you?            A.      Yes.

Q. And those barriers were manned with  Police Officers or
   there were Police Officers in the vicinity of those
   junctions?   A;   Yes.

Q. To>keep people from getting lost or making a nuisance of
    themselves down the side roads.    You say that when you
   were asked for your ticket in 1988, that was by a barrier?
   A.    Yes, it was.

Q. Where was the barrier?   Was it across Leppings Lane or
   by a road junction, one of the side roads?   A.  No,
   it was at the very end of Leppings Lane, at the roundabout
   itself.   As you leave the roundabout and begin to walk
   along Leppings Lane, the barrier was there.

Q. Was the barrier on the road or on the pavement?
   A.   I wouldn't like to say.  That is speculation.
   I cannot remember, to be honest but there was a barrier,
   as I remember.

Q. When you showed your ticket, was the barrier moved or what?
   A.   No, you could walk through, there was a space.
^<7 >■'
                                           148


                                                         S.    ALLEN



          Q.    So were there two barriers or the barrier         and something?
               What was it you walked between?    A.   It         was between twe
               bar rie rs.

          Q. Like the barriers that you know ---          A.       On the side
             st r ee ts .

          Q. —    were on the side streets.      A.   Exactly the same.

          Q. About what time would that be in 1988?   A.   Assuming
             I got in at 2 o'clock both years, it would have to be
             about ten to two, quarter to two at the very earliest
             because I got to the turnstiles at both Semi-Finals at
             about 2 o'clock.

          Q. No question of traffic being barred from going along
             Leppings Lane at that time?   Were vehicles going down?
             A.   This year?

          Q.   In 1988?   A.   No,   I don't think so.        I   don't remember.

          Q.    Is there any reason why you remember this?    A.   Well,
               I remarked ---     I went to the match with a friend who
               eventually went in the North Stand and I remember saying
               to him at the time, I said, "We got stopped for a ticket
               heie last year.    Why haven't we been stopped this year?"

          Q. You passed that observation as you were walking along
             the road?   A.   Yes.

          Q. You were expecting to meet the barrier?   A.   I was
             expecting to be asked to produce a ticket and I wasn't.
             I remember saying, "We were asked last year, weren't we?
             Why weren't we asked this year?"

          Q. You are not confusing the matter with passing or being
             asked in the vicinity of a barrier ---   A.   No, no.

          Q. -- not barring Leppings Lane by a Policeman who said,
             "Have you got your ticket?"   A.   Yes.

          Q. Were you asked ---    Does it happen that sometimes on
             the approach to a ground whether or not there is a
             barrier, you get asked by a Policeman, "Have you got
             your ticket?"  A.   Well, I don't travel to away
             matches normally, so that wouldn't apply to Anfield."

          Q. At the time that you were going along the road in
             1988/89, apart from the difference of not being asked
             for the ticket, were there any other differences?
             A.   Not so much differences.   I don't know if it
             applied last year but this year I remember seeing touts
             selling tickets along Leppings Lane.   That may well
             have been the case the year before - I didn't notice then.
                                 149




                                                     S.   ALLEN



Q. You did not notice?      A.    No.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           That is all, thank you very
   much.

                         MR. P. MAHEW,      called

                   Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Q. Mr. Mahew, I think you are a serving Officer in the
   Merseyside Fire Brigade?   A.   That is correct, yes.

Q. And you came across on 15th April.   What time did you
   arrive at Leppings Lane?    A.   Approximately 2.35.

Q. You know on the plan where the perimeter gates are?
   A.   The big blue gates?

Q. Yes.   What was the state of those when you arrived?
   A.   When I arrived there was total confusion and we
   didn't know where our access to the ground was.
   Eventually we found our way over to the right-hand side.
   Those gates were closed at that side.

Q. The main perimeter gates were closed?             A.     They were
   closed, yes.

Q. Were they opened at some stage whilst you were near them?
   A.   While we were milling around outside they were
   open for a matter of minutes.   A few people went through
   and they were closed again.

Q. And were they then opened again?   A.   They were opened
   again within five minutes and I was carried through with
   the rest of the people because the Police just couldn't
   get those gates closed again.

Q. So you saw them opened once,         some p e o p l e in and closed?
   A.   Yes.

Q. And then the second time the Police were not able to
   close them?   A.   They were not able to get those
   gates closed.

Q. Where did y o u ’actually go into the ground from?
   A.  Through those blue gates which led us through to
   the turnstile area and as we approached the turnstile
   area there was a few queueing up there to go through
   the turnstiles but you didn't have to queue there
   because round the corner there was a concertina gate
   which was open.
                                150




                                                       P.   MAHEW



Q.From there you went through the tunnel, did you?   A.                    We
   congregated together - there was four of us - waited                  for
   each other and we went down the tunnel.

Q.   Did you know the ground at all?         A.   Iwas      there last year,
     yes.

Q. Did  you know there were other ways on to the terrace?
   A.    I went on the terrace  on the West Stand, where
   the Nottingham Forest stand was this year.     I went
   there last year, but I was directed there last year.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry,          you were standing
     last year, were   you?    A. Yes.

Q. What - you went through the        tunnel?     A.        No, I went
   through the other -- to the        corner.

Q. To the right or the left?          A.   To the right.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   Who directed you there last year?
     A.   I think it was a steward.

Q.    Do you know from where you were directed?     A.   From -
     as you come in through the two ---     Well, last year
     that concertina gate was not open, you had to go through
     the turnstiles.   When you got through the turnstiles
     you were met by    a steward or I think he was a steward,
     anyway, and you    were told to go down to the other section.

Q.    Now, this time, once you got in and went through the
     tunnel, did you have any control over your movements once
     you were through the tunnel?    A.    No, we had no idea
     the size of the crowd that was already assembled at
     the end of that tunnel, not until ----      Because you
     had   to go down the tunnel.   There was like steps and
     youhad to step up.    That   was the first glimpse that
     you had of the crowd and that was the edge of the crowd
     there, right at the back.

Q.    Did you quickly find yourself being pushed            through the
     crowd?   A.    Within seconds  I was pushed            down into
     the crowd, yes.

Q. Now, Mr. Mahew, I think you ended up in a position
   where you were able to see the perimeter gate?   A.                   Yes,
   I was.

Q. Was that in Pen 3?      A.   Directly behind the goal.

Q. As you came from the tunnel,        was it the right-hand
   side or the left-hand side?          A.  The right-hand side.

Q. Pen 3.     Were you able to see either a Police Officer
                               151




                                              P.   MAHEW



     or Police Officers by the gate?    A.        There was a Police
     Officer in charge of that gate.

Q. As the events built up, how would you describe the
   appearance of the Police Officer on that gate?   A.              He
   appeared to me to be frightened of what was going on
   in front of him.

Q. What gave you that impression?   A.    Because as I got
   pushed down I saw that gate and I saw that was my only
   means of exit from that area.   Immediately I knew,
   as soon as I got into that crowd, that I had to get out
   because it wasn't just a normal crush.    I had been
   there previously the year before which was a bit of a
   crush - nothing like that - and, as I say, my eyes
   were on that gate because it was the only way out and
   that gate was closed.

Q.    Did the gate in fact open? A. It opened    a couple          of
     times to let one or two people out and then it was
     closed again.

Q. And I think on the third occasion it was opened you did,
   in fact, manage to get through it?   A.  I got through
   that gate, yes.

Q.    And were you then asked by another Police Officer to go
     into one of the other pens further along?    A.   I was.
     As I climbed out and walked along the path and a
     Policeman told me to go into the next section over.

Q. Once there, did you realise that your training might
   be of some assistance out on the pitch?   A.   Once I
   gathered myself together and I looked back across the
   goal and I saw the bodies were now being laid behind
   the goal, I decided I couldn't just stand there and
   watch and I went down to the locked gate which a
   Policeman was in charge of in that section.

Q. Do you know which section that is?        A.       That would
   have been the right-hand section.

Q. Section 1.    A.   The next one along.

Q. Could you just see where   the gentleman is pointing.
   Whereabouts do you think   the gate was that you spoke
   to an Officer?   A.   It   would have been the far gate
   on that section,near the   Nottingham Forest Stand.

Q. Did you explain that you were a Fireman?           A.   I
                              152



                                         P.    MAHEW



     said I was a Fireman and I had been trained in First Aid
     and I thought I might be able to help on the pitch.

Q. What reaction did you receive?   A.  He said there were
   too many people on the pitch and my assistance was not
   n e ed ed .

Q. Did you, in fact, though, climb out and give assistance?
   A.   I did.   I went to the other gate which I entered
   that section by which was open all the time and I went
   out on to the pitch.

Q. Mr. Mahew, the Police Officers who were by the gates,
   did you at any stage see whether they had radios?
   A.   I personally wouldn't ---   I can't say now that
   I did but I would have thought that they would be in
   contact via radio, yes.

Q. You would have expected them to be.        A.   I would have
   expected them to be, yes.

Q. But you do not know one way or the other?           A.   Not
   that I can recall, no.

Q. Did you hear any announcements over the Tannoy at any
   stage?    A.  The Tannoy system I thought was completely
   inaudible.   You couldn't hear anything.   It was as if
   it was broadcasted out to an open area and it just
   vanished.

Q. Can I just be clear that I understand that?   Do you
   mean you were conscious that something was being transmitted?
   A.   Something was being transmitted but I couldn't under­
   stand whatever it was.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Was that the fault of the
     Tannoy?   WCes it poorer than usual or was there just
     more noise than usual?    A.   I would have to say the
     Tannoy system.




                                    (Cross-examined b y . .. )
                                  P . MAHEW


              Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD;

Mr. Mahew, may I ask you about going through the gate to
go into the ground. You went through the gate and at that
stage having come through the gate you found yourself in
the enclosure with the tsnnel entrance ahead of you? - A.
Through the concertina gates?

That is right? - A. Yes.

Had the concertina gate been opened completely for you
to come through? - A. Yes, it was open completely.

What time would this be? - A. This would be just before
the kick-off.
                                j
And you made your way across the enclosure? - A. Across
and down to the tunnel towards the tunnel, to go to the
tunnel.

If you had wanted to stop on that journey could you have
done? - A. Yes, you could have done.

Having made your way to the tunnel what was the state in
the tunnel. Was that such that if you had wanted to stop
you could have done? - A. You could have stopped in the
tunnel yes if you wanted to.

When you got to the terrace you saw the sea of people
there? - A. That was the first glimpse I had of the crowd
when I got to the end of that tunnel.

Were the players already on the field? - A. They were, yes.

Had the kick-off happened? - A. Mot at that point, no.

Did you see the kick-off? - A. No.

When you got on to the terrace which way did you go, down
to the right? - A. I did not have any choice where I went
because I was just pushed down into the middle of the
people that were already there.

Did there   come a point when you stopped? - A. Oh yes, yes,
about halfway down you come to a halt, yes.

What, straight down, diagonally down? - A. Straight down.

So your progress on to the terrace took you straight down
by the fence that divides the two pens? - A. No, I would
have been virtually in the middle Of the pen. I would
have gone   straight down from where the tunnel led in.

Would you  have a look please at Photograph 24 in the thick
bundle. 23 and 24. Do you see those two photographs?
- A. I have got 23, yes.
                             154


                                     P . MAHEW


Q. 23 shows the yellow paint on the ground that marks the
   threshold as it were of the tunnel. YQu can see diagonally
   across the pen, Pen 3? - A. Yes.

Q. And that was the pen into which you went. Is that correct?
   You went to the right, did you? - A. That does not look
   like the pen I was In.

Q. Did you go to the right or the left? - A. To the right.
   I came out of the gate at the front which appeared to me
   to be on the left of the goal.

Q.   Let’s come back to the tunnel. Photograph 21,    do you see
     that? - A. Yes.

Q. That shows the yellow paint which we saw on the other
   photograph, that cross hatching on-the road? - A. Yes.

Q. And the fence that divides the two sidep, the left and the
   right? - A. That is right.

Q. Which way did you go? - A. I would have to say that I went
   to the right.

Q. If you went to the right that would take you, Mr. Mahew,
   to the position that we see in Photograph 23. Do you
   follow? - A. Yes.

Q. There was an exit gate, was there? Was that to your left
   or to your right, an exit gate to the perimeter fence?
   - A . It was directly in front of me.

Q. So if this is the pen that you are In it would be the gate
   that we see down there with the red scarf on it? - A. Yes.

Q. Your progress on the terrace took you diagonally across,
   did it? - A. It took me straight down first and then to
   the left. You had no control about where you were going.

Q. It took you straight down, that is with the railings on
   your immediate left. Is that what you mean? - A. Ye#.

Q. Then it took you to   your left? - A. Yes.

Q. Well that would bring you into the railings,wouldn't it?
   - A. No, I was nowhere near the railings. Picture 23,
   I would have been, I had that gate virtually in front of
   me all the time.

Q. Forgive me, it may be my fault for trying to go too quickly.
   As you came out on to the terrace you went to the right
   with the dividing fence we saw in Photograph 21 on your
   left-hand side?

Q. You did say that you went straight down.      Is that right?
   - A. That is right.
                                   P . MAHEW


Well if you went straight down that would leave you with
the fence on your immediate left? - A. I was not aware
of any fence there because there was just people around
me.

And then you came eventually to a position in front of
the gate with the gate in front of you. How far ahead of
you was the gate? - A. It would have been about seven or
eight yards in front of me.

Were there any barriers between you and the gate? - A. I
remember going round one barrier but I got pushed to the
left and then I got pushed to the right and found myself
in front of the gate.

Have you got Composite 2 in front of you. Perhaps we
might pick you out on a photograph. It might be you there,
might it? - A. Possibly.

That shows somebody in the sort of position .T7.~ lifer© you
in that sort of position in relation to the gate? - A. Yes,
I was.

You are looking at which photograph? - A. 1/11A.

That position, that is the sort of position you were in.
Were you aware at any stage of the barrier collapsed?
- A . I wasn't.

      MR. WOODWARD!   Thank you.

      MR. COLLINS; Sir, the position is there are three
witnesses left but having read their statements, and I
know they are sitting in the room, they are Messrs. Hill,
King and McDonald, it does not seem to me that they have
anything specific to add over and above the picture that
has been painted by the other witnesses who have given
evidence before you today, but sir to save them coming
back, perhaps it might be that you would think that they
could be asked whether they do feel they have anything
specific that they can add to the evidence that they have
already heard and bearing in mind, of course, that we have
had before us their statements and so they can be taken
into account in any event?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I don't want there to be any
undue hurry about this, obviously. Nobody does. If
there is something that any of those three witnesses
really feels he ought to say, if it is going to be very
brief I will hear it now, if it is going to be of any
length we will have to put it off, but I don't want
them just not to be called because we have reached
5 o'clock.

      MR. COLLINSs    No, I was not suggesting that.
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You wanted to say something
Would you like to pome up and do that?




                    /Michael Gerrarxt Hill called
) C '^ V «T < *


                                                 157


                                                                   MG. HILL



                                     MICHAEL GERRARD HILL Called

                                      Examined by MR. COLLINS:

                  Q. Mr. Hill what was it you wanted to say? - A. I appreciate the
                     time element. My only comment I would like to say is in my
                     opinion the gates should never have been opened at all. I
                     know they were opened at least three times.

                  Q. You are referring to the concertina gate that let the people
                     in from outside the ground to inside the ground, are you? - A.
                     Yes.  In my opinion it should never have been opened.  It
                     should have been left shut, and there should be either a delay
                     to the game or an announcement made and then sufficient time
                     for people to get in.

                  Q. Having regard to the crush that had developed outside we have
                     heard the impression of many is that someone might have got
                     hurt if there had not been some means of relief of the
                     pressure, and the only means of relief was to open a gate.   I
                     appreciate you may think the crush should never have been
                     allowed to build up - that is a different aspect - but in the
                     circumstances that then prevailed, namely the crowd, are you
                     still saying you don't think it was necessary to open the
                     gate? - A. Yes, it was not necessary because the two mounted
                     Policemen were trying to close the outer gate, and therefore
                     there was sufficient room between the outer gate and the
                     turnstiles for that area to have been cleared gradually. All
                     it would have needed was an announcement to say, "The kick-off
                     has been delayed quarter-of-an-hour", and the pressure on the
                     turnstiles would have abated.

                  Q. Forgive me, what should have been done is one matter, or what
                     could have been done is one matter. What we are concerned
                     about is in the situation that then existed, namely with the
                     great crush that had been allowed to develop, are you saying
                     that the crush in your view was not sufficiently bad to mean
                     that some measure such as opening the gate should not have
                     been taken? - A. I believe not.

                  Q. That is your opinion? - A. Yes.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Would anybody like to ask him any
                     questions about that?

                          MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, it is late in the day, and we would
                     prefer if we may to say may we stop now, rather than rush
                     these matters, because some of these statements were received
                     or had the opportunity of being considered during the hour of
                     lunchtime.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Certainly.  The only thing I want
                     to know, Mr. Woodward, is would you like this witness to come
                     back tomorrow?

                          MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, may we leave it in this position,
                                              MG. HILL


that if there is anything in those statements we would require
to be recalled we could ask for those witnesses to come, but
not tomorrow. May we do it that way, sir?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, certainly.    Thank you very
much.

     MR. COLLINS:   As always, my endeavour to help has
backfired.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No. Very well, we will break off
now until tomorrow, and tomorrow we will sit until 1 o'clock,
and then from 1.30 there will be available, not in this room,
but in the room called I think the Mandela Room, a showing of
a film which is a compilation of a number of videos which
lasts about two hours and a bit. That is open to view by
anybody.  It is open to view for obviously all those concerned
in taking part in the Inquiry, but it is also open for members
of the public, too, and the press, of course.

         (The Inquiry was adjourned until 10 a.m.
                  the following morning)
