                                                 L
INOUIRY    INTO         THE     HILLSBOROUGH

      S T A D I U M        D ISAS T E R




                       Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                         and

                PROF.   L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESS ORS)




                          At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

             Monday,    15th May,   1989.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                (Afternoon Session)



       From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
            Official Shorthand Writers,
        55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                              TNDEX TO-TRANSCRIPT

                              (Afternoon Session)




OPENING STATEMENT BY MR. COLLINS— (Cont)

PROCEDURAL MATTERS

     <=; m    FOSTER Called

              Examined by Mr.    Goldsack
              Cross-Examined    by Mr. Hytner
              Cross-Examined    by Mr. Jackson
              Cross-Examined    by Mr. Woodward
              Cross-Examined    by M r . Glasgow
              Re-Examined by    Mr. Collins

     m   .T    RRADLEY Called

                Examined by Mr. Philips
                Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner
                Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson
              • Cross-Examined by M r . Woodward
                Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow

      p M. JACKSON Called

               Examined by Mr. Collins
                                             MR. COLLINS

           (Afternoon S e s s i o n )

     MR. COLLINS:   I have not a great deal left to say. I want
to identify a couple of other areas where investigation will
have to be made ;which I have not yet dealt with. First of
all is the question of the medical supplies and attention. I
run those two together. There is or have been certain
criticisms levelled at a possible lack of co-ordination in
the provision of medical attention and the provision of care,
and also some criticisms of the possible lack of equipment
and supplies at the ground. What ought to be there and what
was there again may be a matter which we have to consider to
some extent. At the moment I am not in a position to give
any detail as to what was available, still less to give any
suggestion as to what should have been available. Those are
matters no doubt which will be dealt with in the evidence
that is called before the Inquiry. Suffice it to say that
there does seem to have been an indication of a certain
degree of lack of equipment. One has only, for example, to
consider the need to use the advertising hoardings and tear
them off in place of stretchers, because there were not
apparently sufficient stretchers available to deal with those
who had suffered injuries.
     Finally, the matters that obviously will have to be gone
into, and I say "finally", because probably this will come
towards the end of this part of the Inquiry, is the state of the
ground itself, because we have to ask ourselves whether the
condition of the ground and the condition of the pens in any way
contributed to what happened on the 15th April.

     I have already referred to the Green Guide, the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds, which is described as voluntary
guidance to ground management, local authorities and technical
specialists on measures for improving spectator safety at
existing sports grounds. It goes on to say that it can be
applied to all types of sports grounds where spectators are
likely to be present.
     There are certain recommendations in this guide which do
appear not to have been met, and those are matters which ought to
have been drawn to the attention of or to have been considered by
the local authority who was responsible for granting the safety
certificate, and also, of course, to the management of the ground
itself. I am going to refer to one or two of them in the guide
as indicating the areas that we may have to investigate.
     In Chapter 2 headed, "Management Responsibility", there is a
requirement set out thus in paragraph 26:
     "Staff training, particularly for stewards, in carrying out
     both their normal duties" - the word should be "normal" and
     not "natural" - "and ensuring that they are aware of their
     role in an emergency situation, should be given high
     priority. Management should not only inform all staff in
     writing what their duties are, how to effect them and from
     whom to seek advice if in doubt, but also carry out active
     supervision and organise emergency drills to maintain
                                               MR. COLLINS


     standards".

     It may be the evidence that there was little if any training
of stewards, and little if any directions as to their
responsibilities in particular in ensuring that the pens in
question did not become over full.

     Paragraph 29 sets out a summary of management
responsibilities. Some of those are of relevance:

     "v. To draw up in consultation with the emergency
     services contingency plans, including arrangements with
     police for stopping an event, for

     a.   various emergency situations including fire;

     b.   possible crowd trouble,-
     c. coping with exceptionally large numbers of spectators
     arriving at the ground".

It is certainly open to question whether the contingency plans
were adequate to deal with the crowds that were anticipated for
this particular match.
     Another requirement is to provide first aid facilities and
first aid staff. I have already indicated it may be open to
question whether what was provided was adequate.
     Again it is mentioned the recruiting and training, and xv:

     "To provide directional flow, exit and emergency exit
     signs".
Directional flow signs certain so far as the access to the
terraces were concerned were sadly inadequate.
     Turnstiles: we have to ask ourselves whether the turnstiles
were adequate to meet the crowds that had to get through them.
Paragraph 46:
     "Contingency plans should be made to deal with situations
     where the available entrances at a ground have provided
     insufficient to stop unduly large crowds from gathering
     outside. This may, for example, include opening additional
     entrances, but local knowledge of the ground, crowd
     patterns and advice from the police should be taken into
     account in drawing up contingency plans".

Was there sufficient liaison between the Police and the
management of the ground? Were there sufficient contingency
plans to deal with the undoubted problems that occurred and ought
to have been anticipated because of the lack of adequate number
of turnstiles at Leppings Lane?

     Paragraph 57:
                                                 MR. COLLINS


     "A comprehensive system of signposting which clearly
     indicates routes to the various parts of the ground, and to
     the exits from the ground, should be provided".

They were not.

     87 and 88 dealing with ramps:
     "The gradient should preferably be constant and not broken
     by steps.
     88. The maximum gradient acceptable will depend on the
     particular ramp’s length, purpose and usage but a ramp
     subject to heavy crowd flow should preferably not
     exceed a gradient of 1 in 10".
I have already indicated that this ended with a 1 in 8 turning to
a 1 in 6. I say "this". I mean of course the tunnel through the
central section.
     Chapter 8 is headed "Terraces and Viewing Slopes", and
commences thus in bold print:
     "Arrangements should be Hade to encourage the even
     distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide ease of
     ;access and egress; to control and facilitate Movement,
     particularly if a local emergency should arise during the
     event; and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
     proportions."

We must ask ourselves what steps were taken and whether they were
adequate to meet the objectives set out in that passage I have
just read.
     There are detailed requirements about crash barriers and
hand rails which I will come back to. There are possible
problems with access for emergency vehicles. There is some
evidence that the ambulance first on the scene was not able to
get into the ground itself, that is the playing area, until an
advertising hoarding had been removed or part of it have been
removed. There may be questions arising as to whether there was
adequate access for emergency vehicles to the central part of the
ground.
     Communications; that is another important aspect, a
communication system. Paragraph 194:

     "At larger grounds"....

and of course Hillsborough is a larger ground:

     "the following arrangements are likely to be needed:

     "ii. Metering systems to record all admissions should be
     installed at turnstiles and, to ensure that ground
     capacities are not exceeded in any section, arrangements
     should be made for central control to be informed
                                              MR. COLLINS


     immediately a predetermined number of spectators has been
     admitted through each turnstile” .

There was a metering system at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.
Unfortunately it only metered access generally. It did not and
there was no system for metering or apparently for assessing the
numbers going into the individual pens. One question is whether
there ought to have been if it was feasible.




                              /Then iv. "Loud hailers
                                          MR. COLLINS



Then (iv)*

      "Loud hailers should be available for the use of
      stewards and police in directing or instructing
      spectators.*'

Little evidence of the use of or the existence of loud
h a i l e r s , particularly for those who wanted to inform in
pens 3 and get people at the back to try to move away and
back down the tunnel to stop the press at the front.
True it is that there is a considerable volume of noise
at a football stadium with some 50,000 people shouting or
singing or whatever, and so there are problems, but
certainly there do not seem to have been provided any or
any sufficient loud hailers such as that.

      Then stewarding, chapter 13, paragraph 195, five
basic duties which stewards are called upon to carry out.
These are:

      "a. controlling or directing members of the public
      who are entering or leaving the ground, to help
      achieve an even flow of people to the viewing areas
      and safe dispersal of spectators on the terraces or
      viewing slopes."

It will be obvious from what I have said that that
paragraph was not met because there was no direction,
there was no control and there was no achieving or
assistance in achieving a even flow to the viewing areas
or safe dispersal of spectators.

      Those are all the specific parts of the guide that
it is necessary for me to refer to in opening.   It does
not mean that there are not other paragraphs which may
become relevant in the course of the Inquiry and in the
course of the evidence that is given.

      I said I would come back to the crush barriers
because that is another matter that will obviously have
to be considered, having regard to the fact that one of
the barriers collapsed in the way I have described,
that is a barrier in pen 3, and also to the fact that
there is evidence that some people, quite a lot of people
were trapped against crush barriers, that is, the
internal barriers in the pens and some were bent over
these barriers which of course came to a height of about
3', which, for a lot of people would be about that sort
of level, I suppose.   Obviously a vulnerable part of the
body to crushing and pressure against an immovable
object.
                                       MR. COLLINS


      There are detailed provisions which I do not
propose to go into at this stage, in the guide about the
height and positioning of the crush barriers.   Suffice
it to say these were very old.   Indeed, I think there
will be evidence that a newspaper of 1931 vintage was
found stuffed into one of the railings of one of these
crush barriers, which is perhaps some indication of their
age, none the worse necessarily for that, but they were
elderly.   They were not all of the correct height, some
were slightly higher than is recommended, some were
slightly lower.   Possibly there is some evidence that
the ends were rather sharp, not rounded, so there was a
possibility of people getting caught against the ends of
some of these barriers.   Whether that was a contributory
factor one does not know.   Of course, the fact that one
collapsed may put a questionmark against the ability to
withstand the necessary pressures that will have been
placed upon them.

      Those are matters for detailed evidence which, as I
say, is likely to come towards the end of this phase of
the Inquiry.

      To sum up then, it would of course be naive to
suggest that all supporters, all fans, were perfectly
behaved and that there was no drunkenness or other bad
behaviour, but it does not seem from the evidence that is
available that it is likely that that sort of behaviour
or drunkenness contributed substantially to the disaster
that has occurred.   That is for the reasons that I have
already endeavoured to outline in my opening this
morning.

      There was some antagonism to the police afterwards
and, indeed, to stewards at the ground by fans.    There
was a considerable degree of hostility against the
police.   That is a very poor guide, indeed it may be
suggested, no guide at all, to establish a similar intent
before.   Fans believed, rightly or wrongly, that the
police were responsible and the stewards, to some extent,
were responsible for what had happened in what the fans
perceived, again rightly or wrongly, as a failure to
control the situation beforehand, leading to the opening
of the gate, leading to the crush in the pens, but
perhaps more importantly from what they perceived to be
police inaction in the initial stages of the disaster.
Again, I do not suggest that the police can necessarily,
or, indeed, the individual police officers, can
necessarily be blamed for not reacting more quickly than
they did, but the fact is, looked at from the angle of
the fans who were suffering, it is easy to understand why
they reacted as they did and became hostile towards the
police.
                         53




                                        MR. COLLINS


      However, that does not indicate, and should not be
used to indicate, that that was their attitude from the
outset.   It may have been with individuals, but there is
no evidence there was any widespread attitude of that
sort.

      The fact is, of course, there was a combination of
circumstances all leading to this disaster.   It may be in
the light of what I have indicated and in the light of
what we will hear that it is only by   good   fortune    that we
have not all been gathered here some years before to
consider a similar disaster such as this.    The fact is
that we can hope that as a result of   this   Inquiry    we will
not have to gather in a similar hall   ever   again in the
future.

      Let me end by indicating again this will have to be
very brief, very much an outline, the procedure that will
be followed and to some extent, insofar as I am able, the
order in which we will try to call the evidence.

      We will commence with evidence from Liverpool
supporters.   We anticipate that that will last for the
rest of this week.   It may be longer, it may be shorter.
It goes without saying that we cannot call all the
supporters who are in a position to say what they saw or
who have given statements.   If we did that we would be
sitting here until next Christmas at least.   What we can
do and what we are going to try to do is to call a cross-
section, as I have indicated and to call those who can
add to the general account which will be given through
the mouths of various witnesses and then extra bits,
extra details can be elicited from witnesses who deal
with their own separate little parts of the story.

      After the supporters, and this will be a very short
interlude, evidence from what I will call independent
locals, by whom I mean those who live nearby and can give
their own view of the build-up of the crowd before the
event and the behaviour of the Liverpool fans and how it
compared with the year before.

      We will then seek to have evidence from the South
Yorkshire Police.   This will involve three separate
facets.   First of all there is the planning, the p re­
match planning, the situation outside on the day leading
up to the opening of the gate, the situation inside both
before and after the disaster had started to occur.

      Again we will not be likely to be able to call
every single police officer who was on duty, there were
some 800 altogether who were on duty that day and it is
not intended, nor will it help the Inquiry, to call every
one of those.   Again, what we will endeavour to do is to
                          54




                                         MR. COLLINS


call a fair cross-section of officers to give their
impressions and their evidence as to what they saw.    We
will of course call the officers most directly involved,
the majority of those at the turnstiles at Leppings Lane,
the mounted officers outside and those who were at the
front of the terracing when the crushing started to occur
and a representative cross-section of the rest.

      Then we will come on to the ground and the ground
staff to tell their side.   Again we will have to be
selective and in this, as in all aspects, we welcome any
input from those representing the various interested
parties as to evidence which they can produce and as to
evidence which they consider to be of value to the
Inquiry and, of course, to their side of the thing.

      Then the ambulance, fire, the emergency services,
that side of it insofar as it is relevant and this will
cover also allocation of resources, equipment and so.

      Then the Football Association.   We have to
consider the question of the allocation, which may or may
not, for reasons I gave this morning, be a major
consideration as a causative factor in this disaster.

      Finally,   technical evidence about the state of the
ground.

      Now that order is only provisional.   It may not be
possible to keep to it and it may be as the Inquiry
progresses that there will be other aspects that we
discover which have to be dealt with.

      However, that is the way we would hope at the
moment the Inquiry will progress.    As I said at the
outside, thorough but speedy are, if I may put it this
way, the catchwords.   It is not speed for speed's sake,
not speed because we do not want to be here for a long
time, but speed because of the need.    It is essential
that if recommendations are to be made they should be
made as soon as possible so that football spectators can
be protected as soon as possible and so that situations
like this do not arise again.

      That is all I think I need say in opening this
Inquiry and, sir, I wonder if I might ask you for the
indulgence of a few minutes because there are procedural
matters which we can usefully discuss which ought to be
settled before we start the calling of witnesses?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Without tying you to time,
what is your...
                                           MR. COLLINS


      MR. COLLINS:      I would have thought about a quarter
of an hour.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could I just say before we
adjourn for these few minutes that Mr. Collins has
outlined the way in which this phase of the Inquiry will
proceed, but I take the opportunity now of saying that
anybody, that means any individual or any corporate body,
or anybody at all who wishes to make any representations
about the future, about what recommendations should be
made, please put in those recommendations in writing.    I
would hope that that would be done within the next month.
I am not putting down a time limit, but if you can
present any written submissions on that aspect of the
case within that period it will enable it to be sorted
and it will enable me to consider it along with what I am
hearing in this building and to be able to marshal it as
quickly as possible after the oral hearing has
terminated.

      When I say written submissions, I am not closing
the door to hearing further oral submissions on
recommendations for the future, but in the first instance
it would be very helpful for us to know in writing what
bodies are able to make helpful contributions and what
the nature of those contributions is.

      We will adjourn for a few minutes and I will rely
on Counsel to tell me when we can proceed with the first
witness.

                     (Short adjournment)
                                 56
                                                           PROCEEDINGS



     MR. COLLINS:           Sir, I am most grateful.       What we have
been conce rn in g o urselvess with mainly is the possible
order of c r os s -e x am i na t io n of witne ss es ^ Agreement has
been reached.        I do not know whether it has reached you
yet but there is being typed a list giving the order.

      LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:        That is very helpful,       thank you.

     MR. HYTNER:   It is an agreement, I may say,                 under
protest from at least one of the counsel.

      MR.   COLLINS:     Agreement,         nonetheless.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Mr. Hytner, whilst you are on
your feet or almost whilst you are on your feet, can I ask,
do you now r ep resent all those who are bereaved and injured?

       MR. HYTNER:     Sir, my position is this that I am
in structed by a team of solicitors which I understand grows
every day.       I cannot say that there are no bereaved or
injured whom I do not represent - there may well be,
because not all those who are bereaved or injured have
co ns ul te d solicitors.

      LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:        No,    I see.

     MR. HYTNER:    But there are a con si de ra bl e number              so   far.
If I can get the u p-to-date list ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Well, the point I was raising
was that on the 28th when we were here Mr. King indicated
that he already repres en te d a very large propo rt io n of
those.    There were one or two i ndications of possible
other groups or other d is se ntients but I hope that that
has resolved over the ---

     MR. HYTNER:          I think that may have       resolved.      Can
I take i n st r uc ti on s?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.   Mr. Hytner, if I have
raised s om ething that is not perhaps quite clear, perhaps
it can be dealt with later.

      MR. HYTNER:     Sir, I can reassure you that those
solic i to rs who appeared to be indep en de nt ly rep re se nt in g
clients are now within those instru ct in g me.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is very satisfactory.
I just wanted to be sure that that was so.   Thank you.

     MR. HYTNER:   While I am on my feet, may I just say
this again, that I have come to an agreement cer ta in ly with
Mr. Jackson who appears for the Supporters Clubs that we
                                      57

                                                          S.M.   FOSTER




     should not duplicate.   Where our interests coincide,
     we do not propose to duplicate cross-examination.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, that is exactly as I
     would have expected and I hope that that principle will
     operate right across the field.

           MR. HYTNER:    Can I add to that that it might not
     have been a pp arent that there would be any conflict but
     in relation to the Fire Service, for example, all the
     s tatements that refer to the Fire Service that my clients
     have made praise the Fire Service to the skies and I
     therefore have no conflict whatever with counsel for the
     Fire Service.

          LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:         Thank you.      Yes,   Mr.     Goldsack.

                     STEPHE N MARTIN FOSTER,            called

                         Examined by MR.       GOLDSACK:

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Mr. Goldsack, if I may say this
     through you:  there is no o bligation on witnesses to stand,
     providing that they get themselves in a position where they
     can speak to a m i cr op ho ne or otherwise be heard, but if
     anybody wants to stand I will not stop them.

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:    May we have your             full name,      please?
     A.   Yes, I am Stephen Martin Foster.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:         Is that   "0 S" or " 0 R S"?
     A.   "0 S".

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:       Mr. Foster, what is your o cc up ation ?
     A.    I am a Det ec ti ve Constable in the Merse ys id e Police.

          MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I think what happens is that
     whenever one of us presses the microphone, the other one
     goes off, so it is going to be a r idiculous boxing and
     coxing, which is not satisfactory.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Might I suggest for the moment,
     as counsel is used to raising his voice, that you do without.
     It is more important we hear what the witness says, but if
     you would like to keep your voice up.   Keep yours on, and
     we will see if we can manage a better arrangement.   Thank
     you.

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:       Mr.    Foster,    do you support       Liver po ol ?
     A.   Y e s , I do .

Q.   And did you come across to Sheffield on 15th April?
     A.   Yes, and I also was at the same game last year.
                                 58


                                                 S.M.   FOSTER



Q.    This year did you come alone    or with a group?   A.   I
     came with my younger brother     who is the same size as me
     and he is 19 years of age.

Q.   At what time did you arrive at Leppings Lane?    A.   I
     a rrived at Leppings Lane at quarter to three, having parked
     the car at quarter past two about a mile and a half away
     from the ground.

Q.   Was that the time you intended to arrive or had you been
     delayed?    A.   No, we allowed three hours travelling time
     from Merseyside.    We set off at 11 a.m.    However, we
     were held up in traffic delays for 55 minutes on the exit
     of the M63.    We did not stop en route at all.

Q.   From which d ir ection did you approach the gate atLeppings
     Lane?    A.    I am not aware of the name of the road.
     However, it is a very long, straight hill going down to
     Leppings Lane.

Q.   Had you been into that entrance     the previous   year?
     A.   The year before, yes.

Q.   Can we for the moment co nc en tr at e on this year before
     c om paring it with the previous year.     When you arrived at
     a quarter to three, what was the scene outside Leppings
     Lane?     A.   The scene was one of literally thousands of
     people still outside the turnstiles and one of complete
     chaos.

Q.   Are you able to give any figure for the thousands?
     A.  This is only my estimation, however I would estimate
     4,000 to 5,000 were still -- as I had seen c oachloads of
     people still being o ff-loaded from their vehicles just
     about a mile from the ground where I had, in fact, parked.
     A lot of people were arriving late.

Q.   So i n itially how close to the turnstiles^ were you able to
     get?     A.   To just outside the outer perimeter gate -
     that is before you reach the actual turnstile pen.

Q.   What, if any, police personnel did you see at that stage?
     A.     On this o cc asion the only police personnel on my travels
     down to Leppings Lane were uniformed foot personnel deployed
     standing behind b ar riers which were blocking off, in effect,
     the little terraced streets with d w el li ng ho us es on them,
     and there were groups of uniformed personnel stood on main
     junctions.     However, different to last year, there were
     c e rtainly no foot personnel r egulating people until you
     reached the M e rs ey si de Mounted Officers at the turnstiles.

Q.   Now, when you arrived near to the turnstiles how many
     mounted police o ff icers were you c onscious of?     A.   I
     recog n i se d four as Merse ys id e police officers. Although
                                    59

                                                      S. M.   FOSTER




     I do rat know their   names,   I do know their     faces.

Q.   And were they the only four or were there others you did not
     recognise?   A.   I can only remember seeing four who I
     recognised.

Q.   Did you, prior to gaining access to the ground, see any
     police officers on foot near to the t urnstiles?  A.    I
     did not, at any stage.

Q.   And when you did arrive, wherea bo ut s in relation to the
     people and the t urnstiles were the mounted officers?
     A.   Two of the mounted officers were p ositioned actually
     in the gateway which is the outer perimeter railings.
     That is about 15 yards in front of the Gates A to ---
     Yes, two moun te d off icers were creating a barrier to some
     degree in that gateway and two further mounted officers
     were between that position and the turnstiles facing
     the outer p e ri me te r fence.

Q.   Is that the t urnstiles to the right        of     the    wall as we look
     at the ---?    A.   Yes, A-G, yes.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        That is A-G where the usher         is
     pointing, the short curve,      and the large curve is 1-16.
     A.   Yes, my Lord, A-G.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:    The perimeter gates,    were they          open
     or   closed at that stage?     A.They were open.

Q. Did they remain open whilst you were there?           A.   All the
   time I was ---    Once I had gone beyond those two outer
   officers on horses, I remember at one point in time efforts
   were made   to close the gates behind us and         the horses which
   in effect   caged a p pr o xi ma te ly 2,000 to 3,000 people in that
   pen.

Q.   How did you p hy si ca ll y progress towards the t urnstiles?
     A.   I p ro gr es se d i nv ol un ta ri ly in that.    I had no control,
     even though I am 16% stone, 6 ft. 2.               I didn't have any
     proper control of my own movements, due to the pressing
     numbers.     As I said, people were still arriving behind
     the people at the turnstiles.              I a pproached with my brother
     behind me down the inside of the brick wall which then goes
     on to a c or ru g at e d steel wall just near to the turnstiles.

Q.   That is on the l eft-hand side once you were inside the
     p er imeter gate?  A.   Yes, so I was a pp ro aching the i n n e r ­
     most turnstile.

Q.   How quickly did the pressure from the crowd build up
     behind you?      A.      Due to the people I had seen arriving
     at the ground and, as I say, it was quarter to three,
     there was c o ns i de r ab l e pressure and it was i ncreasing as
                                                  S.M.    FOSTER




more and more people were aware           that the time was getting on,
you know.

Did the mounted police officers appear to be having any
success in bringing any order to the s ituation?  A.    None
at all.

What did they a ct ually appear to be trying to do? A.   They
were trying to control the crowd without any success, in my
opinion through no fault of their own, just because of the
pressing numbers.

How were they trying       to do that?       A.   The movement     of the
horses and verbally.

Did you   e ventually    reach the t urnstiles?          A.   Idid,   yes.

Can you help at all as to the period of time that you were
moving from the back of the crowd to the turnstiles?
A.   I based my times on the fact that - if I can go ahead
a little - I based my times on the fact that I actually
got through the tunnel as the Liverpool team had come on
to the pitch towards the Leppings Lane end, so I think
it must have been about four or five minutes until, you
know, I got to the turnstile.

Do you know which turnstile it was that you went through?
A.    Yes, it was the innermost turnstile next to the steel
corru ga te d wall.

Was there any d if fi cu lt y getting through the turnstile
itself?    A.   Immense difficulty.      As I say, I am 6 ft.
2 and it seemed to be very narrow anyway but there was
ob viously a lot of people trying to get through the
turnstiles at once.      There was no control.

You had a ticket,       did you?     A.    Both myself and my brother
had tickets, yes.

Did you hand that   ticket    over   as you went     through the
tu rnstile?  A.     I did,    yes.

What was the posit io n when you got through the turnstile?
A.   By this time - I had a cotton shirt on which, through
the crush was w ri ng in g wet, as my hair was, such was the crush
and the first reaction as soon as anyone was through the
turnstile was to sit down.       However, I saw a uniform Police
Inspector s ta nding behind the turnstile I had gained entry
through and I appr oa ch ed him.

And what did you say to him?     A.   I a pproached      He was
the only visible u ni formed officer at that time and I felt
it n ecessary to produ ce my police warrant card to inform him
                             61

                                          S. M. FOSTER




    that I was, in fact, a colleague and that in my opinion
    there was a serious risk to life outside.




#




                                          (Was he standing.
Was he standing immediately inside the turnstile? - A. He was
standing immediately inside the turnstile looking out at
the masses through the turnstile.

Now what was his reaction to what you told him? - A. He was
obviously looking out at the masses.  He said:  "I will try
and sort it out."  At that time the large cantilever gate
was closed.

Did you see him do anything to try and sort it out? - A. I
didn't.  I was busy as well looking through the turnstile
making sure my brother was okay who was following behind.

Were you aware or not whether that Inspector had a radio?
- A . I am not aware.

Apart from what you have already told us about the number
of people, what specifically led you to believe that harm
was going to come to those people? — A. Just my observations.
Through the years I have enjoyed contact sports and I have
enjoyed watching football and I have been in crushes at
football matches and I know the acceptable levels of crushing
in sports.  I was frightened.  I was very frightened outside
that turnstile.  People were fainting and were unable to
fall down.

Were people at that stage able to leave the crowd if they
wished? - A. You had no choice but to be pressed on towards
the turnstiles.

Did you see people trying or succeeding to gain access to
the ground by any other route? - A. I assisted people to
climb the large wall and the stainless steel corrugated
wall directly between 1-60 and A-G.

And so far as you could tell it, what appeared to be their
motivation? - A. Their only reason for clambering out was
to escape the crush in my opinion.  Can I say I saw no
evidence of disorder, public disorder or drunkenness outside
those turnstiles.

Well now what did you do after you had spoken to the Police
Inspector? - A. Once my brother came through, I think it
was four or five people after myself, up in the corner of
that wall once you got through the turnstiles my memory
is that you can see directly the tunnel entrance but to
the left of that is I think the urinals up in the corner.
Both myself and my brother went to the urinals and then as
I came out I came out before him, people were entering
the ground through the large concertina gates at the bottom.

Can I just ask you this before leaving the turnstiles:   are
you able to say whether all seven of the turnstiles near
where you came through were working? - A. I am unable to
say that.  Everyone was making towards all the turnstiles.
There was no obvious push towards one particular turnstile.
' Vi                                 63




            The crush was equal on all the turnstiles at that section.

       Q. Now on seeing the people coming in through that gate what
          did you do? - A. I was between at this stage the urinals
          and the entrance to the tunnel and having recovered to some
          degree I was aware that the game was due to start.  Together
          with my brother we made into the tunnel not thinking any­
          thing more of that.  The people who were coming through
          the concertina gates seemed to be  coming    through in a
          normal walking manner, however, as one. They weren't running
          or being disorderly.

       Q. Did you actually go into the tunnel before those people or
          join some of them? - A. I remember being in the tunnel towards
          the start of the group as they hit the tunnel.  They were
          not shepherded in any way through that gate from Stewards or
          Police.

       Q.    In the time available to you, can you estimate how many
            people you saw coming through that gate? - A. My estimation
            is approximately 1,000 people but I only      looked at it  en rout
            to the tunnel entrance myself.

       Q. Well now what was the condition of the tunnel as you went
          through it? - A. My memory is of it being a dark lit tunnel.
          There was the obvious light at the end of the tunnel for
          the playing area.

       Q. And how many people were in     the tunnel   as you went down it?
          - A. The tunnel was a solid     mass.

       Q.    How quickly or otherwise did that "solid mass" move down
            the tunnel? - A. They did not run but they were not d is ­
            orderly.   It was just a normal .11333 of people walking but
            steadily as one.

       Q. Now what happened when you got to the end of the tunnel? -
          A. It seemed to be blocked with people who were obviously
          on the terracing.

       Q. In which direction did you move once you got to the end?
          - A. Somehow, together with my brother, I ended up on the
          right-hand side of the tunnel which brought me out on to
          Unit 3 or Pen 3.

       Q. Had you at any time before entering the tunnel going through
          the tunnel and coming out at the other end of the tunnel
          seen any Stewards? - A. I did not.  This was different to
          last year.

       Q.   So you are in Pen 3 and moving across to the right?     - A. By
            this point in time I had been pushed down Pen 3.

       Q.   Now where did    you end up in Pen 3? - A. At the time   I        was
            not aware that there was a dividing fence between 3 and 4.
            I was pushed towards the front but diagonally down in 3.
re o v
                                            64




                Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Diagonally down to the right? -
                     A. Yes, from the tunnel. On leaving the tunnel on to the
                     terracing, xny Lord, I went over downwards to the right.
                Q.        MR. GOLDSACK: Did you actually go as far across as
                     the fence? - A. I stopped short of the fence.
                Q. What was the condition of the crowd in that pen when you
                   arrived? - A. It was completely congested. However, as I
                   say at that time the Liverpool Team came out on to the pitch
                   towards their own supporters as they normally do, and, as
                   normally happens, the crowd became excited.

                Q. And in their excitement what did they do? - A. The usual,
                   swaying and excited selves.
                Q. Did that cause any movement within the crowd? - A. With a
                   crowd like that of any crowd that I have experienced through
                   watching football, there is some form of swaying and pushing
                   and the numbers to the back of you did not lend yourself to
                   do anything else but that.
                Q. Where did you finally end up in that pen? - A. I eventually
                   once the teams had sorted out, both teams had come out on
                   to the pitch and the game had commenced, I looked back and
                   right up behind me I could see that the only way through
                   to the less congested pen was a gateway which was right at
                   the back and at the top of the terracing which was a door
                   3', 2'6".
                Q. Immediately under the seating stand? - A. Yes, that was the
                   only gap through the railings that I could see.

                Q. And were you able to manoeuvre through the crowd to that
                   gateway? - A. No, not at all until it was apparent some­
                   thing was the matter and rather than make any efforts to
                   move forward we did, and this would possibly be about 20-past-3
                   25-past-3, manage very slowly to move back and out on to
                   the less congested wing 1 and 2.
                Q. So that you were in Pen 3 for 20/25 minutes? - A. Yes,
                   being continually moved about.
                Q. Were you able to see what was happening further to the
                   front of Pen 3? - A. No, I don't think anyone could have
                   imagined what was happening, certainly not from where I
                   was and I was half-way Up the terracing.
                Q. Were you conscious of any people saying or shouting any­
                   thing in particular around you? - A. Not at the time. The
                   crowd was in a typical semi-final atmosphere. The crowd
                   were cheering the team on. We were not aware of what was
                   happening in front of us.
                Q. Were you able to see the pitch? * A. I was able to see the
                   pitch. I was unable to watch the game in progress.




         -Vrv
f f o o^f*
                                               65




             Q. Did you become aware that the players had gone off the pitch?
                - A. Yes, I became aware of that.

             Q. But were you at any stage prior to moving back and going
                through the gateway conscious of what was actually happening
                in front o f you? - r A. Yes, as the minutes passed everyone
                became avfrare of the seriousness.   I saw the deceased being
                passed out.    I knew they had died through my Police experience.

             Q. from your position in Pen 3 were you able to see the gate
                at the front of that? - A. I had a view of the small peri­
                meter fence gate, yes.

             Q. Did you see at w hat stage that opened? - A. I saw uniformed
                Police Officers at that gate.   I did not see it open until
                minutes later.

             Q. Once that you saw that it was open did it remain open? - A. No,
                I did see supporters being pushed back into the stadium, back
                into the terracing.

             Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Through the gate? - A. Yes,
                     supporters who were attempting to clamber out through the
                     gate unfortunately were being pushed back.

             q   .         MR. GOLDSACK:  Can you say when that was and perhaps
                     by relation to whether the players were still on the field
                     or not? - A. I can only say that it was as everything was
                     being realised or the   time I was realising the extent of
                     it, people were passing obviously injured and people up
                     but I was of the opinion that the Officers on duty had not
                     realised it as quickly as perhaps the supporters.

             Q. What about the perimeter fencing.  Did you see anyone trying
                to climb over that? - A. Yes, I saw several people attempting
                to climb over it on to the track.

             Q.      Did they succeed? - A. I saw several young lads getting  on
                     top &f it.  I also saw supporters being pushed back into
                     the crowd.

             Q.      By?   - A. By the uniformed Police personnel.

             Q.      How many uniformed Police Officers were you conscious of
                     outside Pen 3 af the front? - A. I was only really aware
                     of the two people that I focused my attention on at the
                     gate, the small gates.  I think there were one or two other
                     people doing what is the normal practice of patrolling up
                     and d o w n .

             Q. A t wh a t stage was it that you became conscious of a gate
                at the top into the other pen? - A. I am sorry.

             Q. At what stage did you become aware that there was a gate
                at the top of the terrace which would take you through to
                             66




     the next pen? - A. That would have been about 10-minutes-past-3
     I would imagine, but I was unable to reach that gate due to
     people still arriving from the back. I did see it well before
     I could reach it.
Q. When you first saw it was it open? - A. I am sorry, I am
   referring to the gate at the back of the terracing to go out
   on to the less congested wing.
Q. Was that open? — A. I did not see a gate on it. I think it
   is just an open gateway. The wall is formed with railings.

Q. Were you conscious at some stage that the pressure from
   behind was easing? - A. No, the only time that the pressure
   was easing from behind was when, I gathered afterwards, that
   the Police Officers, foot patrols had entered via the tunnel
   and solved the problem that way. They were obviously asking
   people to leave back via the way they had come in. That was
   once, it must have been 20—past, 25-past—3.
Q.    And that was when you were able to make your way to the
     next pen? - A. Yes, rather than move forward to try and
     assist there was enough crush and I chose to move backwards.

Q. Having gone into the next pen whereabouts did you go? — A.
   We stayed where it was in my opinion the least congested
   just to regain ourselves.
Q. Can you compare the relative mass of people in Pen 2 with
   Pen 3? - A. There was considerably less numbers in the outer
   wing, in fact I would say less than half. When I walked
   into it there were open spaces for me to walk into.

Q. As a regular football supporter would you have described
   Pen 2 as full or not? - A. That is the outer wing?

Q. Yes, where you went to after? - A. No, I would not have
   described it as anywhere near as full as Pen 3.

Q. I appreciate that but would you have regarded it as comfortably
   full or not full? - A. By the time I got into it which I may
   estimate it about 20-past-3, there seemed to be gaps in it
   which it is not full if that is the case. There were people
   all the time clambering over on to the west stand at this
   time so whether those people had clambered up out of the way
   I cannot say.




                                       jfQ. Once you were in Pen 2.
                                67

                                                    S.M. FOSTER



Q. Once you were in pen 2 were you able to ;see what was going on
   in front of pen 3? - A. Yes, quite clearly.

Q. What was happening there at that stage? - A. The injured and
   deceased were being finally picked up.
Q. Who at that stage was involved in the rescue operation? - A.
   By that time I think the reality had been realised, and in
   fact uniformed personnel, young lads off the terraces,
   everyone, there was mouth to mouth resuscitation being
   conducted everywhere you looked.
Q. As you had passed from pen 3 to the next pen did you see any
   official in the gateway? - A. I did not. By that time I was
   able to choose to go that way.

Q. Mr. Foster, you told us you had been to the same fixture the
   year before? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Did you park in a similar position? - A. I did. I apologise.
   No, I went by coach. However, it still ended up at Leppings
   Lane via the same route.

Q. You approached by the same route? - A. Yes.

Q. How did things differ last year? - A. Three points which I
   identified. Firstly, at the junction or right at the foot of
   that very steep hill, that is where all the coaches were
   parked last year, the Liverpool supporters' coaches. In
   effect I think it comes to the junction with Leppings Lane.
   It is a very steep long road that comes down for approximately
   a mile or a mile-and-a-half. It is the main road directly
   before Leppings Lane. Leppings Lane comes on to a junction
   with it.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Is that Middlewood Road, the A616?

          MR. COLLINS:   I am told Halifax Road.

          THE WITNESS:   It is a very long steep road, that is all
     I can say.
Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:    If you saw a map could you identify it? -
     A. Yes.   (Map handed to witness)   If the coaches were last
     year parked on Wheels Lane, which is the side of an industrial
     estate, the road I would visualise was Penistone Road, Halifax
     Road.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before you go on, is there a
     plan we are going to use all the time? I think that is off
     the top of it.
          MR. COLLINS:   Yes. I have been provided with this, but
     I don’t know whether anyone else has.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       I think I have got one back in my
                             68

                                                 S.M.   FOSTER


     study, but not here.

          MR. COLLINS:  We obviously must have a plan for general
     use. I am sorry, we seem to be a little disorganised in
     relation to this.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Don't worry.   We will have it
     tomorrow.
          MR. COLLINS:   We will certainly have it available
     tomorrow, a plan of the surrounding area which I hope will
     suffice.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:  Mr. Foster, at the position you now
     identify, what Police activity was there last year? - A. Last
     year?
Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry. I have just got the
     first point you made, that at the foot of the steep hill where
     the coaches had parked last year, and then I did not get what
     happened after that. - A. The area there which tends to be a
     big open junction, there were a considerable number of foot
     and uniformed foot patrols deployed on that junction,
     attempting to get people to enter the ground early.
     I do remember myself and my brother who I had gone
     with last year as well, we were just sharing a can of
     pop on the side of the wall, and everyone was just
     being moved on and being asked to enter the ground
     early. That was the first point. This year I saw
     people stood about behind barriers into the terraced
     roads, but they were not the same numbers, and at no
     time did I see anyone requested to make their way
     down to Leppings lane to the ground. That is the
     first point.
Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   What about as you got closer to the
     ground last year? - A. Secondly, well before you get to the
     outer perimeter railings, that is the ones before A to G, I
     would say approximately 50 yards before those, there were a
     considerable number forming a cordon of uniformed foot
     personnel, forming a cordon, examining tickets and
     filtering so as queues could be created, with mounted
     Officers down near the turnstiles. This year I did not see
     any of those. The first barrier you came to were the
     mounted Police Officers from Merseyside.
Q. Last year what was happening to those without tickets? - A.
   They were being turned away, quite simply.

Q. What is the third point you noticed? - A. The third point was
   last year on going through the tunnel I do remember stewards
   being at the far end, on the pitch side of the tunnel advising
   people to move along those gangways, which are at the base of
   the west stand, the gaps in the railings. This year I did not
   see any.
                    Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:
p
                               69

                                                  S.M. FOSTER



    Q. Can I ask you to try and identify in relation to the roadway
       where these events occurred? When you arrived this year ;you
       see on the model there is Leppings Lane swings round over the
       bridge? - A. Yes.
    Q. Between the roadway and the railings there is a curved area? -
       A . Yes.
    Q. I suppose sooner or later we will have to call that something
       in this Inquiry, but I am not going to be the first person to
       name it. It is the area outside the perimeter gate? - A.
       Yes. The cordon I remember last year seemed to be at the edge
       of that area off the road.
    Q. Forget last year for the moment. This year, when you walked
       down Leppings Lane were you in a group of people walking down?
       Was there a steady stream as one sees going to a football
       match? - A. There was a stream of the width of the road of
       people still arriving at the ground.
    Q. There comes a time, whether it is a traffic jam or whether it
       is a pedestrian jam, where you finish walking and you meet the
       crush? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you stopped? - A. Yes.
    Q. Did the crush overspill on to the public roadway this year? -
       A. The congestion was on the roadway. There was a mass chaos
       in that. There was just congestion everywhere.

    Q. I am trying to find out where it was. Were there people
       walking towards that area, not only down Leppings Lane from
       the roundabouts where you had come from? - A. Yes.

    Q. But were there also people walking over the bridge over the
       River Don to reach the same area? - A. The only route I have
       ever used is from that roundabout.

    Q. I know, but when you came down did you see people coming in
       the opposite direction over the bridge? - A. No, my Lord, I
       was under the impression there was only one route into it. I
       have never been the other way.

    Q. But was there traffic using Leppings Lane? - A. I think I saw
       one Police van or two Police vans parked up somewhere along
       Leppings Lane, stationary.

    Q. Is it your impression that the congestion, the crowd that was
       stationary trying to move slowly into the turnstile area,
       overspilled and up Leppings Lane towards the roundabout? - A.
       There is a considerable distance between the roundabout and
       the turnstiles. No, the congestion was certainly from the
       barrier to the paved area.
    Q. You have misunderstood the question. It was badly phrased. I
       don’t mean all the way up to the roundabout, but that part of
                             70

                                                  S.M. FOSTER


     Leppings Lane between Hillsborough, the club, and the
     roundabout, was part of the roadway covered with stationary
     people? - A. Yes, people stood about, as well as people still
     making to the turnstiles.
Q. How far up the road towards the roundabout was the mass, the
   stationary mass? That is what I am trying to find out. - A.
   People were stood on the roadway. People were still arriving,
   and there was a steady stream of people. The mass did not go
   up towards the roundabout. The people were still arriving,
   and all of a sudden they were at the mass.
Q. I am still putting it badly because you still don’t follow.
   There is let us say 100 yards between the ground and the
   roundabout? - A . Yes.
Q. If there is nobody on the roadway, there is 100 yards
   of roadway to walk down. Was there any part of that 100 yards
   which was covered by the mass of people outside the ground? -
   A. No, you hit the mass in that paved area.

Q. That is what I wanted to know. - A. However, as I said there
   were still thousands arriving.

Q. Last year when you arrived at the ground what time did you
   arrive? Was it a different time? - A. I think it was about
   half-past-2. The coaches usually get there an hour before the
   kick off. I think we were late last year.

Q. Are you saying there were orderly queues last year at 2.30? -
   A. Last year due to the Policing and the cordon that was
   obviously there to stop people coming through, I would suggest
   there were queues formed on the inner side of the cordon. It
   was controlled.
Q. One of the things that has not been mentioned yet, and it may
   be of some marginal importance, as you approached turnstiles A
   to G on the left-hand side you are constricted by the wall, a
   corrugated wall, are not you, by turnstile A? - A. Yes.
Q. By turnstile G there is also a metal barrier dividing off the
   turnstile area from the private road down to the south stand?
   - A. I was not aware of that. All the time I arrived I was to
   the left of A to G against the wall.
Q. You don’t recall that from last year? - A. No.
          MR. COLLINS:   It is 3 feet 8 inches.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:   I am told it is 3 feet 8 inches high. - A.
     I do not remember that, no.

          MR. COLLINS:   It is Just a rail.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:   When you arrived this year do you think
     from your progress that you were progressing more quickly than
     perhaps smaller people around you because of your height? - A.
                           71


                                               S.M. FOSTER


   No, there was just a steady flow of people. However, once I
   arrived at the mass I would have chosen to turn back and
   delayed going in. However, you are unable to because of the
   people arriving behind you.
Q. What I am trying to find out is this. It only took you from
   something like 2.45 to something like 5-to-3, a period of some
   10 minutes at the most, to progress from the outer limits of
   the mass to the position through the turnstiles on the other
   side of the turnstiles? - A. Apologies. From me going to the
   outer perimeter railings where the two first mounted Officers
   were, from there through to the turnstile it took that time.
Q. How long did it take you to get from the outer limits of the
   mass on Leppings Lane through to the outer railings? - A. A
   couple of minutes.
Q. So that was not all that congested? - A. It was congested.
   However, I got through, yes, as did my brother shortly
   afterwards.
Q. One thing is unlikely, is not it?    It is highly unlikely that
   everybody who was in front of you when you arrived at the mass
   had got into the ground before you did? - A. Yes. In fact, by
   myself being against that wall assisting people to get up, at
   different stages there was perhaps more of a gap there for me
   than there was if you were in the more congested part of it.

Q. You would not want to give the impression, as it were, that
   for one reason or another everybody who had arrived before you
   had got into the ground before you? - A. Not at all. I was
   amazed at how quickly I had progressed along that wall to
   the turnstiles.
Q. The railing gates you think were open? - A. Where the two
   mounted Officers were, yes.

Q. There were two mounted Officers on the road side of the
   railing gates? - A. They seemed to be between the entrance to
   the gates, in effect creating a barrier which was continually
   moving.



                                /Q. Stopping people getting
                              72


                                              S. M. FOSTER



Q.    Stopping people getting to those gates? - A. No, they
     were not creating a barrier to stop      you going in that.
     People were still being allowed through.        At the same
     time there was movement of the horses but at the same
     time...       They seemed to be there for a reason but they
     were not preventing people going in, into an already
     c o n gested .•.

Q. Could you see any beneficial effect of their presence? -
   A. In the situation they were in, no.   There were a
   problem.

Q.   What about the police horses within  the enclosed area?
     What do you say about them?   Could  you see any good
     that they could conceivably have done in the position
     they were in? - A. In my opinion due to the numbers they
     lost control.

Q. Is it possible - I know this is speculation - is it
   possible that they had been there controlling the crowd
   and had then got trapped within that area by others
   coining in? - A. No, I would say the position they were
   in was allowed to develop.    It would have been quite
   easy to have deployed a number of uniformed personnel to
   assist them if it had been realised.

Q. I am coming to that.    This may be a mystery you cannot
   help us with, but we have been told earlier this morning
   that there were 44 uniformed police officers, quite
   apart from Inspectors and Superintendents, 44 deployed
   outside the ground.   Did you see none of those? - A. I
   saw no foot personnel within the inner railing barrier
   to the turnstiles, apart from the mounted officers.
   The only foot personnel I did see on Leppings Lane were
   standing in twos and threes behind the barriers on the
   dwelling side.

Q. They are stopping people crushing through the side
   roads, which is obviously good police practice? - A.
   Yes.   There was certainly no-one regulating or
   controlling the crowd at the turnstiles at all.

Q. Was there anybody at all at the roundabout at the top of
   Leppings Lane? - A. I think there were groups of two or
   three officers stood at the junctions.

Q. Doing anything that you saw? - A. Doing what is normal
   practice and is possibly being preferred before any
   outbreaks of trouble but there is no disorder evident
   anywhere.

Q. Last year was it at that spot there were officers who
   were filtering? - A. No, at the roundabout last year
                                       S. M. FOSTER


there were a lot of foot officers deployed moving people
on and trying to get them into the ground early, you
know.

Coming to getting to the ground early, your evidence is
of no greater value than anybody else s, you are a
supporter, but would it have been any incentive to you
to go earlier if, for example, there had been pre-match
entertainment? - A. Yes, I thought I was giving myself
plenty of time, even without pre-match entertainment to
a r r i v e . •• I was only travelling 80 miles from St.
Heel's in Merseyside to Sheffield.        I had allowed
myself three to three and a half hours to get there.     I
arrived at the top of that hill at quarter past two.

Could you assist the Tribunal?   I appreciate you are a
police officer but if you had not been delayed would you
have been content to go into the ground an hour or so
earlier and just stand on the terraces doing nothing? -
A. We are faced with that situation in England and I do
do it and have done it in the past and that would have
been the plan.   We were not going to go into a pub
first.    We were going to get into the ground.

Lastly, there is one matter which perhaps ought to be
cleared up.   When you got into pen 3 you saw this
gateway, this opening into pen 2? - A. Yes.

If you look first of all at a photograph that everybody
has got?   Would you look at photograph 52?    It looks
from there that there is in fact a gate and on that
photograph the gate is closed? - A. It appears so on
this photograph, yes.

      MR. HYTNER:   Sir, I have a photograph taken by my
solicitors which makes it abundantly clear.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I can see it from here.

      MR. HYTNER:   If you had the impression that it was
an opening, either it was because the gate was open at
the time or that you remember it from the previous year
and you thought it was an opening? - A. I went through
the opening and I did not have to open anything.    If
there was a gate there it was obviously open, yes.

Last year did you stand behind the goal again in pen 3
or pen 4? - A. My memory is that it was in the other
side of that middle dividing wall so in effect it would
be pen 4 - very much the same position.

What did time did you get there?    You said 2.30 last
year? - A. Yes.
                                             S. M. FOSTER


Where the pens then full the previous year? - A. Yes.
We are talking about Liverpool Football Club and the
attendances they do get.    No matter where you go, given
the amount of tickets they are allocated,  any section of
the ground is always full.

Last year when you got there at 2.30 were the middle
sections full in the sense   that they were pretty well
filled up to capacity? - A. Yes.

Do you know what happened last year with people coming
later?   Did you see?   Were they moved by stewards to
the two wing pens? - A. Certainly on arrival I remember
the stewards being there to advise.   Now whether you
took that advice, but people did advise you of the way.
People do still make to behind the goal areas
traditionally.

      MR. HYTNER:      Yes,   thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

Just one matter.        Would you confirm your travelling
times, your route and the delays you encountered on the
way? - A. Yes.        On the advice of a local Merseyside
coach company and the route         they were taking, I chose to
go from the M6.        I live in St. Helen*s - the
St. H e l e n ’s end of Merseyside.     I live close to the M6
junction with the East Lancashire Road.          At 11.00 am we
got on to the M6 road to go via the M63.          We
experienced, as I say, a 55 minute delay at the end of
the M63, which I did not know at the time.           You
actually come off the motorway on to a roundabout.
From there we went via Woodhead and then the normal way
into Sheffield once you have come this side.

So in effect three and a quarter hours travelling time
and half an hour to walk tothe ground? - A. Yes,  and we
did not stop en route at all for refreshments or
anything.

            Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

Can I ask you about 1988? - A. Yes,        sir.

That year you came by coach? - A. I did, yes.

You arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance at about what
time? - A. I think it was about 2.30 last year.

As you approached the Leppings Lane entrance last year
you found what, police along the kerbside keeping people
on to the pavement to direct them towards the
turnstiles? - A. Yes.   If any groups of people did
                           75


                                          S. M. FOSTER


   appear to be stood about or after tickets or the sale of
   tickets, people were being moved on.   Quite simply we
   were advised just to try and get into the ground early.
   This was still half past two.

Q. As you got closer to the ground you encountered more
   uniformed officers? - A. Considerably more.

Q. When you arrived on this occasion at the time you got to
   that point you were not seeing any uniformed officers on
   foot? - A. Apart from groups of two or three at the
   major junction and apart from groups of two or three
   behind barriers.

Q. Would you have a look at some photographs?    I
   apologise, this is the only copy that happens to be in
   the building although obviously copies have been
   furnished, certainly to the Inquiry.   These are timed
   photographs.   If I could show them to the witness first
   of all.   Would you look at those please?   Do you see
   there in front of you, Mr. Foster, photograph 20A, then
   21A, 22 and 23? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Those are photographs..**.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Would you give me those
   numbers again?

         MR. WOODWARD:    It is 20 to 23, sir:

Q. You recognise the place those photographs show? - A.
   Yes.

Q. They show a cameraman positioned somewhere in Leppings
   Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. He is looking with the gates to his right up in the
   direction from which you would have walked? -A. Yes,
   sir.   Are these photographs referring to this year or
   last year, sir?

Q. I will tell you in a moment.   Do those photographs show
   the sort of situation that you encountered in 1988? - A.
   In 1988, yes, I would say even more police officers than
   are shown there.

Q. If you look at photographs 20, 21, 22 and 23, do they
   show the sort of policing arrangements not necessarily
   identical to that you saw in 1988, but a method?   The
   police along the kerbside gently ensuring that the
   supporters kept to the pavement? - A. Yes, it was done
   in a controlled manner, yes.
                                       S. M. FOSTER


 Now those photographs, according to the timing on the
camera, were taken respectively at 14.26, 14.27, 14.28
and 14.29 if the camera is synchronised to Greenwich
Mean Time, or to the appropriate time.   Looking at
those photographs, those were taken in 1989.  - A. Yes,
sir.

Those show the situation and the policing on the
immediate approach to the Leppings Lane entrance? - A.
Yes, sir.

They show a number of foot officers in uniform in
addition to the mounted officers? - A. Yes, they do.

Not herding people to the pavement but gently
controlling them and directing them? - A. Yes,   that is
correct, sir.

In the sort of way you would expect it to be done? - A.
Yes, sir.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, may you see those?     I
apologise.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, of course.    Are we
going to have some more?

      MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, you  will.    I understand the
West Midlands have in fact been provided with this
material.




                        /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes
                                                      S. M. FOSTER




     LORD JUS TICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.                      Do you want
me to keep them?   Do you want them back?

     MR. WOODWARD:         Sir, they are my only copy.                       Sir,   we
will pr ov id e copies    for you.

      LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:         You w ould   like it back now?

      MR.   WOODWARD:       Not at this moment,         sir,      no.

      THE WITNESS:        That was at 14.26,          was it?

     MR. WOODWARD:     Yes,        14.26-14.29,       s ho rtly    before       half
past two.   A.    Yes.

On this p a r t i c u l a r occasion,    1989 ---      A.      Yes.

You had come by road and you had been delayed.                          A.     Yes.

The amount of p eople that you e n co u n t e r e d as you made your way
along Le pp in gs Lane to get to the entrance.          A.   Yes.

How did that c ompare with the numbers you had e x p e r i e n c e d when
you had arrived in 1988 before you got to Lepp in gs Lane?
A.       In 1988 I do not r em em be r coac he s having to be park ed
way up the hill.         We were park ed at the side of an
i n d u st ri al estate very close to that big r ou ndabout, as
were most of the L iverpo ol s u p p or t er s last year.   On this
year, c oaches were dr o pp i ng peop le off at the bott om in
order to carry on, o b v i o u s l y later, to park right at the top
of this hill near to w here I parked.

But the general flow as you were w al ki ng towa rd s the gates,
before you got c lose to them, in 1989 at the time you were
w al kin g along there, was that much the same as yai had
e x pe r i e n c e d in 1988? A. A steady flow of people* y e s .

You say that there came a point when you e nc ou n te r ed
the crowd of pe op le ? A. B efore you reali se d it, you seemed
to be in this crowd, yes.

Are you able to say just about w here that s ta r te d ? A.       Yes,
I said beyond the paving, if it is paving, before Lepp in gs
Lane.    The p eople were stood about on the r oa dway at Leppings
Lane near to that motor p e r i me t er barrier.  However,
where the p olice were last year, t hat's w here the c o n g es t io n
started.

Were those p eople as you a p p r oa c he d the edges of this crowd,
were they p u s h in g? A.   There was c on gestion.      I w o ul dn 't
say they were p us hi ng anywhere, no.
                                                                                         /

Were you p u s h in g? A. No.   E v e r y on e at the same time is
aware that it is now quart er to three and you do wish and
                                                     S. M.   FOSTER


you are hoping      to be in the grou nd       for three.

But you were not pu sh in g or thrusting,           you were just walking.
A.   Yes.

U r g en tl y to your destinat io n.       A.   Yes.       I w an te d to
o b v i o u s l y get into the ground    for the game.

You made a s t a t em en t d e s c r i b i n g the crowd of peop le   that
you came upon m assed as one.                 A.   Yes.

You told the Inquiry today that it was one c om p le t e chaos
and there may have been 4,000 or 5,000 there.                 A.      2,000
in the inner p er i m e t e r to the t u r ns t il e s to the p er i me t er
b ar rier and then beyond that, yes, I e st im at e the numbers
at about 4,000 round there.

In the s t a te me nt that you made, you say that "Two of the m ou nt ed
p olice o f f i ce rs were blo c ki n g the e n t ra n ce w ay t hr ou gh the
p e r i m e t e r railings, two farther o ff i ce r s being p o s it i on e d
w it hin the area b etween the p e r i me t er r a il in gs and the
tu rnstile, no u ni f o r m e d polic e p er s on n el a pp e ar e d to be
d e p l oy ed w it hi n this area".       That is betw ee n the p er i me t er
ra il in gs and the t u r n s t i l e s ?  A.   Yes, at quar te r to
three.

And the area was c on t a i n i n g     approximately   2,000 s u p po r te r s?
A.   Yes.   It was full.

That was what      you said.       A.      That small   area was      full.

     LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:         That is b et we en the p er i me t er
fence and the t u r n s t i l e ? A.   Yes, and the actual turnstiles,
yes.    That was i n c l us iv e of the two m o un t ed lads on their
horses.

          MR. WOODWARD:            "Togeth er with my brother, we and the
other s u p p o r t e r s were a ll ow ed into this inner area, all the
time being p us he d from behind by m a ss in g crowds, again
p o s s i b l y n u m be ri ng 2,000."      Are you t a lk in g about 2,000
behind you or 2,000 in front or what?                    A.     There was
an e v e r - i n c r e a s i n g ---   The m em or y is of an i n c r ea s in g
number from behind still arriving, as well as we are, like,
part of a 2,000 crowd inside that little area b e tw e en the
t ur n s t i l e s and the p er i m e t e r barrier.

W i thin how many m inutes was it that you got to the t ur ns t il e ?
A.      As I h a V e said, it would p os s ib l y be about 4 minutes
b e ca us e I was a gainst that wall.       That is the only way I
can think of it.

What was the b enefit of being agai ns t the wall?              A.     Well,
no, but in a s s i s t i n g p eople up on to the wall who were being
crushed, s om e h o w I did end up ---        B ec a us e of the m ov em en t
                                       79



                                                            S. M.     FOSTER


     of the crowd, p e r i o d i c a l l y there were gaps agai ns t that
     wall and I must have made my p ro g re s s along that wall.

Q.   That was your own vol it io n that you moved at that pace,
     was it?   A.    No, I did not ---        I could not c ho os e to
     move.   I could not have chosen to move s te a di l y along
     that but it must have only been four or five minu te s
     that I did act ua ll y reach the t ur n st i le corner there,
     yes.

Q. Did it     seem to you that those ahead of you were going through
   at the     same rate?     A.    There was panic and c o n g es t io n
   at the     turnstiles.      They were not going thro ug h the t u r n ­
   stiles     ste ad il y in any way.

Q.   There you were making         your pro g re s s --      A.      Yes.

Q.   In the sort of time you have told.                A.    Yes.

Q.   Were the  people adjacent to you p r oc e e d i n g at the same sort
     of pace?    A.   I would not    say so, no.           They were -
     As I say, there seemed to be gaps crea te d by the m ov em en t
     from against the wall to and fro.

Q.   So you then went t hrough the t u r n st i le ? A.              I e v en tu al ly
     m an ag ed to get t hrough the turnstile, yes.

Q. Did you know which tur ns t il e you were maki ng                for?     A.    I
   headed for the nearest t u rn st il e and safety.

Q. And having got ---          Did it take you long to              get actu al ly
   through the turnstile, once you got into the                     cabin, as it
   were?    A.       If I am stood in the turnstile,                no-one else
   can get t hrough as well as me and once I was                    in the conf in es
   of the t ur n s t i l e I was able to get through.

Q.    Were you      held up a bn o r m a l l y in going thro ug h the t ur ns t il e ?
     A.    I p r o t e c t e d bteher peopl e w hile they got t h ro ug h as well,
     yes.     It was a case of people there to some degr ee had to
     allow ---          If s omeon e was half through, to some d egree
     they had to make m ov e m e n t s to allow them in.

Q. By the time you get through it is - what - 2.50?          Roughly?
   A.     Well, it was a m inute befo re -- a m in ut e to two minutes
   b efo re I saw that gate open and it would be the time it
   takes to visit the urinals, go thro ug h the tunnel and when
   the Liv er po ol team came out.

Q.   When you came out of the urinal had the L i ve rp oo l team
     a lre ady come on to the field?    A.   As I was t hr ou gh that
     tunnel, as I came out on to the terrace side of the tunnel,
     the Live rp oo l team came out of the players' tunnel.

Q.   When you came out of the turnstile, they were not yet on
     the field?   A.   Well, I could not o b v i ou s ly see that at
                                                   S. M.   FOSTER


that time but once I got through the               tunnel, it was      clear
that they were then coming out on to               the pitch.

You paused, having gone through the turnstile, and spoke
to a police o f f i ce r?      A.   Yes.   There was o bv io us space
behind the t ur n s t i l e s as opposed to what I had e x pe r ie n ce d
on the other side.

There was ample space inside there to stand?                  A.       Yes,
therd was no c o n g e s t i o n there, no.

No problem.            No di so rd e r or p r ob l em in that area?
A.        There were p eople sat on the floor r ec ov e ri n g from
the crush and p eople a ssis ti ng those but there was no
c o n g e s t i o n as such, no.

And your a dvance then to the tunnel from the urinal was a
steady walk?    A.    It is a very  short distance, yes.

And you w alked down the tunnel?    A.    I entered the tunnel
with --   I would estimate, you know, towards the front of
this group that had come through    the gate.

And did you see any off ic ia l s or                  any stew ar ds as you entered
the t unnel?          A.        No,       As I have said, no, not at all.
In fact, the p eo pl e who came t hr ou gh the gates did not
appear ---           My r e c o l l e c t i o n is that they did not appear
s he p h e r d e d or buf fe te d in any way;          it was just a flow of
Li ve r po ol s u p p o r t e r s coming thro ug h the gate t o wa rd s the
tunnel.

Was your going down through the tunnel the sort of o r di na ry
p ro gr es s that you have e x pe r i e n c e d on other football m a tc he s?
A.      Yes, it was not a rush.           A lt h ou g h there was an o bv ious
rush to get to the other side, it was not in any way a
fr ig ht en in g experience.        I felt in most danger on the
o ut sid e of the t ur ns t i l e s where I thought there was a risk
to life.

Having gone in along the tunnel, down the slope, you would
move to the r ight?          A.    Yes, I was not aware until today
that it was, in fact, a slope.            You know, I don't reme mb er
going d o w n w a r d s or upwards;   I just r e me mb er as one ever yo ne
went through to the other end of the tunnel, yes.

Did you see any s teward or o f f i c ia l ? A.    No, and I don't
know how I ended up b ecause I didn 't p ur p os e ly go to the
r i g h t - h a n d side of that tunnel.

Would that be an u nusual e x p e ri e nc e in going to a football
m atch?     A.   It is som e th i ng I can't e x pl ai n b e ca us e if
I start off on this side of the tunnel, you know, it just --
how I ended up on the op p os i te side, it was o b v i o us l y a
mo ve me nt from all the other p eo pl e as well.        I am still
                                           S. M.   FOSTER


aware that my younger brother is with me and I am still
feeling r e s p o n s i b l e for his health as well.

Having gone in and on to the t e rr ac e?    A.   Well, yes,
you could not go on to the terrace;       it was a push on to
the terrace.

Is it right you were not able to see anyt hi ng o f the game?
Is that what you were saying?          A.    I could see the
L iverp ool team come out on to the pitch towards their own
supporters.         It was at that time   that through no -- not
in a v o l u nt ar y way, I was down --    I went down t ow ards the
front of the t e r r ac in g and at that time such was the
c on gestion, al th ou gh you could look about, you were more
c on ce r ne d with your health than what was h a p p e ni n g on the
football pitch.

So did you at that time e xp er i en c e any sudd en surge or
p re ss ur e in the crowd?     A.   As I have said, at that time
when the L i v e rp oo l team came out, as is normal, the crowd
does become excited.        They are there for a very i mp o rt a nt
occasion.

They had al re ad y come out by the time you had got on to
the terrace, had they not?      A.    As I came to the end of
the tunnel on to the terrace, the Live rp oo l team were coming
out.   That would be at the back of the highest p oint of
the terrace, yes.

You told the     Inquiry that you saw a u ni f or m ed o ff ic er at a
gate?   A.       I think it was two u ni f or m ed p olice officers.

Are you able to i dentify which gate that was?   A.  My
me mory of it is below me in Unit 3, if there is one there.
It was down in front of me.

And are you saying that people were a ct ua ll y being p ushed
back by that o f f i ce r?       A.   I am s aying that in the early
c ircu mst an ce s, before it b ecame apparent - the e xtent of it -
I d ef in i t e l y saw p eople being p us he d back on to the t e rr ac in g
who were a t t e m p t i n g to get out and on to the pitch, yes.
As I had seen p eople pushed back over the fance, back on
to the terracing.

Did there come a time when you felt c o nc er ne d for y ou r se l f?
A.        I was c o n c e r n e d for m y se l f from having left Lepp in gs
Lane, apart from s peaking to fehe Poli ce Insp ec to r where
there was space.                 You were not in a p o s i t i o n w here you
could have a ltered a nyth in g or any of your s u r r o u n d i n g s or
c i r c u m s t a n c e s on that terracing.

      MR.   WOODWARD:      Thank you.
                                               S. M.   FOSTER


                  Cross-examined      by MR.    GLASGOW:

Mr. Foster, two              matters, please.    As you a p p r oa c he d the
turnstiles, first of all, o ut s id e the ground, am I right
in u n d e r s t a n d i n g that you w ould not have had any v ol u nt a ry
C ontro l of which t u r ns ti le you went to?         You went to
w h i c he ve r you were pushed to?          A.   I found m y s e l f against
a brick wall w hich then goes into a c or ru g at e d steel wall.
I had - and I do still have - the butt of my ticket.                       I
had the ticket in my hand and found m y se l f at the nearest,
which just hap pe ne d to be the end turnstile.                 I made for
that, which was the quickest and e as iest one.

No c ri t i c i s m of you or the rate of p ro g re s s you made,
Officer, but you are a very s u b s t a n t i a l and a s trong man.
A.    Yes.         Well, I would say so, yes.

Nobody in the crowd, by the time you arrived, would have
had any c hoice of which t u r n st i le they went to;           they would
have simply got c arried along involunt ar il y, as you put
it?     A.        The crush was equal and was o b v i ou s ly agai ns t
every t ur n s t i l e along that row.      I d idn't count the number
of t ur n s t i l e s or actual gates that you could go through.
I found myself, along with a lot of other s u p po r te r s all
trying to get th ro ug h one p ar t i c u l a r t ur ns t il e and that,
in my case, h a p p en ed to be the one n ea re st to the wall.

Just assume, for the moment, for w ha t ev e r reason, on looking
at the ticket or your k n o wl e dg e of the ground you had decided
that you w is he d to go to a d i f f e r e n t turnstile, that w ould
e f f e c t i v e l y have been out of the q ue s ti o n by the time you
a rrived?            A.   When I was in that inner p e r i m et e r I was,
b ecause of the signs outside, I was not even clear in my
own mind as to w hether I was aiming for the c o rr e ct t u r n ­
stile.            However, I had no choice, I could not have turned
back.

It would not have made any diff er en ce , Mr. Foster, would it,
you would have had to be p ush ed to the one that you were
p ushed to?  A.   Yes, I had no choice to move back and out
of that crush.

You have also told the Inquiry, Mr. Foster, about the
s it u a t i o n when you came out of the toilet and saw that the
gate had been o pe ne d while you were inside.        A.   I
didn't a c t u al ly see the op en i ng of the gate but I was
aware of p eo pl e coming as one through that gate towards
a direct line to the tunnel.

And you gave your own e st im at e of that and you s tr e ss e d
that it was only an estimat e but s o m e t hi n g like 1,000
people coming t hrough that gate towa rd s you.           A. Yes,
a c o n s i d e r a b l e number, the w idth of the gate.
                                                    S. M.   FOSTER


On the pre vi ou s year when you had e nt ered the g round through
the tunnel, you had had some time to be able to look
around the d i r ec ti on in which to go and whet he r to filter
along the back wall or go to the front?                A.    It would
be wrong for me to say in so much detail.                 I can't reme mb er
e v er yt hi ng about last year.       I can r e me mb er the matters
r el at in g to the p o l i ci ng of that.   I can reme mb er turning
up late b ecause of where the coach was parked.                I can't
rem em be r the density of the crowd going in about that time
through the tunnel last year beca us e it didn 't matt er last
year.

Mr. Foster, let us stick to this year, then.                 As you came
out of the tunnel on to the ground -----   A.               On to the
terracing.

On to the terracing, I am sorry, in view of the ground, yet
again you had no real control over where you w an te d to go;
the force of p eople b ehi nd you p r o p e ll e d you i n v o l u nt a ri l y
through.   A.     I had no cont ro l w ha tsoever.          I do not know
how I bame, dr ag gi ng m y b c b t h e r , over to the r i gh t - h a n d
side of that tunnel to end u p                It wasn't out of c h oo si ng
that I ended up in Pen 3.

Hay I just ask you - this is the last question, Hr. Foster -
can you try and v i s u al is e a s i t u a ti o n in which the pens
were full - either 3 or 4, I do not mind which, but let us
stick to 3          b ecause that is the one that you were in.
If you had come through the tunnel and found t h ^ Pen 3
was e f f e c t i v e l y full and there was not a c o m f o r t a b l e way
down to the front and you had not had a thousand people
c oming b ehind you, do you think you w ould have been able
to move along the wall through the open in g into Pen 2
r e l a ti ve ly e asily?      A.   What, with the a s s i st a nc e of
stewards, do you mean, or ---?




                                            (Well w he th er   a n yb od y told.
Well whether anybody told you to would it have been an obvious
place to go if you had found 3 full when you got through there
- A. 3 was full and 4.  The perimeter gate splits in effect
the tunnel.  As you come through the tunnel I was not aware
until afterwards.

Letts stick to 3 because we know as you turn to the right of
the split perimeter fence _____  A. My memory is it is the
same distance to go into 4, so if you had been at that end
of the tunnel you would automatically have been pushed into
4.

But we know you are in 3 because as you say involuntarily
you have been propelled along the right-hand side of the
tunnel as you came down, haven't you? - A. I found myself
in that position, yes.

Again no criticism.  You find yourself then at the end of
that tunnel turning to the right which goes into Pen 3? - A.
Yes.

Once you are inside Pen 3 you have got a great deal of weight
behind you pushing you forward, haven't you? - A. Pushing
from every side.  Sorry from the back and the sides, yes,
not from the front.

Again I appreciate it may be unfair and if you cannot help
the Inquiry please say so, but what I am asking you to
envisage is a situation in which you had not got that
enormous weight of people pushing from behind you? — A. In
that case you would have had to retrace your steps to the
top and the highest point of  the terracing to have gone
through to a different pen via that gate at the top of the
terracing.

Mr. Foster, that is the one matter I am having difficulty
with.  I don't see why you would ever have got propelled
down from the top of that terracing.  If there had not been
the weight of people behind you that forced you down on this
occasion you would have been able to see from the entrance
to the tunnel that that pen was full and that you just had
to walk along through the entrance to your right? - A. I
thought you said if it was just a normal pen.

If there had not been the weight of people behind you that
there were, you would have been able to see, you taould not
have been propelled in any particular direction and you
could have simply walked whether stewarded or not towards
your right towards the entrance to the relatively empty
Pen 2, couldn't you? - A. If pressure had not been upon
us from behind you could have chosen your route anyway,
yes.

      MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much, Mr. Foster.
                                  85




                      Re-Examined by M R . C O L L I N S :

Q. That always assumes that you can see when you come to the
   end of the tunnel that there is in fact a gateway for you to
   go through? - A. As I say it took me ten minutes to become
   aware of where that was and I was looking for that route out.

Q. Yes, one or two other minor matters, perhaps.  Do I under­
   stand that there were Police Officers in Leppings Lane as
   you approached but this year you say they were doing no­
   thing effective as far as you could see? - A. The Police
   Officers at quarter-to-3 or just before quarter-to-3 as I
   am walking down Leppings Lane, the only obvious ones on
   Leppings Lane were the ones behind the little barriers to
   prevent people going into the dwelling houses, the terraced
   houses.

Q. Whatever may have been the position at 2.26, when you came
   down at 2.40, or whatever it was,    there weren't any Officers
   that    you could see doing anything effective? - A. I am
   amazed that those pictures at 2.26 are for this year as
   there were no signs of foot personnel anywhere near the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles.

q   .         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That was 2.45? - A. Yes, my Lord,
        I am referring to the photographs.

Q. You got there at 2.45? - A. Yes,           there was no one there at
   that time.

q   .         MR. COLLINS:    When you talk about 2,000 being the
        crowd within the outside perimeter gate and between   that
        and the turnstiles, are you referring to the area with your
        turnstiles, if I can put it that way, that is to say the
        area on the right-hand side of the dividing wall? - A. Yes,
        from A-G you cannot see because of that wall.   You cannot
        see until 1-16 ....

Q. So you are talking about 2,000 in your estimation in the
   area outside A-G? - A. In the area A-G, yes, including
   Police mounted Officers.

Q. And on the other side outside 1-16, you obviously cannot
   help us in numbers, but there were a large number of
   people, were there not? - A. As you approached them you
   can see and it seemed as busy.  However, I did not enter
   that so I cannot give evidence on that.

Q. Did you hear any announcement of any sort as you were trying
   to get in or when you had got in over the Tannoy system
   or from Police loud hailers or from anywhere directing
   movement? - A. Certainly not outside and the only loud
   hailer message that I do remember quite clearly and
   distinctly was:  "Would the supporters please get back on
   the terracing".  That was 20 minutes after 3 o'clock.
   That was once people had realised the extent of it and
   people had been advised to get back on to the terracing,
   which was ludicrous.
That is the only announcement you heard and certainly nothing
before? - A. No.

      MR. COLLINS:  Yes, I don't think there is anything
else I need to ask, sir, unless you have any questions?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No,   thank you very much indeed.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   May I call Michael Joseph Bradley?


              MICHAEL JOSEPH BRADLEY Called
                Examined by MR. P H I L L I P S :

Is your full name Michael Joseph Bradley? - A. Yes.

You live in Fairfields in Liverpool? - A. Yes.

And are you a British Telecom Engineer by profession? - A.
That is correct.

I think you are 24 years of age.       Is that right? - A. That
is right.

Have you had any special training in first aid, Mr. Bradley?
- A. I have taken part in a one week St. John's Ambulance
organised course.  Telecom paid for it because they were
after people to act as first aiders.

How long ago was that? - A. I think it was sometime last year.

Did you pass the course? - A. Yes, I passed the course.

And did you practice your first aid afterwards? - A. Yes.
As there was only three of us in the building who passed
the course or even took part in it, the actual nurse who
they had on duty retired and we took over the running of
the first aid using the facilities available.

So you had some experience of first aid then by April of
this year? - A. Yes.

Did you go to the football match on April the 15th? — A.
Yes, correct.

I think you bought your ticket didn't you in Liverpool from
a friend of youra?— A. Yes, he was working at our place
and he could not get to the match so he said did I want to
buy the ticket because I did not have one.

 Did you go on your own or did you go with somebody else?
 - A. I went with another lad who I work with and his
 brother.

 What time did you set off to get to the match on the 15th?
 - A. We set off at half-past-8 from Lime Street Station.
                             87




Q. Where were you going to from Lime Street? - A. We went to
   Manchester to meet my friend's brother who was staying in
   the area.

Q.   And how did you go from Manchester to Sheffield? - A. We   got
     a train about 1 o'clock.

Q.   Was that a football special or a ordinary train? - A. It was
     an ordinary train although there were stewards and Police
     on the train stopping anyone drinking.   There were some
     people thrown off for having cans on the train at the time.
     They had taken a couple of cans on the train and were ordered
     to leave so they never got to the match.

Q. Cans of   beer and that sort of thing? - A. Yes.

Q. So where did   the train finish up? - A. Sheffield.

Q. Sheffield Main Railway Station,   the Midland? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did it get in there? - A. It must have been about
   2 o'clock.  I am not too sure because I did not have a watch
   on.  All I was concerned about was getting down to the ground.

Q. Did you know where to go from the station? - A. Not really
   no because last time I went to Sheffield we went by car and
   we came back the other way.

Q. Had you been the year before to that semi-final? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d you had been by car on that occasion, had you? - A. Yes,
   me and some other people who did not go this year because
   they could not get tickets, we hired a car last year and drove.

Q. So you and your two friends then left the Railway Station,
   did you? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d how did you get to the ground? - A. We walked part of the
   way, what we thought was part of the way through the town
   and then a taxi was driving past so we flagged the taxi down
   and asked him to take us as far as he could to Hillsborough.

Q. How far did he take you to? - A. I am not too sure exactly
   where we flagged it down on the main road but it was only
   five or six minutes in the taxi and he said:  "I can't go
   any further" because of Police cars and traffic and we said
   we would walk.  It was just by the park.

Q. Hillsborough Park? - A. Yes,   that is right.

Q. That was just along the road from the football ground,
   wasn't it? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. And you walked then down Penistone Road, did you, with the
   football ground on your left? - A. No, the football ground
   was on the right as you are coming down.
You went to the other end of the park then, did you? - A. I
d o n 't know because I have not got a map so I d o n 't know what
road you are referring to.     There is no signposts there.

The football ground was on the right as you walked down the
road? - A. Yes, as we were coming down the road there was
a park and the football ground.

If you saw a map would you    be able to recognise   where you
went? - A. Yes.

V ery well.  (Map produced)  Can you see where you got out
of the taxi? - A. Yes, it was at the top of Middlewood Road,
may be halfway down, a third of the way down.   The park was
on the right and the ground was further on.   You could see
it.   That is why we were making in that direction.

Can you see the name of the road that you walked down towards
the ground? - A. Yes, Middlewood Road; carried on down there
and then at the junction of Leppings Lane we carried on
down that part.

So you went down Leppings Lane then from the Middlewood Road
end? - A. Yes.

Did you see many people about on your trip from Sheffield
centre out towards the ground? - A. In the town centre it
was like a normal Saturday town centre but going down towards
the ground I would not say it was packed with people walking
on the pavements, everyone was like spread out walking down
but there was a lot of football supporters walking that way.

A lot of football supporters? - A. Yes,     they had scarves on.

Could you see which team they were supporting? - A. No
because both teams play in red so it was impossible to
identify them.

You could not identify them.   Did you see many Policemen
on your way down to the ground? - A. It depends what you
m ean by a lot, not compared to last year. There were a few
on the side streets but not m any at all.

This is as you were walking from where the taxi had dropped
you down Leppings Lane towards the ground? - A. Yes, down
Middlewood Road we saw m a y be two or three that I can
remember.  I was not particularly looking out for Policemen
but there was not a large contingent, not compared to last
year anyway.

The other fans that you saw were they all making for the
ground as well? - A. Yes, correct.

Can you say what time it was that you wppe approaching the
Leppings Lane entrance? - A. It must have been about getting
                              89




     on for about half-past-2 because the two other lads had
     stand tickets and they weren't bothered about getting there
     too early but I was the only one who had a ground ticket,
     so they said:   "If you get to the ground about half-past-2
     you should be o k a y " .

Q. So you were getting to the ground for half-past-2 were you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you come to any difficulty or meet any difficulty getting
   to the turnstiles themselves? - A. Well before we got to the
   turnstiles we arranged where to meet after the match which
   was the bridge over the little river at the back of the ground,
   so we said we would meet up there after the match and walk
   back to the station.  At that point they went off to the
   left-hand side to go to the stand and over the turnstiles
   for that area.  I was trying to see which turnstile the
   ticket I had was for.  I think it was B.   I was trying to
   see which one was B but because there was a lot of people
   there was no definite queue.  You just had to walk up to
   where everyone was standing and then proceed w ith them.

Q. So you left your friends, you parted then on the bridge
   itself over the river? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. And they walked off to the left? - A. That is right.

Q. And you looked to see where you should go? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there any people at that time on the forecourt between
   the road itself and the outer gates to the ground? - A. Yes,
   thousands.  I mean you just could not see the turnstiles
   at all.  You could see the letters above but you just could
   not see the turnstiles to go into. It was like a solid wall
   of people.

Q.    When you were there did you see any Policemen about? - A.
     From w hat I can remember when the Police came round to the
     house and I gave a statement I could only remember seeing
     two on horseback for definite.

Q.     Can you say where they were? - A. They were before the   turn­
      stiles, may be 60 yards beforehand one either side.




                                      /Q. 60 yards
    1                            90


                                                     T.M. BRADLEY



    Q. 60 yards before the turnstile? - A. Possibly, yes.

    Q. On the outside of the wrought iron gates or the   inside? - A. I
       thought they were at the side of them. I don't    know whether
       they were on the inside or the outside. I tend    to avoid
       Police horses when I got to the match. I don't    try and got
       anywhere near them. I thought they were either    side.

    Q.   Either sideof the gate? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see any Officers on foot? - A. May be one or two.
       There was not a large barrier of Police across that area.    May
       be about one or two, or three may be.

    Q. Which largebarrier are you talking about? - A. During the
*      match there was a large barrier across the middle of the
       pitch, a solid line of Police. That is what I would call a
       large continent.

    Q. I am talking about before you got into the ground. - A. i know
       that, yes. What I am saying, that is what I would call a
       large contingent, a solid line of Police shoulder to
       shoulder. I am talking about two or three, a handful,
       that I remember seeing visibly.

    Q. You remember seeing two or three? - A. Yes.

    Q. Before you got to the turnstiles? - A. Yes, it was well before
       the turnstiles.
    Q. Did you see what they were doing? - A. They didn’t appear to
       be doing anything. I don't know what they were supposed to be
       doing, but they were not telling people where to go. They
       were not issuing instructions. They were just standing.

    Q. Standing where? - A. Where the road is before the perimeter
       fence, where the road stops and there is an area before the
       perimeter fence, probably just before the road as such I would
       have seen the Police.
    Q. What, on the forecourt? - A. No, off the forecourt and on to
       the road.

    Q. On the road itself? - A. Yes.

    Q. Could you say how many people there were in that area from the
       road up to the turnstiles? - A. I could not estimate numbers,
       but I know it was solid. There were no spaces for you to move
       into. I am no good at estimating crowds. I would say may be
       1,000. I don’t know.

    Q. You say it was solid? - A. It was solid.   Solid people, wall
       to wall.
    Q. Did the crowd look as if it was moving in any direction? - A.
       It seemed to be going forward all the time. It was not
                           91


                                               T.M. BRADLEY


   stationary. It was moving very slow but it was moving.     So I
   just joined on to it to try and get in.

Q. Did you go towards the turnstiles? - A. Yes. I could see the
   turnstile that I was supposed to go through, the letter, the
   letter B. So I headed for that, in that general direction.

Q. Were you able to get towards that turnstile? - A. At first I
   was when I just came off the road and I went to the apron
   before the perimeter fence. I could see where the fence is.
   I was heading towards entrance B, and then I seemed to be
   veering over to the right-hand side.
Q. Why were you veering to the right-hand side? - A. I had
   nothing to do with it. I just could not control where I was
   moving because of the amount of people coming from behind and
   at the sides.
Q. People were pushing you over to the right? - A. They were not
   like hands on my back pushing us, but sit was just the mass of
   people moving in that general direction around me, so I you
   just tend to go with the flow.
Q. Do you remember a kind of railing coming out from the right-
   hand side of the turnstiles towards the gate? - A. No, I was
   not aware of that.
Q. Did you get to the turnstile itself? - A. No, probably halfway
   across from the perimeter fence to the turnstile, that is when
   there was a definite movement to the right. So I carried on
   thinking there would be more turnstiles round that way and
   that is why everyone was going there, and then before I knew
   it I was actually inside the ground area between the
   turnstile and the tunnel.
Q. Did you see how it was you got to be inside the ground? - A.
   Only through an opening. I presumed, OK, the turnstiles were
   there and so there must be some further past. I was not that
   familiar with the ground. I had only been there once before.

Q. You did not go through a turnstile at all then? - A. No, I had
   my ticket in my pocket read to produce it, but when I actually
   inside the area it was the gate I went through, I know that
   now, but I still had my ticket which I could not understand
   with it being a semifinal, because normally there is a lot
   of security about tickets. I still had it actually intact,
   which I gave to the West Midland Police Officers.
Q. So you went through a gate you think now to the right-hand
   side of the turnstiles? - A. That is correct.
Q. You did not see that gate being opened, did you? - A. No, I
   did not see the gate open. I just ended up going through it
   through no choice of my own.
Q. And how were you going through? Walking, running or what? -
   A. I was not walking as if walking down the street. It was
                           92


                                                T.M. BRADLEY


   just more like a shuffle through.    It was like a shuffle going
   through.

Q. Before you got to this area you mentioned Police Officers.
   Had you seen any stewards outside the ground? - A. None that
   were identifiable. Stewards at a football match normally were
   a fluorescent jacket. I did not observe any at all.

Q. None at all outside the ground? - A. None at all outside the
   ground.
Q. When you got into the ground did you see any stewards there? -
   A. No, none at all.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers when you got into the ground?
   - A. What, before the tunnel?

Q. Before the tunnel, yes. - A. Not that I remember. It was just
   like a movement of people towards the tunnel, which I presumed
   was the entrance on to the terracing.

Q. Did you go through the tunnel yourself?   - A. That is correct.

Q. Why did you go that way through the tunnel? - A. That is where
   everyone else was heading. Because there wais that many people
   either side of me, in front and behind, then there was no
   choice. You could not suddenly turn round and go a different
   way.
Q. You say you were taken along to the tunnel having no choice to
   go either way? - A. That is correct, plus the fact there was
   no signpost saying there was any other way into the ground.
Q. I was going to ask you, would you have known to go in any
   other direction? - A. No.

Q. Did you have a particular desire to go immediately behind the
   goal? - A. Not really, no, because last year when I was there
   I was in one of the wing sections, and I had a perfect view.

Q. Youwere in one of the wing sections? -A. Yes, sections 1, 2
   and 3.
Q. The top one on that model? - A. Yes, that was last year.

Q. Sections 1 and 2 that is? - A. Yes. We were there last year
   and we had a perfect view of the match. We saw the whole
   game. We could see that the other pens were crammed full, and
   talking to people afterwards last year they said they could
   not see the match, so I did not particularly want to go behind
   the goad for that reason.
                                   S'



Q. How is it you came to get into pen 1 and 2 last year? -
   A. Last year when we went we went through the tunnel
   again because we did not know which way to go. There
   was a steward at the top of the tunnel checking the
   tickets, and he said, "You are in pen 1 and 2” , which
                                               T.M. BRADLEY


   is down the back. So he told us to go along the back
   wall underneath the stand, just like a causeway through
   an opening and into the other section, which we did not
   mind doing because there was no room.

Q. So the stewards were on the pitch side of the tunnel then? -
   A. Yes, last year.
Q. And pointing you towards pen 1 and 2? - A. Yes, because we
   were in the wrong section.
Q. On this occasion how is it you went down the tunnel? Did you
   walk down or getcarried down or what? - A. The mass of
   people were moving towards the tunnel and actually into
   the tunnel, and it was just like a steady flow through.
   As you got near the end I was not too sure whether my
   feet were touching the ground at that point, but I
   presume, having heard this morning there was a gradient
   so may be that explains it, but it just does not seem I
   had any control about which way I was moving. I was
   not getting crushed too badly.
Q. You were being carried along by the crowed? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.

Q. Could you see anything ahead of you as you went down the
   tunnel? - A. Yes, I could see the pitch over people's heads.
   I could see the goal net and the outline of the goal.

Q. Could you see if the players were on the pitch? - A. Yes.
   They were not at that time, as I remember. I am not too sure.
   As I was looking over the heads all I could see was the green
   grass and the goal net. They might have been coming out but I
   could not see them.
Q. You could notsee any players on the pitch? - A. No.
Q. Now, when youget to the end of the tunnel there is a centre
   fence, is not there? - A. That is correct.
Q. On which side did you go, the right or the left? - A. I was up
   against the wall of the tunnel on the left-hand side at the
   end of the tunnel.
Q. The left-hand side? - A. That is correct.
Q. So which pen did you go into? - A. I was in pen 4.

Q. Pen No. A. What was it like in that pen when you got out of
   the tunnel? - A. I didn’t really have a chance to observe it
   because as I got out of the tunnel there was a surge and I
   ended up about 2 yards away from the perimeter fence. I could
   not really say whether it was packed or make any observation
   at the time. It was just a surge sent us down all the steps.

Q. Sent you down    all the steps? - A. Well, a lot ofthem,yes.     I
   did not get stopped by a barrier.
t>
                                  94


                                                       T.M. BRADLEY



     Q. You did not get stopped by a barrier? - A. No.

     Q. How far do you say you ended up from the....
     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Two yards? - A. I would say two
          yards. Midway between Be and you.
     Q.        MR. PHILIPS:   Which side of the pen were you on looking
          at it from the pitch?   Were you on the right-hand side or the
          left-hand side? - A. Probably left of centre of the pen.

     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Looking from the pitch? - A. Yes.
          Standing on the pitch looking at the pen, probably just to the
          left of centre of the pen.
     Q.        MR. PHILIPS:   When you stopped were you near any
          barriers? - A. Not that I can remember, no. I was not
          touching a barrier and could not see any, obviously, with the
          mass of people there.
     Q. What was happening around you when you stopped? - A. It was
        just getting worse and worse, getting crushed from behind. I
        thought it was going to ease off with there being a sway, but
        it did not let up. It just kept on getting tighter and
        tighter.
     Q. How did you feel when you ended up in that position? - A. I
        thought I was going to pass out because I could not breathe.
        Everytime I breathed out then the people behind seemed to be
        getting more and more tightly packed.
     Q. Did you have any difficulties? Did you feel any pain or
        injury? - A. Yes. I had pressure on my shoulder from someone
        who was next to us. I was getting twisted halfway round. I
        couldn’t move my arms because they were jammed by my side. It
        was just like constant pressure on my chest getting tighter
        and tighter.

     Q. Was there anybody near you that you could see who was having
        any difficulties? - A. Everyone. Everyone around us, we were
        just getting crushed.
     Q. Did you hear anything said? - A. Someone started shouting,
        ’’Get back” to the people obviously behind us, and then
        everyone around us took up the shout, shouting ’’Get back” to
        the people behind.

     Q. Were you able to see beyond the perimeter fence to the track
        round the pitch? - A. Yes.

     Q. Did you see any Policemen? - A. Yes, there were may be a
        Policeman every 3 or A yards it seemed to me, just standing on
        the track, just looking into the crowd.
     Q. Was anything said between the Policemen and the people in
        your pen? - A. We were shouting at the Policemen, after we
                             95


                                                    T.M. BRADLEY


     shouted "Get back" to the people behind, and nothing was
     happening, we were shouting to them to open the gate. We
     didn’t even know there was a gate there but we presumed there
     must have been one, and we were shouting for them to open it
     to relieve the pressure.
Q. What was the response? - A. There was not any.        They were just
   staring blankly at the crowd.
Q. By this time had the team come out on to the pitch? - A. Yes.
   The team were on the pitch and the match was in progression.

Q. How long did this go on for, the Police standing or just
   looking back at you? - A. I don't know. I didn't have a
   stop-watch. They did not seem to be doing anything
   right the way through until the team was well off the
   pitch and the pressure seemed to ease back behind.
Q. Did you gate open at any stage? -A. I could not see the gate
   from where I was.
Q. Thegate on to the pitch?       You   could not see that? - A. No.

Q. Did the pressurein your pen ease off at   any time? - A. Yes,
   from behind there seemed to be, I don't know how, there must
   have been space created at the back and people moved up a
   step.
Q. What did you see when the pressure eased off? - A. All I could
   see was the fence and a pile of bodies between the ground and
   may be - I don’t know - 4 or 5 feet upwards, a solid wall of
   bodies just lying there.
Q. Which pen was that in? - A. Pen 4.
Q. Did you do anything to help those people? - A. Yes.   Me and
   another supporter who was standing by us, he knew one of the
   lads who was on the top of this pile, and pulled him off. He
   must have known him. I don't know whether he was a friend or
   relation. We pulled him off. The two of us pulled him off
   and put him in the space that was created. I checked to see
   if he was breathing.
Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The space that was created where?
     Which side of the fence? -A. On the terracing side. We were
     able to grab this lad off the top. His eye were closed. I
     checked for a pulse in his neck. There was a pulse there and
     he was breathing. So I said, "He's OK. Stay with him". Then
     I turned round again and saw a pile of bodies with a hand, may
     be two or three bodies down, which was moving, so I grabbed
     another lad who was standing by us to give us a hand, and we
     tried to free him.
Q.        MR. PHILIPS:    You were able to free him, were you? - A.
     This one particular person, yes. We were pulling on his arm,
     and there was a bit of give, and he pulled out from
     underneath the p;Lle. There must have been about two or three
r~p   *

                                  96


                                                      T.M. BRADLEY


          bodies on top. The two of us managed to get him out. We
          laid him down on the terracing and tried to give him first
          aid or mouth to mouth resuscitation.




                                /Q. You were able to pull.
                           97

                                                M. J. BRADLEY



Q. You were able to pull these further back on the terrace,
   were you? - A. Yes.

Q. Because by then there was sufficient space for them? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. Could you tell us how many bodies there were
   approximately?   Have you any idea? - A. It looked like
   there was maybe eight high at the front, but I do not
   know how long they were going for - you know, lengthwise.

Q. Had you seen these people    falling down?    - A. No.

Q. You had not seen what caused them to go? - A. No.    I
   presume one of them fell down and then a space occurred
   and someone else - they got trapped on the fence and they
   just followed them down.   I do not know h ow they got
   there.

Q. How many do you think you pulled out? - A. We took a lad
   from the top of the pile and then another lad pulled
   another body out and giving them first aid.   Then I
   think it was a St. John's Ambulance man came through the
   gates and asked if he was OK.   I said I did not think he
   was breathing so him and a few of the supporters carried
   him out so I followed them out on to the pitch.

Q. Which gate did you go through to get on to the pitch? -
   A. I presume it was the one in gate 4, but I am not too
   sure.   It might have been the one in 3, if there was a
   gap at the bottom.   I don't know.

Q. Was anything obstructing you getting out of the gate? -
   A. Only a policeman trying to stop us getting on to the
   pitch.   I told him I was a First Aider and he let us on.

Q. Did you do anything with any of these people once you had
   got out on to the pitch? - A. Yes.   There was a lad
   lying flat down on the ground face up and there was
   somebody giving him first aid so I went over to see if I
   could give him a hand.   I think it was a St. John s
   Ambulance man because I said to him, "I will look after
   him and you go and help someone else."   I proceeded to
   give him mouth to mouth resuscitation on the pitch.    He
   did not respond at first but after - I don't know, maybe
   a minute or a minute and a half - he vomited and so I
   cleared his mouth and put him in the recovery position
   because he was breathing again and some supporters took
   him away.

Q. You saw to that one and he seemed to recover.   Did you
   see where he was taken? - A. He was taken,  looking
                           98

                                          M« J. BRADLEY


   towards the Leppings Lane end, he was taken to the left
   hand side of the goal mouth.
Q. By this time had the match stopped? - A. Yes.
Q. Were there many bodies about on the pitch? - A. Loads.
   There were people littered everywhere.   People bending
   over them giving them First Aid.
  ft
Q. Who was giving First Aid? - A. People in uniform,
   supporters, just ordinary people.   You could not tell
   whether it was policemen or St. John's Ambulance men
   because they had just like a black tunic on.
Q. Did you try to help another lad? - A. Yes.    I turned
   round and there was another lad.   There was a supporter
   carrying him, trying to prop him up.   The lad had
   obviously damaged his legs.   He couldnot walk.    That
   supporter carried him across the pitch to the gymnasium.
   I stayed with him and the other lad went back to look for
   his brother because he could not find his brother, so I
   stayed with the supporter in the gym.

Q. Before you went over to the gym did you see to somebody
   on the pitch? - A. Yes.    There was a lad who was carried
   away and there was someone else before I actually went
   across to the gym, but there was nothing I could do for
   him.   There was no pulse.    He was not responding to my
   giving him mouth to mouth or trying to resuscitate his
   heart.
Q. Did you say anything at any stage about oxygen? - A. Yes.
   I was getting frantic because I could not do anything.
Q. With this one you are talking about? - A. With this
   casualty, yes.   I had never been in a situation like
   that before.   I turned round and saw there was a police
   officer standing a couple of yards away.   I was
   screaming at him to get oxygen and he was was like that,
   you know, "There isn t any .
Q. Did he say that to you? - A. Yes.   I said, "Get some
   oxygen", and hesaid, "There isn't any".    I said, "He is
   going to die, he needs oxygen".   He said, "There isn't
   any".    It was hopeless.
Q. Did you get any oxygen? - A. After that a fireman - I
   presume he was a fireman, he had yellow leggings on -two
   of them came over and they had an oxygen mask and they
   put it over his face and carried him away.
Q. So you had no more to do with him after that? - A. No.
                             99

                                            M. J. BRADLEY


Q. You told us about the one whose legs were hurting? - A.
   Yes, we carried him off the pitch.

Q. What did you carry him on? - A. Well, I had one arm round
   my neck and the other lad had the other arm round his
   neck.

Q. You took    him to the gymnasium? - A. That is correct.
Q. What was going on on the pitch when you were taking him
   across to the gym? - A. There was just like a lot more
   people on the pitch around the goal      mouth.     I couldnot
   see what   they were doing.   It was just like chaos.   I
   did not know what was going on*    I presume they were
   helping the other casualties.

Q. When you got to the gymnasium I think you met up with a
   doctor, did you not? - A. yes.    We were ushered passed
   loads of casualties that were in the sports arena and we
   were told to find a space which was at the back and we
   put the lad down.    This one in plain clothes came over
   and said, "I am a doctor. Is he OK?"     I said, "I think
   so.   His legs are hurting."    He checked his legs and
   said there was nothing broken.    He said, "Stay with him,
   for the time being"*

Q. Did you staywith him? - A.   Yes.The other     lad got off
   to go and find his brother so I said I would stay with
   him.   I just kept on talking to him and then I think it
   was a police officer who came over and took his name and
   address.   Then he went and then somebody came round with
   a drink of water for the pair of us out of a cup.     The
   lad said he would see if he could stand up.    He stood
   up.   His legs were a bit shaky but he was able to walk.
   He wanted to get out of the gym.    He said, "I think I
   can walk. Let's get out", so he just walked out.
Q. He walked out where, on to the pitch? - A. Yes, we went
   on to the pitch.     There were no spectators anywhere,
   the place was empty.
Q. Can you   say what time it was? * A. No, I do not know
   because   I did not have a watch on.   I presume it was
   late.     I knew we met up with two lads outside about five
   minutes   after that.   I think it was about maybe quarter
   to six,   possibly.   Maybe half past five, quarter to six.

Q. I want you to go back to the time when you were in the
   pen, before you went out on to the pitch. - A* Yes.

Q. You told us how you helped to pull people from a pile of
   bodies.   You were in the left hand of the two pens as
   you come down the tunnel? - A. That is correct.
                           100

                                           M. J. BRADLEY


Q. Did you see any dead bodies in that area? - A* Not until
   the crowd eased back and they were going to the front.   I
   presume they were dead because their faces had gone a
   white colour and their lips were blue, which is like the
   first sign of lack of oxygen*   Their eyes were wide open
   and they were just stuck there trapped underneath
   everyone.
Q. That was one person you saw?   - A. No, it was more than
   one.
Q. You, of course, were moving people away, were you, who
   appeared to you to be still alive? - A. Well, we tried to
   pull one lad out, but it was an effort because there were
   people on top of him.     I remember his arm giving after
   we were pulling on it so presumably we might have broken
   his arm trying to get him out.    We dragged him out by
   his jumper and shirt and got him out.
         MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, thank you.
               Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q. There are just two things I want to ask you about to see
   if you can be sure.   How sure are you of the time you
   got to the bridge over the river?   You thought it was
   2.30? - A. Yes.
Q. How accurate can you be about that? - A. Maybe five
   minutes.
Q. If it was 2.30, it will have taken you about twenty-two
   minutes to get from where you were on the bridge through
   the gate that got you into the ground.   Does that sound
   about right to you? - A. Yes.   No, it was a fair while.
   I was panicking because I thought I was not going to get
   in on time.
Q. You were panicking... - A. Well, I wasn't panicking.   I
   was thinking I was not going to get in on time, that I
   was going to miss the first five minutes.
Q. The crush was sufficient for you to have taken roundabout
   twenty minutes, give or take a few minutes, to get from
   one end to the other? - A. I would say so, yes.
Q. The other thing I want to ask you about, whether you are
   sure, is this: are you sure that last year the steward
   actually told you that your ticket was marked with the
   pen that you should have been in? - A. Yes, I am sure.
   He said, You are in the wrong pen.    You are in the
   wrong area.   Go down there"*   Whether or not he was
   moving us down there because the pens were full and he
                              101

                                              M. J. BRADLEY


     was not bothered whether we had a ticket or not, I don't
     know.
Q. I am just wondering about this.    Could it have been that
   last year the steward was moving you from a full pen to
   an empty pen, as crowd control?    You know, "Don't stay
   here.    You are in the wrong pen.   It is full*   Go over
   there"?    Could it have been that? - A. I do not know.
   Do you want to have a look at ray ticket from last year?
Q* Have you still got it? - A. Yes, I have brought it down.
Q* Then we will know. - A. The only one I haven't got is the
   one from this year.
Q. We will have a lot of tickets from this year, so it will
   not matter.   Unless the number on the ticket tells the
   steward that you are in the wrong pen, it does not seem
   as though there is a pen... - A* No.
           MR. COLLINS:   I think I know that to be the case,
     there wasn't any pen marking.
Q.         MR. HYTNER*   It may be, and we will find out
     later, that the number does indicate something to the
     steward, but otherwise... - A. All I can remember is him
     looking at the ticket and saying, "You are in the wrong
     pen", for whatever reason, whether we were in the wrong
     one or it was good crowd control.   I don't know.

           MR. HYTNER:   Could I just say, sir, that what he
     has said does not appear to reflect fully all the efforts
     he did make according to his statement and I think
     perhaps that ought to be said publicly.   He has been
     very modest in his evidence.
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. When you arrived at the railway station in Sheffield, did
   you notice any signs directing you to the ground? - A.
   No, none at all.
           MR. JACKSON:   Thank you.
           MR. MULLER:    No questions.

           MR. MAXWELL:    No questions.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Mr. Woodward?
                                                                 M.    J.   BRADLEY


                    Cross-examined         by MR.      WOODWARD:

You have b e e n to many football m at ch es before?                         A.      Yes,
I have followed Liv er po ol all my life.

And on this o c c a si on        you were keen to get in and not miss
the kic k- of f?    A.           That's correct.

Andyou a rrived at the ground, you have said,                          about      2.30?
A.   Yes, round about that time.

Give or take a few minutes.                    There came apoint            when    you
went t hro ugh the gate? A.                    Yes.

When you went in t hroug h the gate, what was the g en eral state
of people in there?    Was there a great crowd of people,
a great torrent of people going in a p a rt i c u l a r d ir ec t io n
or what?  A.    B etween the gate and the tunnel?

The gate.          A.     Just    the a c t u a l   gate going t h ro ug h?

Yes.   When you got into the e nc l os u re beyond the gate as
is being ind icated.   Beyond the gate.       Beyond the turn st il e
there.   A.    Just an awful lot of peop le there.      I mean, it
wasn't as bad as it was outside but there did seem to be a
lot of people.

But n o th in g    unusual,      was there,         for you?      A.        Well,    no,
not really.

It did not cause you any c onc er n - what you then saw?
A.      Only the fact that I didn't know w h e r e a b o u t s I was
s up po se d to be going.

You were c o n c er ne d as to how to get to where you want ed                            to
be?   A.     Well, how to get inside the ground, yes.

But h aving       got   inside    there,     you were not p r es se d upon?
A.    No.

You were able to walk and make                   your way towa rd s the tunnel?
A.   Well, not walk freely but                  I was able to walk, yes.

You were not        running,      were you?          A.    No.

And the people with you were not in a great surge                              going
forw ar ds? A.   D idn't appear to be, no.

They were m aking their way in a fairly orde rl y way but
u rg e nt l y to go to see the match. A.  Well, depends,
li'ke, " orderly" you know, sounds to imply that, you know,
there was a lot of space but there wasn 't a lot of space;
it was just like people, maybe, you know, a foot in front
of you e ither way.
                                                    M.    J. B RA DLEY


        LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:           I think we can see it on the
video    very clearly.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, I have not had the a dv an t ag e of
s eeing that;  they were not d e l i ve r ed until the weekend.

        LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:       You will.    You will.

        MR.   WOODWARD:        Thank you,   sir.

You were      saying   you appro ac h ed    the tunnel.        A.     Yes.

As you a pp ro a c h e d the tunnel, were you a b l e to see on
to the pitch?          A.   Yes, you could see the dayl ig ht at
the end.

B efore you   into the tunnel?   A.    Yes,                that is how you
knew that was the way in to the pitch.

H aving got out of the tunnel on to the terrace, you felt
yourself taken down the steps, did you?   A.   Yes, didn't
have any control over that.

Do you r emember really how far you got?                  A.        Just   seemed
to be going further and further in front.

At the stage you were going through the tunnel down towards
the terrace, that did not bother you, did it?    A.   Not
really, no.    Just seemed, with it being, you know, betw ee n
h alf two and three, I wasn't sure what time it was but ---

Did there come a time when you were b ot h er e d?  A.   Once
I s uddenly s topped and there was n ow here to go forwards,
s ideway s or backwards.

At that stage was there any team on the pitch, do you
r e m em be r? A.   No, there wasn 't a team on the pitch.
I r ememb er the pl ay er s coming down to our end so, I mean,
I was getting c rushed then.       I thought it would ease
off once, you know, the match sett le d down like it
nor ma ll y does.

But it did not?           A.     No,   it was g et ting worse       and worse.

Was there any surge or movemen t of the crowd after that?
A.     Yes, after the kick-off, there seemed to be like
a not her inc re a se and then I think it was Peter B ea r ds l ey
hit the c ro s s - b a r at the other end and what do you call
it was just g etting worse and worse then.

Did the s up p o r t e r s on the terrace move forward then with
that incident at the other end on the p i tc h?          A.   Not
in front of me because there was no room for them to move
forward.     There sas just like -----         itw asnft like a big
                                            104



                                                             M.   J. BRADLEY


     sudden   rush behind,       it was just         like g ra d ua l ly gett in g worse.

Q. About how far from the p e r im et e r fence were you at this
   s tage?   A.   As I say bet ween here and may be where the
   space is.    The start of the desk.

Q.   You are i nd i c a t i n g gust beyond the s h o r t h a n d - w r i t e r 's table,
     are you?     A.        Where the other table starts.

Q.   About 6 or 8 ft.          A.      S om et hi ng   like that,     yes,    3 yards.

           MR.   WOODWARD:          Thank    you.

                        Cross-examined            by MR.   GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. Bradley, you said in your s t at em en t that when you
   got into the ground - the area that was p o in te d out to
   you just a m oment ago - the crowd surge just carried
   you on towards the tunnel.    Is that your m emory of what
   it felt like - just being carried gently along?
   A.   The tunnel - are you talking about?

Q.   There was no q u e s ti on of ind iv i du a ls being           able to change
     their mind and go in differe nt d i r e c t i o n s ?            A.   W h er e a b o u t s
     are you on about?

Q.   It is very h el p f u l l y being poin te d out.   That area where
     you said in your sta te me n t that you were just carr ie d on
     towards the tunnel in the surge.            A.   Yes, it wasn't a bad
     surge;   it was just that was the g e ne ra l d ir ec t io n people
     were h eading and b ecause it was quite a wide, you know,
     body of people.

Q.   As y ou-were being c arried along, did there ever come a
     stage at which you could make up your mind that you would
     like to go in a diff er en t d i r e ct j op or were you just b ei ng
     c ar ri ed on r e g a r d l e s s of where you w a n t e d to go? A.    I
     didn't s p e c i f i c a l l y want to go in any other d ir ec t io n because
     there was no d i r e c t i o n s to say where you could go.

Q.   So you were happy to be c ar ried on that way?                      A.   O bv i ou s ly
     eve ry on e knew where the y: w er e going, you know,               on to the
     terracing.

Q.   Taking you back to the pr e vi o us year, Mr. B r ad le y - when
     you e merged from the tunnel on the p r e v i ou s year, s om e bo d y
     for wha te ve r r eason had u sh er ed you along to the side
     behind the wall.       A.   Along the gang wa y at the back.

Q.   But on this occasion, on this year as you were coming out
     of that tunnel, as you say, your feet were barely t o uc hi ng
     the ground.   A.  That's correct.

Q.   You were by that stage being c ar r ie d along in a forced
     body of a mass of men altogether.       A.   Yes.
\1.^M ‘
                                                   105



                                                                M.   J. BRADLEY


          Q.   It w ould have been quite i m po ss ib le for a ny bo dy to pick
               out an indi vi du al out of that m oving mass and say, "You,
               you OTdyou, go along the side t h er e "^ b e c a u s e the wnole
               lot were being c arried down together, were they not, by
               that stage?     A.    There didn't seem to be any room at
               the back between the wall and the terracing.               You know,
               there is a gangway that is flat before the steps start.
               There is no room f bEiyou to move up and down the back
               anyway, so ---

          Q. And there cer ta in ly w oul d not have been an o p po r tu n it y for
             a s tewar d or a p o l i ce ma n or anyb od y else to talk to
             i n d i v i d u a l s and direct them in any p a r t ic u la r dire ct io n
             by that stage.             A.   There might have been if any had
             been there but there wasn't any there, so, you know, it
             is a poi nt le ss question.

          Q.   I think youre saying you are in the midd le of a mass of
               people being ca rr ie d along with the feeling as if your
               feet are not t ouching the ground.     A.  That's actu al ly
               in the tunnel, yes.

          Q.    So as you       come out of that          s i tu at io n -   A.   I was on the
               l ef t- ha nd side as you come out.

          Q.    Yes.  Are   you then ca rr i ed    in one m ov e me n t stra ig ht down
               to the front or was there a b r e a th i ng space, so to speak,
               when you e merged just from the tunnel?        A.      It was more
               of a stumble;   it w asn't like_a direct, you know, stra ig ht
               line down to the railings.       It was m aybe like a couple
               of steps and then a nother coup le and anot he r couple.

          Q.   It went in a series of pulses, or urges, w ha t ev e r you
               would call it?      A.   Yes, but I still didn't have any
               c ontro l about where I was going;   it was just people
               p ushin g and s hoving all the way down.

          Q.   And no d ir ec t i o n s that you c ould have been g iven could have
               made the s lightest dif fe r en c e to the d ir ec t io n in which you
               were being forced?          A.   If there had been a space at the
               back b etween where the end step is, there must be like a
               3 ft. gap b etween there and the wall.          If there had been
               s omeon e sta nd in g there ---

          Q. Well, was there a 3 ft. gap b et ween there and the wall?
             A.    As I said, the s up po r t e r s were all the way up the
             steps and on this flat part right up to the wall where
             the gtand was, so there was no room for a s te ward there
             anyway but if there had been one there and a space and he
             had said, "Go this way or that way", I don't know whet he r
             or not I w ould have been able to.         If he had got hold of
             my arm and p ulled us out, yes.

          Q.   Yes,   but the s i t u at io n   that p r e s en t ed you when you came
                                           M.     J.    BRADLEY


out of the tunnel was a total mass when you c ould not
have moved v ol un t a r i l y either beca us e youw anted to or
b e cause s omebo dy had sent you.       A.     Yes.

      MR.   GLASGOW:        Thank you,       Mr.       Bradley, very much.

      MR.   COLLINS:       I have no questions.

     LORD J US TICE TAYLOR:       I should like to thank you for
your e vidence and more p a r t i c ul a rl y I think on b e ha l f of
the public for all that you did to try and help people.
I am sure you were not the only one but you are here so
we can thank you.

      THE WITNESS:         Can    I just make one point,           one c o mm en t?

      LORD JUSTICE       TAYLOR:           Yes.

        THE WITNESS:     About what this g e n t le m an said earlier
on about football s u p po rt er s not being able to queue in an
orderl y      fashion.   I w ou ld just like to say if he went to
A n fi el d when they play at home or ask the M e rs e y s i d e Police
they will tell you that there are orde rl y queues           at every
t ur ns t il e and there has never been any c ru s hi n g.

      MR.   COLLINS:       Point taken.

      THE WITNESS:         I w ou ld just       like to point      that out.

      LORD JUS TICE      TAYLOR:      Thank you very much.

       MR. COLLINS:        Sir,    would    you like me to start
a no the r wi tn es s?

     LORD JUS TICE       TAYLOR:      Does the next w it ne ss come
from L i v er po ol ?

     MR. COLLINS:     Yes, but there are others as well who
have come from Liv er po o l and we have got rid of the two
who have to be dealt with today, as I u n de r s t a n d it.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Any w i tn es s who is s t ar te d
now will have to come back tomorrow.           If they are not
s t ar t ed now, they will have to come back t om o rr o w anyway,
so we might as well start now.

     MR.    COLLINS:   Indeed.  Well,I will go on to Mr.
Jackson,    then, who is in fact in the p o si ti on of b eing here
anyway.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Can I just say whilst he is
c o mi ng to the wi tn es s box that I think it is very i m po rt an t
that c o unse l should see the video at earliest.              I
u nd e r s t a n d that a number of coun se l a lr e ad y have it. Whet he r
v
                                            107




         they have seen it or not, I do not know, or a lr eady had it
         but anybody that has not, please get in touch with the
         T r easu ry Sol ic it or beca us e I think it may very well be
         h el pfu l for counsel to see that w hich is plain s to be
         seen.      It might shape the c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n somewhat.

                            PETER W I LL I A M JACKSON,       called


                                E x a m in e d by MR.   COLLINS;

    Q.   Peter W il l i a m Jackson,    is that     right?      A.      That's correct.

    Q.   I think you are a solicitor, partner in the firm of Hill
         D ic k i n s o n & Co. who are the s ol ic i to r s i n s t ru c te d on b ehalf
         of the Foo tb al l S u pp or t er s A ss oc iation.       A.      That is
         correct, my Lord.

    Q.   Indeed, you are I think V i ce - C h a i r m a n of the M e rs e y s i d e
         Branch of the Foo tb al l S up po r te r s A ss ociation.      A.        That
         is correct.

    Q. And are you a season t ic k e t - h o l d e r for the main stand at
       Anfield, h aving followed football r eg u la r ly since you were
       a boy and being a Liv er po o l s up po r te r ?    A.  I am.

    Q. Did you a tt en d the semi - fi n al        on   15th April of this year?
       A.   I did.

    Q.   Had you been last       year as w ell?          A.    I was,    yes.

    Q.   I think    you came by car,      did you not?         A.      Yes.

    Q. And you came with others, did you?           A.      Came with Roland
       Taylor, who is the C hai rm an of the F o ot ba ll S u pp or te rs
       A ss oc ia ti on; Peter Garrett; my b ro th er -i n -l a w, Lawr en ce
       Moran.

    Q. Did you have       tic ke ts ?     A.      We all had t ic kets        for the
       N orth Stand.

    Q.   The North    Stand?       A.   The North Stand.

    Q. What time did you leave Liv er p oo l ?  A.      I left home
       about 10 o'clock.     I p icked up, first of all, P oland
       Taylor, then Peter G ar rett and we e ve nt u al l y left Hough
       G reen about q uarter to eleven.

    Q.   I think you had been to H i l l s b o r o u g h on other occasions,
         had you not?   A.   Two or three o ccasions, certainly, yes.

    Q. And what route did you choose to get to S he ff i le d ?
       A.   We chose to go on the M56, then the M63 to e ve nt u al l y
       get on to the A57 w hich is the Snake Pass which comes out
       at the H i l l s b o r o u g h end of Sheffield.
T    +

    'I
                                                 108


                                                                   P. W.   JACKSON


         Q. Any hol d- up s on the way? A.  There was a h ol d-up at the
            end of the M63 where we were held up for about 45 minutes.

         Q.   That is the one d es c r i b e d byMr. Foster, I think.          A.    That's
              correct.     There was then a s l o w - m o vi n g line of     traffic
              t hrough B redbury on to the end of the M67, the roun da bo ut
              there, where we were held up again for about 2 0 m i n u t e s ,half
              an hour.     It was then quite s l ow - m o v i n g t ra ff ic until we
              turned off the A616 on to the A57 to go over the Snake Pass.

         Q.   Any p a rt ic ul ar r easons for the hold-ups, by w hich I mean
              a n y t hi ng like r o a d wo rk s or abno rm al c o n di t io n s or was it
              just weight of traffic, as far as you c ould tell?
              A.       There seemed to be a lot of road wo rk s at the M63.
              They are actually, I think, ext e nd i ng the m ot o rw a y at that
              point and the r o un da bo ut that Mr. Foster m e n t i o n e d s eemed
              to be h eavily congested.

         Q. Wbfeit time did you reach Shef f ie l d?     A.  We reached
            S h e f f i e l d about quarter past to half past one.

         Q.   I think you m an a g e d to p ar k close to the ground, about ten
              m inutes away.     A.     Parked about ten m i nu te s away. Parked
              very close to w here we parked last year.

         Q. Did you i ntend to have som et h in g to eat befo re you went to
            the gr ou nd ?      A.   We had taken s an dw i ch e s with us but we
            i n t e n de d to go to a pub for a pint.

         Q. Did you manage to find a pub and have a pint?   A.  Yes,
            we went to the same pub we had been to last year, it was
            the F r e e m a s o n ' s Arms.

         Q. What was the state of that pub?               A.    Busy, crowded.          This
            year there was a b ouncer on the door only letting L iv er po ol
            s up p o r t e r s in and last year I d i s ti n ct l y r em em be r there was
            Liv er po ol and N o t t i n g h a m Forest fans.      That s u r p ri s ed me a
            bit.         it was noisy, with p eople singing, but nobody a pp e ar e d
            to be drunk.

         Q.   That is what I was going to ask you.       Did you have a n yt hi ng
              to drink y o u rs el f? A. Yes, I h a d two pints of lager.

         Q. And what time did you leave that pub?             A.   Just after
            2 o'clock.       I r emember I had a p or t ab l e radio with me and
            I rem em be r he ar in g the 2 o'cl oc k news saying that Alan
            Hanson w ould be playing.

         Q.   How long did it take you to get to the g ro un d             from the
              pub?   A.   A p p r o x i m a t e l y 10 minutes.

         Q.    Can you recall the route or which         read you     came down to
              get to the gr ou nd ? A.  I  don't         know ---
                                                        M.   J.   BRADLEY


There is a map b eh in d you if it helps, which you will see
the g roun d m arked in y ellow and the roads a p p r o a c hi n g it,
if you can recall.               A.    We came down M i d d l e w o o d Road.
We p arke d som ew h er e off Holme Lane and if that is right
the pub is som ew he re Langsett, but we c er ta i nl y came down
Wfth: H i l l s b o r o u g h Park to air right and the g ro on d over
that way.

So you came down M i d d l w o o d Road,       is it?        A.     CIme down
M i d d l e w o o d Road.

And the time by now or by the time you a c tu al ly reached
the g round must have been s om e th i ng round about quarter
past two if you left the pub just after two.         A.  That's
correct.

What was the s i t u at io n that met you as you r e ac he d the
g ro und ? A.    It seemed to be very crowded.           One
thing that I n oticed was that unlike last year there was
no outer c ordon of police o f fi ce rs c he c ki n g tickets.

When you say outer cordon what are you refe rr in g to?
A.       Last year I r eme mb er that in the vici ni ty of the
first gate, either they were c l os e d or there was a line
of p o l i ce me n a sking eve r yb o dy to show their tickets.
That c er t a i n l y did not happe n this year.       As we went
throug h those gates we c ould see at that point that
there was no o rderly queueing;             it was just a mass of
people trying to get to our t u rn s t i l e s which were
T u r n st il es A and C.

How big a mass was a mass when you got there about q ua rter
past two?      A.  Q uarter past two?            We were p ro b ab l y about
30 ^ r d s away from the turnstiles, 30-35 yards away.                  I
would e stimate c er t a i n l y h un dr ed s of people in front of
us,

Did you have any d if fi c u l t y in g e tt in g to the t u rn s t i l e s ?
A.        Yes.          I don't recall g e tt in g into the g r ou n d until
a p p r o x i m a t e l y five to three.

As long as that?        A.     Ten to, five to three.   I h eard
a roar which i nd i c a t e d that the teams were out before I
got to my^seat, b efore I got inside the ground, in fact.

When you were o utside the turnstiles, were you aware of
any p ol ic d p r e se nc e?    A.     I remember seeing a police
offi cer by each of the sets of turnstiles.                  A lt ho ug h
there are eight turnstiles , there are four sets, I think
four off ic er s there and I seem to remem be r additionally;
there was one police officer at the side by Gate A, the
c o n c e r t i n a gate, who was d ir ec t in g peop ol e to t u r n st i le s
but no other o f f i ce rs I can recall.
                                                        M.   J.    BRADLEY


Q. Any mo un te d of fi ce rs in your part     of the --- ?          A.      I
could not see any mo un te d officers.

That you can r ecall?      A.     No.




                                (Any a n no u nc e me n t   made   ...)
V
                                111




    Q. Any announcement made that you heard at any time about post­
       poning the kick-off or anything like that? - A. No, I didn't
       hear no announcement.
    Q. Were you concerned whether or not you would get in in time?
       - A. Yes, I did not think we would get in for the kick-off,
       I thought we had missed the start, but I was more concerned
       things were getting ___   The pressure outside as we got
       close to the turnstiles was worse than I had ever encountered
       before.
    Q. Was anyone, or you yourself perhaps, in physical difficulty that
       you were aware of? — A. I remember feeling fchat there was
       pressure on my chest from the bloke in front but I did not
       feel I was in physical danger. There was a lady to my right
       who said she felt faint and started to panic and as soon as she
       did people made way for her and got her through the turn­
       stiles. There was an old gentleman saying he had pain in his
       chest and he was let out of the side. Other than that I
       did not see anybody in actual physical distress.

    Q. We know people did climb over. Did you see any of those?
       - A. Yes, I saw people climbing over. The Police seemed
       to be assisting them climbing over.
    Q. Eventually you got yourself through the turnstile. Did you
       have any difficulty getting through the turnstile itself
       when you actually reached it? - A. It was difficult to
       actually position yourself to go through but people were
       tending to help each other and forming a little queue up
       front trying to get in. It was difficult.
    Q. Was it your observation that it was being done smoothly
       in the sense that people were getting through the turnstiles
       steadily or was there any delay in actually getting people
       through? - A. At the front, although at the back it had
       seemed very slow, at the front by the time we got there
       people seemed to be moving quite smoothly through it.

    Q. By the time you got in what was the state of the crowd
       behind you? - A. I don't remember looking round. I remember
       feeling pressure and being aware that there were a lot
       of people behind but I did not look round and see that.

    Q. When you got in Gate A was still closed, was it? - A. Yes.

    Q. When you were inside did you see any Police Officers inside?
       - A. As you immediately got through the turnstile there
       seemed to be several Police Officers. People were going
       up to them and asking them to go outside and do something.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: If we have got through the
       turnstile we might break off, I think.
             Sorry, you will have to come back tomorrow, 10 o'clock.
      MR. COLLINS: I chose Mr. Jackson because he is going
to be here anyway so I knew there would be no difficulty.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.


             (The Inquiry was adjourned until
            10 o'clock the following morning)
                                                  1


INQUIRY    INTO      THE      HILLSBOROUGH

          STADIUM            DISASTER




                     Before


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                  MR. B. JOHNSON
     (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                        and

                 PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                    (ASSESSORS)




                        At

                 The Town Hall,

                    Sheffield,

                        on

             Monday, 15th May, 1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                 (Morning Session)



      From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




OPENING OF THE INQUIRY

PROCEDURAL MATTERS

OPENING STATEMENT BY MR. COLLINS
                                PROCEDURE



                FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDING

                M O N D A Y . 15th MAY. 1989

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORI    I am going to open this
Inquiry.  The oral hearings will start after Counsel to
the Inquiry has m ade a preliminary statement.   They will
continue until we have heard all the oral evidence that I
an going to take.

      What we shall do is to sit day by day from ten
o'clock until one o'clock and from two o'clock until five
o'clock.    It is a longer day than one would normally
sit in court, but I am very anxious that we should get
through this Inquiry as swiftly as possible and I hope
that everybody concerned will co-operate in achieving
that end.   There will be an exception to those times.
I think it is more convenient that on Monday it should be
10.30 rather than ten o'clock and on Friday it will be
some time after the midday adjournment to enable those
who have come from afar reasonably to get home as this is
being conducted for most people a good distance away from
their normal place.    Subject to that, we will continue
day by day.   We shall not sit, of course, on Bank
Holiday Monday, but in case there is any doubt about the
matter, we shall sit on the Tuesday.

      Before I call on Counsel to the Inquiry to make his
opening statement, is there any preliminary application
of any kind?

       MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir, I am instructed by the Trent
Regional Health Authority which is responsible for the
management of the South Yorkshire and Metropolitan
Ambulance Service, which I shall refer to hereafter as
SYMAS.    We wish to be granted full rights of
representation.

      An application was made by instructing solicitors
on the 28th of April which you then refused, but you gave
leave to make an application at a future date if it was
deemed necessary.   Sir, we do think it is necessary that
we should be part of this Inquiry basically for five
reasons.

      First, we have a substantial volume of evidence to
present to the Inquiry in respect of every aspect into
which this Inquiry will be enquiring.   Although we have
no statutory obligation, we did in fact take part in
discussions about the safety requirement at this ground
in 1986.   We were also privy to arrangements made in the
event of a major disaster at this ground, prior to the
match in question.   We had Officers present before the
                             PROCEDURE


match.   We have Officers who were present in an off duty
capacity who can give descriptions of events as they
built up...

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Kallipetis, you were
kind enough at my invitation to put in a written
statement as to why it should be granted representation.
I have read that and I think you are now really
expounding what I have already read.

      If it were merely a question of giving evidence I
do not think I would be very sympathetic because that is
going to be done anyway.   However, I do take the point
that you say there has been some criticism of SYMAS and
also the question of consultation in regard to safety at
grounds, that is a matter which also may be material.    I
have considered what you have set out and I am disposed
to grant you representation.

      MR. BROWNE:   Sir, I am instructed on behalf of the
Police Federation to apply for full representation.    I
appreciate the application is made late.   I apprehend
you will have a letter from those instructing me on
behalf of the Federation.

      The Federation might essentially be said to have
three reasons to be represented;  two of those can be
further said to be in part concurrent with bodies already
represented before you, sir.   First, of course, a number
of Officers were injured in the incident, or certainly
have required counselling since the incident.   I accept
that that, of course, is an interest concurrent with
those of the relatives and those of the deceased, much
more seriously.

      Second, it may be the case that the Federation
members will be criticised during the course of the
Inquiry.   Sir, the Federation represents all Officers up
to the rank of Superintendent - over 120,000.   Sir,
again it may be that in that respect, the South Yorkshire
Police already represented, have a concurrent interest,
although it could be that there might be a divergence of
interest, if it were to be the case, and one simply does
not know, if it were to be the case that operational
decisions were called into question and then the way in
which those decisions were put into practice, and given
the fact that Officers may have claims arising, there
could be a dichotomy of interest.

      I therefore pursue the application on a third
ground and that is this:   sir, it is the ordinary
Officer who week in and week out is required to police
football stadia.   Sir, it is that individual Officer
who, as it were, is perhaps best able to judge the
                             PROCEDURE


conflicting demands of crowd safety and the pressures
imposed by hooliganism, by spectator violence.   It is
the individual Officer, sir, who will have to put into
e f f e c t . ..

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORi   That is really dealing with
the future recommendations side of this Inquiry and it
would be perfectly capable of being put in writing.

      MR. BROWNE:   Sir, that clearly is right.   Tha t is
clearly in part what was done after the Bradford fire.
Sir, the Federation applied before Mr. Justice Popplewell
for representation at the Inquiry and were granted full
representation at the Inquiry.   I made that application.
I made it on a similar basis that I am making today.

      Sir, a number of matters that will be covered by
the Inquiry where the individual Officers has, as it
were, an interest in those recommendations - fencing,
radios, perhaps.    The Federation has a unique interest
really in those matters.   Its members would wish to be
represented to make inquiries into those matters and for
the conflict that I have already indicated between safety
and the potential disorder at matches.

      Sir, that is the way in which I put the
application.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Let's be clear about this.
Are you saying there is going to be a conflict of
interest between the Federation and the South Yorkshire
Police?

      MR. BROWNE:   Sir, I simply do not know.    With
respect, sir, the application is made.   The Federation
is unaware whether the members they represent are likely
to be criticised.   It may well be that they are.    Sir,
it may be there could be a conflict depending upon, as it
were, instructions given to individual Officers and the
way in which those instructions were put into effect.

      Sir, I appreciate I sound hesitant in this regard.
It is simply that I do not know the evidence that is to
be presented before the Inquiry.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   My approach has been that
when applications were made last month, that I would
always be open to further applications if the evidence
went in a way which suggested that somebody's interest
ought to be represented and was not being up until then.
I am reluctant to allow representation, as it were, on
the speculative chance that there might develop a
conflict.   I hope in a way that a conflict does not
develop, but if it did I would certainly hear an
                             PROCEDURE


application about it, but as far as your other points are
concerned, the fact Officers are injured, as you will
recognise yourself, would not qualify for representation.
The point on which you have said you have particularly
relied, that ordinary Officers are required to police the
ground and had views, seems to me to be very much
susceptible of a written submission about how things
should be organised in the future.




                   MR. BROWNE:   If I might just
                                                      P RO CE E DI N GS

      MR. BROWNE:             If I might just pursue it a little, t
Sir, the F e d e r a t i o n is a c r ea tu re of statute.             Under
s. 44 of the Police Act, it has both the power and the duty
to   make r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s on m at te rs a f fe ct in g both the
health, safety and e ffic ie nc y of its members.

        LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:       To make    representations         to
whom?

     MR. BROWNE:             Sir, the s ta tute merely      uses    the phrase,
"to make r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s on behalf".

        LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:       Yes.

     MR. BROWNE:        Sir, I put that as part of the background.
Sir, the p r i nc ip al point which c on ce rn s those i n s tr u ct i ng
me is, I apprehend, this, that if, during the c o ur se of the
evidenc e before the Inquiry, e v id en ce is given as to, for
example - I give it only as an exam pl e - the e f fi c i e n c y of
police radios, the F e de ra ti o n would wish that matt er to be
put forward through c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n of witnesses.

       Similarly, more perti nently, perhaps, in r e la ti on to
p er imet er fencing, so that your Inquiry can make r e co m m e n d a t i o n s
in the light of what the F e d e ra t io n have to say b r ou gh t out
through the ev id en ce on the F e d e r a t i o n ' s b eh al f as to how
this p ar ti c u l a r tragedy links in with those matters.              Sir,
I a pp re c i a t e that that can to some s ub st a nt i al e xtent be
done by giving w ritten evidence.            Sir, the F e de r a t i o n would
wish to be able to draw out c ertai n m at te rs in e x a m i n a ti o n
of witnesses.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              As you say, your Poli ce F e d e ra t io n
only r ep r e s e n t s off ic er s up to the rank of S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
and I b elieve we have got two more unions on top of that,
have we not?

        MR.   BROWNE:     We have.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Well, I fully u n de r s t a n d the
grounds that have led to this a p p li c at i on being made but
at the p resent time my feeling is that the South York sh ir e
Police are r e p r e s e n t e d and until some s u g g es t io n arises
that there might be a c onfl ic t of interest, I am not minded
to open up the gates to ---                If you get r e pr es en ta ti on ,
there is no reason why the other two unions s hould not have
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n as well and the m at te r will b ecome a l to ge th er
overblown, it seems to me.                So for the moment I think
that Mr. W o o d wa rd wants to say something, so I will hear
what he says but I am, at the moment, m inded not to allow
this.
                                  6
                                                 PR OC EE D IN G S



       MR. WOODWARD:    I rise not on the q ue st io n of conf li ct
 of e vide nce - not on the q u es ti on of conflict but, sir, I
rise in r esponse to certa in points that have been made by
my learned friend Mr. Browne and observed by you, sir.

     By Fax letter of 9th May - a Salmon letter, as it
may be termed - i nd ic a t i o n s were given, as you had dire ct ed
on the occ as io n when we first met here, c o n ce r ni n g the
making of a l l e g a t i o n s and the p ro vi d in g of the s u bs ta nc e
of evidence.        We have had the letter, we have Oot had the
evidence.     We have asked for the evid en ce but in that
letter, sir ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think the letter made it
clear that the e vidence had not been fully o bt ai ne d yet
but, in fairness to your party, it was decided to give
notice as early as possible of what was likely to be the
tenor of the evidence.

       MR. WOODWARD:         Sir, the reason I rise is because
that letter contains, amongst the allegations, which really
do lack some p a r t i c u l a r i t y at this stage, the o bs er vation,
for example, "failure by c ert ai n o f fi ce rs to do various
things" and it is in relation to that matter, sir, that I
do rise b ecau se there seems to be in the b a c k g r o u n d of what
is c on t a i n e d in that letter, the p o te nt ia l c r i t i c i s m of
in di vi du al officers.

       LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:       Of what rank?

     MR. WOODWARD:   It does not say,             sir.        It does not
consent to particulars.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Yes,   thank you.        Can you
help   about this at all?

         MR. COLLINS:     Sir, as the author of the letter,
p erhaps I can.        It was c o n s id e re d only fair that as soon
as pos si bl e we s hould let those who might be c r it i c i s e d
know the g eneral area of criticism.               Now, it must be
ob vious to eve ry on e that the i n ve s t i g a t i o n is still
c o n ti nu in g and all the e vi de nc e has not yet been assembled.

       It is e qually clear that there might be some c ri t ic i sm
of i n d iv id ua l off ic er s and the a ction that they took but
my u n d e r s t a n d i n g is that the C h i ef C o ns ta bl e of the South
Y o rkshi re Police made it a b un da nt ly clear that he was taking
full r e s p o n s i b i l i t y on b e ha l f of the Force for the actions
of all of fi ce rs in the p o li ci ng of H i l l s b o ro u gh on the day
in qu es ti on and, of course, it is i ne vi t ab l e that there
may be s u g g e s t i o n s made against i n di vi du al o ff i ce r s in
c a rryin g out the duties on that day, b e ca us e you can on}y
carry out a plan through i n di vi d ua l s and j n d i v i d u a l s , therefore,
are open to po ss ib le criticism, but this does not mean - and
>7*6 >


                                                      P R OC EE DI NG S



         c e rtai nly was not intended to mean - that we foresaw any
         p o ssib le co nf li ct between the South York sh ir e Police as
         a whole and the i ndividu al officers.       C er ta i nl y as I see
         it at the moment, there is no such conflict.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:?       Thank you.         Do you see any
         c o nfli ct as at present, Mr.     W o od wa rd ?

              MR. WOODWARD:       Sir, I rose beca us e of the w or ding
         inthe letter sugg es ti ng that there might be.       It seems
         to be not on the h orizon at the moment.

                   LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:          Mr. Stuart Browne, I think
         that I shall pursue the course that I indicated.                 You
         are free to come back at any time and, of course, there
         is n othing to stop the F e d er a ti o n from having someone
         here with a w a t c hi ng b r ie f to see whether, in their
         e st imation, that situ at io n has arisen but for the moment
         r e p r e s e n t a t i o n means another party here to do sone cross-
         e x a mi n a t i o n and I do not want to b ecome a bore about this
         but it is i m p or ta nt that we get on, so for the moment
         w it h ou t you.           Thank you very much.

                MR. MULLER:      Sir, my junior, Mr. Robertson, who I think
         was here on the last hearing, is anxious to c or rect s om et h in g
         w hich he said to you on that occasion.                I think on that
         o ccas ion he said that a Fire C e r ti f ic a te had been issued
         by the Fire Authority.            Sir, that is not right in the
         sense that the Fire C er ti f i c a t e that was issued was relating
         only to the o ffices and so on in the South SEand so there
         was no Fire C er ti f i c a t e o p er at iv e in rela ti on to the ground
         itself.     I thought that right to tell you.

              LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:       Thank you very much,            Mr.   Muller.
         You are l eading Mr. Robe r ts o n?

               MR.   MULLER:    Yes,   I am.

              LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:           Thank you.    Yes, n ot hing else
         by way of p r e l i m i n a r y ? Very well.    Yes, Mr. C ol li ns ?

              MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I do not know, I am afraid it
         may be that you will have, to some extent, my back, due
         to the lay-out.

              LORD J USTICE    TAYLOR:     I think     I can hear you at this
         range, thank you.

                   MR. COLLINS:        As long as you can hear and e ve ry on e
         can        hear, that is what matters.        I am also w it ho ut a
         m i c r o p h o n e so I shall try to direct my words that way and
         fairly loudly.           I   do not know w he th er it is a good idea
         for        me to have one or not.      I think I can be heard.
                                                    MR.   COLLINS



      LORD J USTIC E       TAYLOR:      You could get that one.

      MR.   COLLINS:         Yes,    I can perh ap s try that.

          It is a m e l a n c h o l y fact that this is the fourth inquiry
following a major disaster at a football ground leading to
loss of life since the war.                 The first was in March, 1946
when 33 were killed in a crush on the terraces at Bolton
W a n d e re rs Ground during a Cup-Tie.           Too many p eople were
packed in too small a space.                 A crush barrier c ol la p se d
and a c o n t r i b u t o r y factor was some u n a u t h o ri z ed entry to
the ground.

        It is pe rh ap s    a sad echo or     foretaste   of what happ en ed
here.

          At the c on cl u s i o n of his report in that Inquiry, Mr.
Hughes of K in g' s Counsel, who was the Chai rm an said this:
"One of the d eepest i m p r e s s io n s left upon my mind from the
Inquiry is how simple and how easy it is for a d an g er o us
s i t ua t io n to arise in a c ro wd ed enclosure.          It happ en s
again and again w ithout fatal or even i n ju ri ou s c o n s e q u en c es
but its danger is that it requir es so little a dd it i on a l
i n f l ue nc es - an i n v o l u nt a ry sway, an exci ti ng moment, a
c o m p a r a t i v e l y small a dditi on to the crowd, the failure of
one part of one barrier - to t ra ns la te the d anger into
terms of death and injur ie s. "

     As I say, those words were w ri tt en           in 1946 and we
do not seem to have learned since then.




                                                   ( Un fortunately,   very little.
                        9




     Unfortunately very little action was taken upon the
recommendations in that report.
     By good fortune there was no serious trouble until the
disaster at Ibrox in 1971 when a number of people were
killed on a gangway trying to go in two directions. There
was a late goal, those leaving tried to come back and got
muddled up with those who were trying to leave at the same
time.
     This led to Lord Wheatley's Report on the Safety of
Football Grounds and eventually to the Safety of Sportsgrounds
Act 1975 and now of course since that Act Safety Certificates
are required for stadia accommodating more than 10,000.
That was the position until!1987 when following the Popplewell
Inquiry and Report the Act has been extended.
     The next tragedy was the Bradford fire on the 11th May
1985 in which 56 people died and coupled with on the same
day some crowd trouble at Birmingham City, and that again
was perhaps an unfortunate echo having regard to what
happened on Saturday in which following the collapse of a
wall a 15 year old boy was killed.
     As I say following Mr. Justice Popplewell's reports
in 1987 came the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports
Act 1987 which extended the certificates and it also led
to the updating of the Green Guide which is the publication
produced by the Government through Her Majesty's Stationery
Office which contains recommendations for Local Authorities,
Sportsgrounds and so on to consider and adhere to in granting
Safety Certificates.
     Now sadly we have this Inquiry following the disaster
at Hillsborough exactly one month ago today, the 15th April
1989 as a result of which 95 people died, a number were
seriously injured and many suffered minor injuries both
physical and perhaps more importantly mental injuries.

     We have heard a little this morning from the represen­
tative of the Police Federation about the effect on Police
Officers. Of course there were similar effects, if not
more so, upon many of the fans who themselves suffered
or suffered bereavements or were witnesses to the deaths
of others.
     Now as we all know, the purpose of this part of this
Inquiry on which we are now embarking is to discover what
happened and why it happened. That will form the factual
basis upon which recommendations for the future can be made.

     In addition, account will be taken of all suggestions
and ideas put forward by those who feel they have something
of value to contribute, but that is for a later stage of
the Inquiry.
     At this stage only witnesses who can give factual
evidence will be called and will of course be open to cross-
examination. This is not the stage for witnesses to give
evidence of their opinions. That is a mattery as I say,
which can be dealt with properly at the second stage and
which can be dealt with most conveniently and expeditiously
and sensibly by the submission of written evidence.
     Now this does not of course mean that the Inquiry will
ignore the opinions of those who wish to put them forward.
As I have indicated, these can be reduced to writing and
indeed many of course have already been reduced to writing.
The Inquiry has received a flood of letters and of statements
from those who feel that they have ideas and suggestions
to put forward.
     Statements of course are still being taken. The fact
that this occurred only a month ago is an indication that
that is inevitable because there are a very large number
of people who were involved both as fans, as Police and as
others who will have to be seen and who have evidence that
is potentially valuable for this Inquiry.
     As I have indicated, of course statements are still
being taken from fans. That is not in any way a useless
activity now that the Inquiry has opened, because they
can rest assured that anything that anyone has to say which
casts a fresh light or deals with something that has not
already been covered by other witnesses will immediately
be put before us and will be taken into account and that
witness will be called if that witness has something
valuable to add.
     Of course there is a limit. There must be a limit
to the number of witnesses that we call before this
Inquiry and inevitably a very large number of people who
have made statements to the Police or to others, because
we know for example that a lot of the supporters have made
statements not to the Police but through their Supporters'
Association or whoever or have written letters they will
not be called necessarily to give evidence.
     It will not help this Inquiry to hear repetitive
evidence. If matters can be established and properly
established by calling two or three witnesses it is no
help to anyone to call another dozen to deal with the
same point, but as I say no one who has made a statement
must think that he or she has wasted his or her time.

     It is only possible for those responsible for deciding
what evidence should be called to do so having seen the
full picture and they can only do that by reading as many
statements as they can from people who deal with what they
saw at the incident.
     It is then possible to see what is common ground and
so to avoid unnecessary repetition and those who have made
statements can rest assured their contents will have been
taken into account even though they are not themselves
called to give evidence.
     In addition I should say this: there may well be
and I do not doubt that there are, those who were involved
in this tragedy who will not want to relive the agony they
suffered in those enclosures, those perhaps who have lost
dear ones or who saw people die in their presence and will
be reluctant to relive those events. Again we have their
statements and they will be taken into account.
     It is of course of the utmost importance that this
Inquiry should be thorough and that all necessary witnesses
should be called. No one need fear that the Inquiry starts
with any preconceptions. It does not.
     There have been, as is well known, a number of public
utterances and speculation in the Press and elsewhere.
Many are manifestly ill-founded and many are based upon
ignorance of the true circumstances. It is the function
of this Inquiry to find out what the true circumstances
were and to base informed opinion upon those circumstances.

     It is also, as Lord Justice Taylor said at the
Preliminary Inquiry, "important to conduct this Inquiry
as speedily as is reasonably possible". Lessons must
be learnt in order to enhance safety for the future and
it goes without saying that the sooner the better because
if there are lessons to be learnt, if safety is to be
improved by those lessons then that must be done if
possible before the start of the next football season
which of course is before next August.
      That may be optimism. I hope it is not, but as I
say there is a need for speed coupled with a need for
thoroughness and it is a balance that is going to be
difficult to draw but it is one that it is essential to
draw.
     I am very glad to say that those bodies represented
before the Inquiry have been most helpful and have responded
to our requests to indicate witnesses who they consider to
be important for their purposes. They of course have their
own interests in this Inquiry but we will, I say "we", I
mean those appearing on behalf of the Inquiry will be most
receptive to indications from any party of witnesses whom
that party considers to be important and whom we may perhaps
have missed or have considered for one reason or another
to be of less importance.
     I don't of course guarantee that we will call every
witness whose name is put before us by the parties, of
course not, but we must have those to take them into account
in deciding which witnesses to call in order to give a proper
and full picture of what occurred.
                                 /It is our hope
                                       MR. COLLINS


     It is our hope that all who are involved in this Inquiry
appreciate it is vital that an accurate account be given even
if that involves admissions of errors, because undoubtedly some
errors were made, and because the avoidance of any such
disaster in the future is more important than the justification
for what occurred on this occasion.
     There has of course been, and still continues, a major
Police operation under the control of the West Midlands Police,
and an enormous amount of work has been and continues to be
done to obtain the necessary evidence to enable this Inquiry to
reach the correct conclusions. Their task is a formidable one.
The evidence is not yet complete, and statements, as I have
said, will continue to be taken, and investigations will
continue to be made as this Inquiry proceedings.
     However, the general picture has been established, and the
areas of dispute are fairly well indicated. The Police and the
Inquiry have been greatly assisted by the provision of a great
deal of video and photographic material by the BBC, who had the
rights to televise this game, by the closed-circuit television
cameras which were in existence at the ground; the South
Yorkshire Police have produced some themselves, and other
individuals have also produced, as I say, videos and photographs.
Those, of course, help to set the picture, to set the scene, and
to tell the story, because in this regard at least the camera
does not lie.
     Since as I have said the evidence is incomplete, I cannot,
even if I considered it part of my task to do so, which I don't,
forecast what the answers will be to the various questions that
the Inquiry must ask. What I propose to do in the course of this
opening is this. First, I shall endeavour to set the scene by
explaining the layout of the ground so that we can all follow the
accounts that are to be given by the various witnesses, and by
the layout of the surrounding area. That will include, of
course, the capacity of the ground, and a description of the
pens themselves.

     Secondly, I shall indicate how the disaster occurred by
reference effectively to the films that I have seen. That is the
base material which leads me to be able to give a narrative
account of what happened. In this regard times can be fairly
accurately given, because of course as you now doubt are all
aware, most modern videos have the times included in the
pictures. You can see the times as thing progressed, and indeed,
quite a lot of modern cameras also have a facility for including
date and time in the photographs that are taken. So one has that
assistance insofar as timings are important. That part will be,
I hope, purely factual, and may well be the subject of very
little if any dispute as the Inquiry continues.
     Thirdly, I shall try to identify the issues which will have
to be determined by this Inquiry where there are disputes on the
evidence, where there are differences of recollection and where
assertions and counter-assertions have been and no doubt will be
                            13

                                        MR. COLLINS
                                             PRf.-CEDUKK


made.    Of course, laying the blame is not part of this Inquiry's
function, but as was indicated and must be a matter of common
sense, as we go through we will have to identify where things
went wrong in order to enable them not to go wrong in the future.
To that extent, of course, it is inevitable that criticisms may
be mhde.
     Finally, I shall deal briefly with the way which we propose,
subject to Lord Justice Taylor, to set about our task of
presenting evidence to the Inquiry in order to establish what
happened and why it happened.
     First, let us come to the ground itself. I appreciate that
what I now say will be a matter of common knowledge of many of
those who are here, but there are no doubt others who will not be
so aware of it, and it is right that it should be explained.

     Hillsborough ground, the home of Sheffield Wednesday, is
situated a few miles from the centre of Sheffield in the district
of Owlerton, hence the name for Sheffield Wednesday, "The Owls".
It was opened in September 1699 in what was then a green field
site, by the River Don. It lies - there is a model there -
roughly west to east, the west end being the Leppings Lane end
and the east end abutted by Penistone Road North, which is the
A61, one of the main roads into the centre of Sheffield.
     On the south side of the ground is the River Don, and to the
north now are houses which are houses abutting on to a road
called Vere Road which runs between Leppings Lane and Penistone
Road North. There is a private roadway belonging to the club
which runs alongside the river to the south of the ground,
immediately to the south of the ground, backing on to the south
stand, and this roadway gives pedestrian access to and from
Penistone Road North to Leppings Lane and vice versa. There are
gates which can be shut, but of course are normally open at the
time of matches. It also provides some car parking, I think
largely for directors, players and staff of the ground. The
directors’ entrance, the administrative block as it were,
buildings, are situated under the south stand on that side of the
ground. The south stand in fact is the oldest of the stands,
having been erected originally in 1914.
     To the north, behind the north stand, is a building which is
described as the gymnasium or the sports hall. This was a room
access to which is at the north-east corner, that is between what
is called the Spion Kop and the north stand, and it was used as a
casualty clearing room, as it were, when the disaster occurred.
In addition in this area is a first aid room and a Police room.
     The east end of the ground is all terracing, known as the
Spion Kop. Why most football grounds or many have that name,
which I think stems from a battle in the South African War;
anyway, that is what it is called, this has a capacity of some
21,000, all standing on terraces.

     The west end, behind the other goal, consists also of
terracing but with a covered stand above. This was built I think
                                       MR. COLLINS
                                             t'" jCEDU&£

in 1965 for the World Cup, some of the matches for which were
held at Hillsborough in 1966. That terracing at the west end has
a capacity of 10,100. The seating part of the west stand, and
just to be awkward, stands or seating areas are known as
"stands”, and standing areas as terracing. The west stand has
seating for some 4-and-a-half thousand - to be.precise, 4,456.

     To the north and south of the ground are stands, all
seating. That to the north has a capacity of about 9,700. That
to the south has a capacity of about 6,600, 3,300 uncovered,
5,500 covered.
     Thus the total capacity of the ground is something just in
excess of 54,000 people.
     Access to the ground is as normal, by a number of
turnstiles. Because of the geography there are no access points
to the north. That is the part of the ground which is abutted
by the houses in Vere Road. Access is from the Leppings Lane
end, the west end, from various turnstiles in Penistone Road
North and by other turnstiles on the south, pedestrian access to
which as I say comes from the private road running alongside the
river.
     There are altogether some 46 turnstiles along Penistone
Road North which normally give access to the Kop and to the east
side of the north stand. I say "normally", because on this
occasion what happened was that Liverpool were allocated the west
and the north, and Nottingham were allocated the east and the
south. In order to achieve segregation the turnstiles in
Penistone North which normally give access to the east side of
the north stand were not used for that purpose because all the
Liverpool supporters were to access from the Leppings Lane end,
as I say to achieve the segregation which sadly has been shown to
be be necessary to avoid clashes between rival supporters. The
result of that is that there were I think some 12 turnstiles
which normally would have been used for that purpose which were
not in action in Penistone Road North, which means there were
effectively some 34 turnstiles - I hope I have got my figures
right - in Penistone Road North, which were available for access
to the Kop essentially.
     Along the south roadway were another 24 turnstiles which
gave access, some to the Kop, those at the east end, and some to
the south stand. That means that there were a total of something
in the order, if my mathematics are right, of about 58 turnstiles
to enable Nottingham Forest fans to get access to the ground.
These figures are important for reasons that will be obvious in a
moment.
      At the Leppings Lane end - I am sorry, before I go on from
that. The area covered by these turnstiles is effectively half
the ground, the whole of the south side and the whole of the west
side.
     At the Leppings Lane end the situation is different, because
not only is the access only from that side for that part of the
                                      MR. COLLINS
                                            - o ceduke


ground, but It is only part of that side. Effectively it is only
the south-eastern part which is available for such access. That
again is because of houses on Leppings Lane which abut the back
of the ground. The result is that there is a relatively small
area, the precise extent of which will no doubt be given in
evidence. There is a relatively small area which is available
for access for all those who need to use that end of the ground.




                                  /There are a total of.
                                         MR. COLLINS



      There are a total of 23 turnstiles, which are
available at that end.   The precise layout of those is
of some importance.

      Liverpool was, as I have   said, allocated the west
and north stands.   That is to   say, something in the
order of 24,000 altogether, of   which 10,100 - slightly
less than half - were terrace,   terracing behind the goal.

      Nottingham Forest had the south and east stands, a
total of some 29,000, of which 21,000, or about three-
quarters, was terracing behind the east end.   That
meant, of course, not only that Nottingham Forest had
more tickets allocated than Liverpool, and as everyone
will know, that is a matter which has already been raised
as a matter of complaint by the Liverpool supporters, but
also there was a tremendous difference in the sort of
accommodation, because the bulk of Nottingham Forest was
terracing - 21,000 - whereas less than half of the
Liverpool part was terracing.   That makes, of course,
not only a difference in the sort of accommodation, but
an enormous difference in cost because the terracing cost
I think £6 and the seating £12.   Quite apart from the
sort of conditions in which people are used to visiting
football matches.

      Be that as it may, I should say some, I think, of
the south stand was reserved for neutrals and officials
so the total capacity of 29,000 for Nottingham Forest
fans was, I think, slightly less than that.

      1 have said that it is important to consider the
turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end.   I had hoped we
would have available, and will in due time have
available, blown-up photographs to show this more
accurately.   However, let me give a description.     There
is, at the Leppings Lane end, as I have indicated, a
relatively small area which is available for access.
There is the roadway itself - Leppings Lane - which
widens out at this point.    It is on a bend of Leppings
Lane where the entrance is, besides the river.     There
is, as I say a widening of the roadway and an extra area
of the roadway at that bend.     There are then external
gates where the boundary of the ground, or the area
belonging to the ground, the club, starts.    Those gates
are normally kept open, wide open, during matches and
enable supporters and others to come into the areas in
front of the turnstiles.

      What you then have are effectively two separate
areas for waiting, divided by a wall, the height of which
I do not have, but I think is of a height, certainly
                                        MR. COLLINS


judging by these photographs, of some 6* or so.       I am
looking at photograph 3 of the bundle I have.

      I do not know how many jof these photographs have
been handed out, but I suspect that most people have a
rough idea of the geography having seen the television
films and perhaps having been there, but as I say, in due
time we will produce blown-up photographs so that
everyone can see what it looks like.    I hope my
description will be relatively clear and will enable
those who are not fully aware of the geography to have
the picture.

      Suffice it to say, you have coming through the
external gates which are opened, you have on the left
hand side a waiting area where there are 16 turnstiles.
Then on the right hand side you have a waiting area in
front of some 7 turnstiles.   The ones on the left are
numbered 1 to 16.   The ones on the right are not
numbered but are called A to 6.   The reason for that is
this:  originally there used to be 18 turnstiles there.
There were some modifications made in - I shall be given
the date, I have forgotten it offhand, but it was fairly
recently, some modifications to the ground.   These meant
that extra turnstiles were put in, making 23 as it were,
in all, but since the next turnstile round was numbered
19, rather than change the number of all the turnstiles
round the ground, the extra ones were called A to G and
there are now no 17 and 18.   It goes 1 to 16, A to G,
and then 19 starts round on the south side and is the
first of the turnstiles on the south side.

      Originally that barrier between the two waiting
areas had something to do with segregation of that area.
Originally that end was for away supporters only.   Then
in 1984, I think it was, Sheffield Wednesday got back
into the First Division.   They began to get larger
crowds and it was decided that at least part of that end
would be used for home supporters as well.   Some effort
had to be made to segregate the two at the Leppings Lane
end.   That led, at least in part, to this barrier and to
another barrier inside which also is of some importance.

      The left hand side first - turnstiles 1 to 16.     On
the far left there is a gate, a concertina type gate,
known as gate A.   That is the exit gate.   Then you have
a series of 16 turnstiles.   Then you have a barrier.
To the right of the barrier the wall, the barrier itself,
continues on where there is another gate on your left.
That is gate B.   Straight ahead of you as you cone into
the waiting area are the seven turnstiles A to G.    You
reach the end of turnstile G and then ahead of you is the
roadway I have described, which you can take to go down
                                        MR. COLLINS


to join up with Penistone Road North, running alongside
the river, which is immediately on your right.

      After turnstile G , as the wall of the ground goes
down on the left of this roadway, there is another exit
gate, a concertina type gate, gate C.    That is the gate
which was opened and which led to the supporters cooing
in which in turn led to a considerable overcrowding of
the terracing in the relevant pens.

      On the day in question there was a barrier in the
roadway, which meant that those cooing in Leppings Lane
could not walk down the roadway to Penistone Road North.
Equally, those coning in the other end could not walk
through to Leppings Lane.   Again, another segregation of
the Nottingham Forest and Liverpool supporters.

       Because the turnstiles at the Penistone Road North
end which would normally have given access to the east
side of the north stand were not being used for that
purpose, two extra turnstiles of the 16 were used for
that purpose at the Leppings Lane end.    Thus turnstiles
numbered 1 to 10 of the first 16 were used on this
occasion for those who had seats in the north stand.
Those were given the letter A.    Those who had tickets
for the north stand should have had on their tickets an
indication that they were to go in from turnstiles A,
which were, as I have said, numbers 1 to 10 on the left
hand side.    Those who had tickets for seating in the
west stand, that is, up and behind the terracing where
the disaster occurred, had numbers 11 to 16 of the first
16.    They were marked C.   Therefore, on the left hand
side of the divide, in the left hand of the two waiting
areas, were turnstiles 1 to 10 labelled A, for the north
stand and turnstiles 11 to 16 labelled C, for the west
stand.

      Those who had tickets for the terraces were
directed to A to G, which were marked B, and which were
to the right of the dividing of the two waiting areas.
This was a little bit muddling and gave rise to a certain
amount of confusion because I think most people would
have assumed that B came after A and before C, but
unfortunately that did not happen on this occasion
because they went A, C, B and because B was on the wrong
side, as it were, of the dividing line, there was a
degree of confusion of people going the wrong side into
the wrong waiting area and then trying to get   out to get
into the right one, which did not help with the confusion
that existed outside before the game started.

      Be that as it may,   that is the situation outside.
                                         MR. COLLINS


      Now, when you cone through whichever be the
turnstile that you were due to go through, if you come
through turnstiles A and C, those are the ones on the
left hand side, you find yourself in an area, on the
right of which is a wall.   You are channelled towards
your left.   On the immediate left there is a sort of
passageway with a fence beside it, a railing beside it,
leading round to the north stand.   Immediately in front
of you is the back of the west stand and you get round
the side of it, if you want to go to the terracing, or
you can go to the back of the stand and there are stairs
up to take you up to the seating.

        If you want to go to the seating on the right
hand side, that is, the south side of the west stand, you
have to go through a gateway in a wall, an open doorway
in a wall, which runs inside the ground when you have got
through the turnstiles and which effectively is a
continuation of the barrier I have described outside, so
that the wall runs effectively on the line between the
turnstiles A to 6 and turnstiles 1 to 16.    If you can
imagine that if you come in and go through turnstile 16,
once you get through the turnstile on your immediate
right will be the concertina gate, gate B, and then this
wall that I have described with a gap in it, a gate in
it, which was opened enabling you either to turn right
through the gate to get to the right hand side of the
west stand or to turn left to go round to the left hand
side of the terracing or up to the west stand.




                    /If you go through
                                                       MR.   COLLINS



If you go through Turnstile A, before you reach it you have
the Gate B on your left - the outside, of course, of Gate B.
You go t hrough the t urnstyl e and then on your i m me di at e
left again is this wall I hhve d es cr ib ed with the gap in it.

      If you want to go to the left -h an d side, you have to
turn through that gap through that wall.       If you go s tr ai gh t
ahead, you will see s trai gh t ahead of you the tunnel
leading through and under the middle of the West Stand,
l eading on to the terracing, and if you turn to your right
you can get round the West Stand and go to the terr ac in g
on the side.

        Numbers, as I have said, are important.                      The result
of this a r r a n g e m e n t of t u rn s ti l in g and t ic k et i ng is this:
there were ten t ur n s t i l e s a va il ab le for those want in g to
use the North Stand, that is 9,700 people through ten
t urnstiles.            There were then six t u r ns t il e s a va i la b le for
those going to the seating in the West Stand, that is
some 4,500 through six turnstiles.                    There were then seven
t ur ns t i l e s a v a il ab le for those going on the terracing,
that is some 10,000 through seven turnstiles.                         That is
how they were directed.

      The Green Guide, the "Guide to Safe ty at S p o r t s g r o u n d s " ,
which, of course, is based upon info rm ed c o n s i d e r a t i o n by
various w or k i n g parties, says this - it is P ar a gr a ph 47:
"The m ax i m u m no ti on al rate at which s p e c ta t or s can pass
through t u r n s t i l e s will depend upon a v a ri et y of factors,
for example, the design and age of the equipment;                  the
a bility of the o perator and the t i ck et in g a rr an gements.
The a d m is si on rate will t he r ef o re depend greatly upon
local c i r c u m s t a n c e s but in general, b ased upon o b se r v a t i o n
and e xperience, it is u n li ke ly that the m a xi m um noti on al
rate per t u r ns ti le would exce ed 750 p e rs on s per hour."

      It is o bvious from what I have i n di ca te d from the
figures that there was no way in which even given orderly
queueing, as at a v icarage tea-party, that this crowd
w ould have got t hrough those t u r n st i le s in less than about
an hour and a half, a ssuming e v er y t h i n g w or ki ng properly.
That is an i m p or ta nt c o n s i d e r a t i o n when we have to disc ov er
why the b u i l d- up occ ur re d at the t u r n st i le s which led to
the d e c i si on to open the gates, that is Gates C and A, which
were the two gates opened.

     Now let me deal with the West terracing.                 E v er yo ne
knows that it was d ivided into pens and there was a p er i me t er
fence.   Of course, when it was c o n s t r u c t e d o r i g in a ll y
there were no pens and there was no peri me te r fence.
                                                 MR. COLLINS


So far as the other end is concerned, the Kop,                there are
no pens but there is a p erim et er fence.

        The pens were erected - that is the d iv id in g off into
the smaller units of the West t e r r ac i ng - in about D e ce mb er
of 1981, I think, following p rob le ms at a Cup semi -f in al
earlier in 1981 b etween Wolves and Spurs when there was some
c ru sh in g due to o ve r c r o w d i n g on the West terracing, when
the gates in the front had had to be o pened to relieve the
p re ssur e and when I think after that there had been some
sort of a ground in va si on as well.

         Now, there were d i s c u s s i o n s held as a result of this.
For tunat ely, no lives were lost.               The o v e r c r o wd i ng was
s o m e th in g in the order, it would appear of about 500 people
in the 10,000 or so - over 10,000 or so - capacity, due ---
It does not really matter why;                there may have been some
forgery of t ickets or s om et hi ng at that stage.

          In any event, following that i n ci de nt there were
d i s c u s s i o n s and it seems that it was really the police
who took the view that it would be easier to cont ro l if
there were these smaller pens to cont ro l the numb er s in
the terracing.

       As I say, later the pen ning was slig ht ly modified,
in this way.       I am going to ask you to i ma gine y ou rs e lv e s
sta nd in g on the pitch and loo king at the West      Stand
so that we start with your l ef t- ha nd side being the South
end.      On the l e f t- ha nd side, there is a pen running
from the corner t hrough roughly to just inside, as it
were, the edge of the penalty area, if you can imagine
where the p enalty area starts, which is a pen which should
contain, or rather has a ma xi m um c ap a ci t y of some 2,600.
That is known as 1 and 2 - calle d 1 and 2 not beca us e there
are two pens but be ca us e there are two gates which are
nu mb er ed 1 and 2, which give access from that pen into the
ground, into the p e r i me te r fence.

         Then we have a small pen, or smaller pen, known as
Pen 3, which runs from, as I say, just inside the penalty
area to roughly di re ct ly behi nd the m iddle of the goal.
The access to Pen 3 is down the central, tunnel to the
r i g ht -h an d side at the end of the c en tral tunnel, Pen 3,
which is i ts el f the r ig ht - h a n d end of Pen 3. The capac it y
of Pen 3 is n o ti on al ly 1200.

     Next to that is Pen 4.      If you come down the central
tunnel and stay on the lef t- h an d side, you come into Pen 4.
Pen 4 is a bit smaller, having a c ap ac it y of 1,000.   To
the right as you are looking at it, to the right of Pen 4
there is a barrier and then a small gap and a no ther barrier
before you get to the next pen, which is 5, 6 and 7,
effective ly.
                                22



                                                  MR.   COLLINS


     The reason for that narrow gap and two barri er s
between Pen 4 and the n ex t -d o or pen on the right is that
that was done in order to prov id e the gap b et we en home
and away supporters, away s up po r te r s being to your left
as you look at it, home sup po r te r s to your right, and
the reason for the gap was to contain an area so that
they could not get at each other across the single fence.

      So you have, as I say, this d ouble fence with a
little neutral area or gap in between.               Then you have
Pen 5, Pen 6 and Pen 7 which, I suppose, are e ff ec t iv e ly
two pens al th ou gh there is not any real phys ic al barrier
b etween them because what it is, is you run along the
front - 4 the rest of the front of the West Stand, and
then when you get to the corner area the t er r ac i ng goes
up to the side of what is the seating stand, so you have
got a sort of c r e s c e n t - s h a p e wider area of t e rr ac in g
on that corner.

       The only other matter of g eography that is perhaps
of i m p or ta nc e is that on the l e ft -h an d side, again as you
are looking at the pens, right on the l e f t - ha n d side, the
end of the South Stand but in the corner, as it were, of
Pen 1 at a higher level is the Police Control Box, or
the Ground Control Box, which has a view or one of its
views is d irec tly across the t e rr ac in g on the West Stand.

         It is not e ntirely clear, and no doubt the evid en ce
will bring this out, but it would appear that the divi si on
of home and away at the L e pp in gs Lane end that I have
d escribed, that is away on the l e ft -h an d side and home on
the r i gh t - h a n d side or, to put it more simply, the away
Pens 1-4 inclusive, the balance being home, was a divis io n
which c on t i n u e d until c e r ta i nl y the 1988 season but may
have ceased since then.             As I say, we will no d oubt have
e viden ce about that in due course.              It is not entirely
clear on the m aterial I have              seen  - so far whet he r that
home and away div is io n still exists.             Suffice it to say,
of course, that it was a d iv is io n which was i rr el e va n t
at this match b ecause all the s up po r te r s at the Lepp in gs
Lane end were L iverpool s up po r te r s and so there was no
d iv i si on b etween home and away that was rele va nt but - and
this is very imp or ta nt - those who came thro ug h A and G
on that side of the wall that I have d e s c r ib e d would see
and did see in front of them as they came in, and the
same ap pl ie s to Gate C which, of course, is down beside,
as I have described, G - Turn st il e G.

     What they see as they come in is a tunnel in front
of them, the tunnel through the middle of the stand which
gives access to Pens 3 and 4 and above this tunnel is
the big letter B and the word "Standing" in large letters.
There is no i nd ic a t i o n wha tsoever, no sign at all to
                                                MR.   COLLINS


indicate that if you turn to your left and go t hr ough the
gap in the wall you can get round to Pens 5, 6 and 7 round
that side and, of course, Pens 5, 6 and 7 in fact have a
total ca pa ci ty of - I c a nn ot read these w re tc he d small
figures - I think about a total of some 3,000 -- no,
about h a lf the capacity, about 5,000 a lt ogether, if you
add 5, 6 and 7 together.            But no d i r e ct i on sign at all
i n d i c a t i n g that if you go through thdre you can get
round, u -    j


          Whether that is beca us e normally there is no a ccess
through that wall because of the home and away divide,
I do not know.             Whether it was that no-one appl ie d . their
minds to this p roblem and that there was need for these
d i r e c t i o n a l signs, again I do not know, and this is
s o m e t hi ng no doubt that we will have to go into.

       The fact is there was no sign to indi ca te to people
that they s hould go, or could go to their left to get
access to the end pens of the West side.           There was a
sign i nd ic a t i n g that there was a way round to the right
but it was not much of one.           It was a sign situated,
I suppose about as far away from me as that wall is at a height
of about the bottom of the window, in r el at i ve l y small
l etters saying, "Standing" with a little a rrow pointing,
as it were, away from you, so that if anyone c li ck ed they
would p er h a p s have rea li s ed that if you went that way
you c ould get round the side at the back of the West Stand
which is in front of you and get to the side of Pens 1 and
2, but that is the only sig ning that there was there to
i n dicate that way round.

      No doubt some Liv er p oo l s u p p or t er s may have been
the p r e v io us year and may have been aware of the geog ra ph y
of the g round but if they did not reme mb er or were s t ra ng er s
to the ground, there is no way in which they w ould have
known that having come through that gate rather than go
down the c entral tunnel they could go to the right and go
round to Pens 1 and 2 or to the left to go round to Pens
5, 6 and 7 out of the tunnel.




                                             (The tunnel    i t se l f   ...)
     The tunnel itself is some 23 metres long.  It is not
even in its slope.  It starts with a slight rise, a gradient
of 1:16; it soon levels off and then goes down gradually
and then more steeply and the end of the tunnel is a gradient
of 1:6 which of course is a relatively steep gradient.   At
the end of the tunnel roughly in the middle of it is the
barrier which divides Pens 3 and 4 as you 9ome down the
Tunnel 4 on your left, 3 on the right.

      Now at the top of the terracing immediately abutting
the wall of the stand behind there is a passageway or what
can be used as a passageway and there are gates, very narrow
gates which can be used to give access on the right-hand
sidev as you come down the tunnel you would turn immediately
left you could go through a gate which would give you access
to Pens 1 and 2.   If you turn down the tunnel and make for
the left-hand side you could go through two gates because
of the small gap     between them which  would give you access
to Pens 5, 6 and     7.

     Those gates were narrow.  They were not marked as such.
When the crowds built up they were not noticed and they
certainly weren't used and they were not really very
effective to provide for the relief of the crowding that
occurred in those pens.
     So much for the geography. As I say I apologise that
I have had to do it in the absence of any photographs but
I hope that the explanation that I have given is at least
comprehensible to those who have not seen pictures of or
have not been to the ground as setting the scene of what
happened.

     Let me now turn to the events of Saturday, the 15th
of April.  Of course it w a s a sell-out this match and so
there were going to be at least 24,000 Liverpool supporters
coming to Hillsborough.   I say ?at least" because it is
undoubtedly the fact that a number of supporters came without
tickets in the hope of getting tickets.

     This is a not uncommon phenomenon at all    ticket matches
where there is an attraction, where thexe is a   limited capacity.
It had happened the year before because there    had, as every­
one probably knows, been an identical fixture    the previous
year in the same stage of the Cup.

     Whether or not people without tickets came with a
view to getting in if they could, even without a ticket,
or whether they simply came on the hope that they might
be able to buy a ticket, I cannot of course say. All that
is clear is that there were quite a lot of tickets available
for sale or exchange.
     There is some evidence of the existence of touts and
some fans apparently went with spare tickets no doubt with
the expectation that they would be able to dispose of their
spare tickets and perhaps at a profit.
     It is perhaps in the nature of things that those who
did get in without tickets are the least likely to come
forward to give evidence to the Inquiry and it is probable
particularly when the gates were opened that some people
did go in without tickets.

     There is at least one statement that I have read of
someone who has had the courage to admit that he did take the
opportunity of going in without a ticket when the gates were
open and as I say, human nature being what it is, I don't
doubt that there were more, but it does not appear on the
evidence available that people trying to get in without
tickets was a great contributory factor.

     The existence of people without tickets trying to
get tickets outside the ground undoubtedly added to the
confusion.  They should not have been there and it should
have been possible or attempts should have been made to
ensure that they did not get there, but as I say although
it is undoubtedly a fact that people were there without
tickets, whether or not people trying to get in without
tickets added to the problem is difficult to say.

     Most Liverpool supporters came by coach or by mini
bus or by other forms of road transport.   There were I
think two special trains laid on but their joint capacity
was something in the region of 1,000 only.   Also some
came by scheduled train services to Sheffield, but this
meant a vast influx of buses, coaches, cars, etc. and
obviously the Police had a problem with parking.

     It is one of the recommendations of Popplewell and
an obvious one, it is in the Green Guide as well, that one
should not allow parking too close to the ground because
you cannot have access for for example emergency services
if a disaster occurred and this of course does mean that
there is an enormous pressure on parking places and the
result of that is that people had to park some distance
away from the ground and walk up to a mile, mile-and-a-
half in order to get to the ground.

     There were some delays on the roads.  There were road­
works for example I think on the M62 near Manchester which
a number of supporters refer to as causing a delay of
up to half-an-hour or more.

     There were I think some roadworks on one of the roads
into Sheffield, the A34, but perhaps I am wrong about
that, may be it was Junction 34, but in any event there
were some roadworks, and as a result of that there was
some delay and some people arrived later than they had
hoped, but on the whole, and again this is something that
obviously may have to be gone into because it is relevant
to the possibility of postponing the kick-off, on the
whole it does not seem that there were any major traffic
problems which led to major delays.
     Let me now refer to drinking.   No alcohol by law
could be sold in or brought into the ground and there is
no evidence that we have seen so far anywhere that any
alcohol was brought into the ground.

     However, it was brought into the ground inside a
number of supporters because there is evidence of very
considerable consumption of alcohol before the match statted
both in such pubs as remained open within a reasonable distance
of the ground; with off licences and supermarkets which sell
largely cans of beer for consumption off the premises and
also in cars and mini buses and it seems also in some of
the coaches too although that should not have happened
because it is an offence under the Act for the coach operator
to permit it,  fans brought their own drink.

     Many people describe, and we will hear evidence,    of
a considerable amount of drinking largely from cans,    people
were walking along or while they were having lunch.     People
were sitting in Hillsborough Park, for example, near    the
ground and on grassy areas dotted about.

     No doubt some drank more than they should have done
and we will hear evidence to that effect.

     No doubt there were as a result isolated examples of
bad behaviour relating to drink, but the general picture
that comes across and would seem to emerge from what we
have seen so far, is that although people may have been
drinking and may have been drinking quite heavily, the
general state of the crowd was good humoured.  It was not
bolshy.  There was no hooliganism as such unless you include
as hooliganism an unfortunate tendency to urinate in places
wherever you are rather than going somewhere which is the
right place to do it, because there was a certain amount
of that which caused a nuisance and caused obviously distress
to some people living around, but apart from that and as I
say perhaps isolated incidents, there does not appear to
have been a great amount of bad behaviour due to drinking.

     Of course where drink may be important is what happened
outside the turnstiles at Leppings Lane leading to the crush
which led to the decision to open the gates and I will come
to that in a moment.

     It is also right that I should point out that of the
evidence of drinking fans some of them of course were
not Liverpool fans and there is an indication that the fans
from Nottingham Forest were just as inclined to drink as
were the Liverpool fans.

     It is something which football fans do before they go
to a game if the kick-off is at 3 o'clock and it is some­
thing which I am afraid cannot be stopped by any law unless
you ban drink altogether and even then probably you won't
stop it. It is a fact of life.
     Now so much for the moment for drink.  The gates opened
at midday, that is the gates to the ground.  By 2 o'clock
there had been really, and I am concentrating now of course
on the Liverpool end, Leppings Lane end, there had been only
perhaps a trickle of people coming to the ground.  There
was plenty of room still in all parts.

     By quarter-past-2 or shortly thereafter Pens 3 and 4
were beginning to fill up on the terraces.  By half-past-2
they were full.

     Now that is a relative term.   I d o n ’t know whether
there were 1,000 or 1,200 capacity or whether it was less
than that, but the fact is if one looks at the video it
is perfectly plain that by half-past-2 those pens were to
all intents and purposes full and by half-past-2 there was
a mass of people outside trying to get into the ground.

     Again it is not possible to be accurate on numbers
but certainly it ran into thousands rather than hundreds,
that is to say it was more than 1,00Q, probably nearer 2,000
people or perhaps even more waiting or trying to get in.
     It was not an orderly queue.  It is described generally
by all those who were concerned in it as a "mass of people",
a disorganised mass.

     No doubt if there had been orderly queueing there would
not have been the crush outside and the gates would not
have been opened, but to expect orderly queueing from a
football crowd is to expect something which simply will
not ever happen and has never happened.




                               /Anyone who has experience
                          28


                                         MR. COLLINS



Anyone who has experience of football crowds ought to have
appreciated that there was likely to be such a press, such a
crush, unless measures were taken to try to ensure that there was
orderly queueing, and those measures ought to have involved
control at a greater distance from the ground than appears to
have occurred.
     In any event, the fact is - without comment - the fact is
there was a mass of people trying to get in through these
turnstiles. It is perfectly plain that the turnstiles were not
operating efficiently in the sense that people were not going
through smoothly. This, of course, is a vicious circle,
because the more people that are millingaround trying to get
in the less easy it is for people to go through smoothly,
because people press on each other at the turnstiles, and
this in itself leads to delays at the turnstiles. So you
have, as I say, a vicious circle. You have a build up, and
the more there is a build up and the more confusion there is,
the less people can get through smoothly, so the greater time
it takes to get people through, so the more build up you get.
And that is what happened on this occasion.
     It led to a situation which necessitated in the view of the
Officer in ultimate control outside, the opening of the gate.
Obviously that decision is going to have to be looked at in depth
in the course of this Inquiry, but it is right I should say at
the outset that having regard to the situation that had built up
outside and the dangers that were perceived and genuinely
perceived to exist outside, that decision was almost an
inevitable one, that is a decision that the gates should be
opened. It is difficult at this stage - evidence may come out to
contradict this - but it is difficult at this stage to see that
the Officer who decided that the gates should be opened should be
criticised for that decision.

     What unfortunately happened thereafter was that the result
of opening the gates on the situation inside was not properly
catered for or foreseen, but that is not necessarily the fault of
the Officer outside, who was concerned with the situation that
had developed there, and the undoubted crowd crush and danger to
individuals and what he believed to be a danger to life outside.
     Be that as it may, there were deployed outside, apart from
some foot Officers, some six mounted Police. Perhaps ironically
some of those at least were Merseyside Officers, and were
recognised as such by some of the supporters. Sadly, they did
not seem to have much beneficial effect upon the crowd
outside. May be, and again this is something we may have to
investigate, may be because of the confined space - you remember
I described you have got the gates and you have the areas in
front of the pens, which is no great area - may be because of
that the capacity for the Police horses to do good was limited
and the capacity for them to do evil was great, because with a
great crowd of people around in a confined space a horse is
something which can be a bit of a danger. It is no fun to have
your foot trodden on by a horse, as some of the fans discovered
                           29


                                         MR. COLLINS


in the course of the melee outside.
     I have indicated by 2.30 the situation inside, pens 3 and 4
were full and the situation outside, a great mass of people
trying to get in.
     The Officers in control, of course, could see this on a
video from the control room. They could see the situation
outside and could see the situation inside, too. They wondered
at half-past-2 whether they would be able to get everyone in in
time, and decided they would. Therefore, the decision was then
made not to defer the kick-off.
     By 2.40 people were having to be moved out of the crush
outside. A young boy, for example, who obviously was in
distress, was lifted over the heads of people to be taken out of
the crush. As a result of the crush people were beginning to
climb up over the walls and over the turnstiles in order to
escape the crush.   Now, it may be that some of those who climbed
over were trying to get in without tickets, and we will no doubt
hear evidence about that.   But certainly some of those who
climbed over climbed over with tickets and climbed over because
they were trying to escape the crush and to get in before the
match started. They should not have done so, may be, but the
mere fact that someone climbed over does not mean that that
someone did not have a ticket.
     At 2.47, and these times can be quite precise because we
have evidence of them, at 2.47 Superintendent Marshall, the
Officer in the crowd, made his first request to open the gates.
At 2.48, one minute later, Gate C was opened, not as a result of
that request, but in order to eject someone who had climbed over,
may be someone who had climbed over without a ticket. He got
inside, the Police Officer gets him, decides that he must be
ejected, and the gate is opened at 2.48 in order for that to be
done. When the gate is opened - I don’t know whether they get
the man out - but they get an awful lot in at the same time,
because there is an immediate inrush of people because of the
pressure outside. It is difficult to tell how many came in on
that inrush. It certainly was more than 100, probably even in
the low hundreds. As I say, it is difficult to tell. May be
even up to 500. The gate was then shut again with the assistance
of a horse. What happened was that a mounted Officer got his
horse across the open gate from outside, and it was then shut.

     The importance of that is this, that the Officers on the
control - again the video shows this happening, the closed-
circuit television shows this - must have been aware of the
effect of opening the gate, that it would lead to an inrush of
people because of the pressure outside. When I say ”an inrush” ,
I don’t want the impression to be given of a great stampede. It
was not like that. It was an inrush in the sense it was a large
number of people coming through the space, but it was not a mad
rush. That is 2.48.
     The gates are then shut. Mr. Marshall repeats his request.
He gets no acknowledgement through his radio, and this is
                          30


                                         MR. COLLINS


another matter that again we may have to investigate, because it
does appear there was some problem with the Police radio
communications at a crucial stage, certainly some evidence of a
breakdown in the system. Be that as it may, his message was in
fact received, although it was not communicated, or the
reception was not communicated to him.
     At 2.52 or thereabouts - I have given these fairly precise
times; this depends upon the video being accurate, and it may be
out by half-a-minute or so. At 2.52 Gate C was opened. It was
opened by the Police and on the Police instructions. It was not
forced open by anyone. I say that, because there have been some
reports in the press and elsewhere that that gate was forced. It
was not. It was opened as a result of a Police request and by,
it would seem, a Police Officer, and of course there were
stewards also present.
     When that gate was opened people were encouraged to go in
through it in order to relieve the pressure. You will appreciate
that the main group of people who used that gate, Gate C, would
be those who were trying to get through turnstiles A and G,
because that was the mass that was on that side of the barrier
outside. So broadly speaking, those who were trying to get to
turnstiles A and G were those who had terrace tickets, standing
tickets, and thus would be generally those who would be going to
the standing area. Once Gate C is opened I have already told you
that there is the lure, effectively, of the tunnel ahead. It is
the only way that appears sensible to go. Again, when that gate
was opened, there was no question of a stampede in, no question
of a mad rush. Indeed, people appeared effectively to walk in
rather than to run in. If one looks at the video one can see
some at least of them appear to have in their hand ticket
sized pieces of paper. I can’t say they were tickets. You
can’t see that on the video, but there is no question but that
the vast majority of those who went in through that gate had
tickets. I do not doubt as I have said before that there may
have been some who went in without tickets, but the majority
appeared to have had tickets.
     Of course, where did they go? Straight down the tunnel.
The timing is important, because at 2.54 the teams came out on to
the pitch. That is a minute-and-a-half, 2 minutes or so, after
the gate was opened. When the teams come out on the pitch the
crowd reacts. You get a crowd roar. Further encouragement for
people to come down on to the terracing quickly. Liverpool, of
course, are used at Anfield to going on to terracing without
lateral barriers, and most will say, ’’Well, there is the tunnel
ahead. There is the terracing ahead. We thought when we got
down there we would be able to spread out” . That of course did
not happen. What did happen was that at 2.55 there was a surge
forward immediately after the teams had come on the pitch, there
was a surge forward in those already full pens. Normally, when
surges go forward it is common practice you have a surge and then
everyone then goes back. On this occasion there was no going
back. There was a surge forward with the impetus of people from
behind, and the people from behind when they reach the end of the
tunnel can’t turn round and go back because they have got other
                          31


                                         MR. COLLINS


people coming behind them down the tunnel.
     There is some confusion in the evidence, and again it is a
matter we may have to go into, as to precisely what it was like
going through the tunnel. Some speak of an orderly walk through.
One or two even speak of being able to turn round and go out when
they did not like what they saw ahead. Others speak of being
carried down on a tide, effectively, unable to go any other
way. It may be it depended when you came in. It may be at
certain times there was a bit of a rush through, possibly
when there was this roar as I have indicated when the teams
came out, and at other times it was not quite so bad, because
the flow through the gate varied slightly. At some stage
nearer the beginning it was obviously more intense than it
was a little later on when the first knot had got through.

     Be that as it may, down they come into the pens. There is
this surge forward. It would appear that it was at that stage
that the barrier broke in pen 3, and the barrier which broke
was the one immediately behind the exit gate on the right-hand
side as you come down off pen 3. Now, the breaking of that
barrier in all probability caused a number of deaths, because
when the barrier broke so there was a crush forward onto those
in front of it, and because of the weight of numbers behind it
was not possible for them to get up again. It does appear that
all the deaths occurred in the pens rather than in the tunnel.

     There has been, I think, some speculation that I have read
that some deaths may have occurred in the tunnel. That seems
improbable on the evidence we have seen so far. We can't yet
rule it out because as I have indicated the investigations are
still continuing, but it looks as if they did not. Certainly
some dead people were afterwards found in and around the tunnel,
but that was because they had been carried there afterwards, and
some injured people as well. As I say, all the deaths would
appear to have occurred in the pens, and most of them at the
front of the pens. Not all at the front. Some people, sadly,
were crushed on to barriers in the pens. These are the barriers
about 3 feet high. There are graphic descriptions of people
being pressed against and bent over these barriers, and sadly
suffering great injury or losing their lives in that way.
     So as I say, at about 2.55 there was this surge forward
which was the start of the real trouble and the real crushing.
This led to attempts by people to climb out over the barriers at
the front. These are barriers which are of a considerable
height, a height of I suppose about 8 or 9 feet or thereabouts.



                               /At the top they are bent
                                       MR. COLLINS



At the top they are bent inwards with bits of wire
sticking inwards, obviously with a view to stopping
people climbing over but people did begin to try to climb
over and, indeed, did succeed, to get out of the crush.
Others were trying to climb over the barrier between pen
3 and pen 2 on that side to get away and others, no doubt
from pen 4, trying to do the same across the two barriers
to 1 and 2.

     Of course, one of the results of what had happened
was that pens 1 and 2 on the one hand and 5, 6 and 7 on
the other had considerable spaces.   Everyone had gone
down the middle to 3 and 4 instead of going round the
sides to 1 and 2, 5, 6, and 7.

     There were gates in the front of both 3 and 4,
narrow gates, no more than a metre wide, possibly less,
which were bolted, that is to say, they had what
effectively are latch-type bolts on the perimeter side,
which could be opened by police officers patrolling the
perimeter or, indeed, anyone else outside on the
perimeter, but police officers had control, or stewards
of those gates.

     When the trouble started, when people started to be
crushed at about five to three, as I have said, there was
a clamour to get out, clamour to the police to try to
make them realise what was happened.   Sadly it would
seem, partly because of the general noise that always
exists in a football crowd, the police did not appreciate
what was going on, that is, the police officers on the
perimeter.

     At one stage the gate in pen 3 was opened.   The
evidence appears to indicate that it opened through
pressure of numbers from inside.   That is to say, it was
not opened by a police officer outside, it was opened
first of all by simply the pressure from inside.    One or
two people got out.   It was then shut again by the
police because they did not realise, and I am not seeking
to criticise at this stage, I am simply stating the fact,
it appears they did not appreciate what was happening
inside those pens.    Certainly for some minutes the
police appeared to have looked upon on this as a possible
pitch evasion rather than the truth, which was people
were desperately trying to get out of a situation where
many were dying because of the crush and many were being
injured.

     I should say that once the police did realise what
was happening they helped as best they could.
                                       MR. COLLINS


     Equally, It Is right to say that In these days when
fans seem to be attacked so much, It Is pleasant to be
able to say that those fans who could, helped to try to
alleviate what was happening.    There was assistance In
getting people out of the pens*    Of course, some
panicked, of course some reacted in an hysterical way,
but those were the minority.    The majority did what they
could to assist and we have all seen the pictures of the
makeshift arrangements with the advertising hoardings
being used as stretchers, attempts to give mouth to mouth
resuscitation, attempts to help the injured, attempts to
prevent people dying.

     However, sadly, as I say, the magnitude of what was
happening was not appreciated in the very early stages
and as I say what was believed to be happening was a
pitch invasion.

     Whether it was because the police were conditioned
to thinking in terms of hooliganism rather than in terms
of safety is a matter we will no doubt have to
investigate, because the priority must be always safety.
Of course, hooliganism has a safety side because if
people behave like hooligans there is a danger.   We all
saw that at Heysel and hooliganism can lead to problems
of safety.   It is also right to note, because it is a
matter of fact, that without hooliganism there would not
have been perimeter fencing and without perimeter fencing
this problem, at least, might not have occurred.    That
may be like saying post hoc, ergo propter hoc.

     Be that as it may, this is the situation starting
from about 2.55.

      By two minutes past three it would appear
appreciation had set in as to what in reality was
happening.    The fact is when people did find out they
did not try to get on the pitch.    They stayed on the
side.    Some of them were channelled back to 1 and 2
through the gate which was opened at the side.    Others
collapsed.    Others remained and tried to help to get
those out and to try to get crowds to go back and you
will see graphically, or one has seen, police officers
and others and fans standing on the perimeter fence
outside doing this, "Get back.    Get back.**   They could
not because people were still coming from behind down
that tunnel and the crush was such that it was simply
sadly impossible.

     At four minutes past three one sees this happening,
fans on the fence trying to get people to go back, people
climbing over still trying to get out, going to the
adjoining pens when they could, but people still - and we
are now getting on to five minutes past three - still
                                          MR. COLLINS


coming in through the tunnel.   Despite what is happening
in these pens people are still coming in through that
gate and through the tunnel.   There is still no-one to
stop them doing it*
     At five and a half minutes past three the game is
stopped by a Superintendent running on to the pitch and
at that stage it may be that what could be seen from the
Police Control Room did not enable them to hav« a proper
picture of what was happening, an ambulance was called*

     At eight minutes past three there came a request for
a fleet of ambulances.   This was when a senior officer
had gone round to the pitch to see for himself what was
going on.

     At three fourteen the police summoned the fire
brigade and the fire brigade record is perhaps
instructive because they write down, of course, when they
receive the message.    It    reads thus:
       "There has been   a major accident at Hillsborough
       Football Ground.    The crowds have forced their way
       in.   They have broken fences and the gate down.     I
       don't know exactly what it is but there are people
       trapped."
"They have broken fences and the gate down" - that is
important because that is      apparently thepolice message
to the fire brigade.    If     they had been watching their
video in the Police Control Room and listening to the
messages they must have known that the gate had not been
broken down*   If that is the gate they are referring to
because I have omitted something which I ought to have
dealt with and that is gate A*    You remember gate A is
the gate on the left as you come in*    That is the gate
by turnstile number 1*

     Gate A was also opened at some stage.   It is not
entirely clear whether it was before or after gate C was
opened, but it was certainly at about the same time as
gate C was opened*   What led to gate A being opened, and
of course, this was the crush on the left hand side of
the waiting area, outside turnstiles 1 to 16, what led to
that gate being opened was an indication that it was
shaking and a fear expressed by Mr* Marshall in his
message to the Control that if it was not opened it would
fall down*
       However, the opening of gate A had very little, if
any,   bearing on what happened in pens 3 and 4, for the
very   simple reason I have already indicated, that if you
come   in through gate A you are on the left hand side of
that   wall and therefore you would go round to the side
                                       MR, COLLINS


anyway and into 5, 6 and 7.   So it is improbable - not
impossible - but improbable that anyone coming in through
gate A would have made their way across through the
opening in the wall inside and so down to the central
tunnel to go into pens 3 and 4.

     Accordingly, although gate A was opened, and of
course, this effected a relief of the pressure on the
left hand side, outside turnstiles 1 to 16, it is
unlikely to have had any bearing on what happened in pens
3 and 4.

     I should have dealt with that in sequence, but
having mentioned it, I have told you the fire brigade was
called at 3*14 and I have indicated the message*    At
3.15 the first ambulance came on the pitch*   It was a
St. John's ambulance.   At 3.17 the first fire tender
arrives.   It only take some three minutes.   At 3.20 the
first health authority ambulance arrives, if I may call
it that, I know that is not strictly right.   In the
meantime there have been the makeshift arrangements that
I have described.

     The tannoy on the ground was not used to explain
what was going on, partly perhaps because it was not
known precisely what had happened.   The only messages
that could be relayed was a message to clear the pitch,
not to go on to the pitch, which was perhaps in all the
circumstances not the most helpful of messages that could
have been broadcast.

     Whether as a result of that or not, it was not
apparent to the Nottingham Forest end or, indeed, to most
of those in the ground, other than those in the west
stand, to the west terracing, what was happening.    It
was believed that Liverpool fans were misbehaving and
that there was a pitch invasion.   This led to a certain
amount of hostility and chanting from the Nottingham
Forest end.   This in its turn led to exasperation from
the Liverpool end and there was a potential for an ugly
confrontation because, of course, the Liverpool fans had
by then got on to the pitch.   It was for that reason
that the police decided they should draw up a cordon
across the centre of the ground.   There has been a
certain amount of criticism expressed in statements that
police manpower should not have been wasted forming
cordons across the ground and there should have been more
policemen pitching in to help.

     Well, there obviously was the potential for trouble
and difficulties as a result of the confrontational
atmosphere that I have indicated that made it necessary
for there to be that sort of policing.   We will
obviously have to consider in the course of this Inquiry
                                      MR. COLLINS


whether the response was an adequate one in all the
circumstances and more importantly, that response, if it
was inadequate, and I am not saying it was I am simply
indicating the area, whether that response led to any
unnecessary deaths or unnecessary suffering as a result
of there not being available in time proper medical
equipment etc.




                           /Be that as it may
                                                      MR.   COLLINS


          Be that as it may, it was not until 3.45 that there
was any a n n o u n c e m e n t really i n d ic a ti n g that a d i sa st er
had occ ur re d and that was when Kenny D a l g le i sh made an
a n n o u n c e m e n t which called upon the L i ve rp oo l fans to
show r ue st r a i n t and calm the s it u at i on down.

      At 10 past 4 there was an a n n o u n c e m e n t that the game
had been abandoned.        Immed ia t el y on r e al i s a t i o n of what
had h appe ned there was calm and about ten minu te s later
the s ta d i u m began to empty, again in a calm fashion.

          Now, there had to be a delay.           I think you can all
u n de r s t a n d why, b ecause to feiave had t ho u sa n ds of fans
leavin g the s tadium would have i n te rf er ed with the
e m e r g en cy ser vi ce s g ett in g to it, and so it was nece ss ar y
to ensure that p eople r ema in ed in the s ta d iu m until all
the i njur ed had been ferried out to hosp it al and, as I say,
the proper a r r a n g e m e n t s had been made to get the e m er ge nc y
s er vi c es to and from.          So it was proper and i ne vi t ab l e
that people should have been r e qu es te d to remain.                Whether
they s hould have been left to remain in i g no ra nc e of what
was going on is, of course, another que s ti o n that will have
to be, perhaps, gone into.

     From what I have i n di ca te d of the narrative, it is
clear that it was the openi ng of Gate C which led to a
large number - I do not know how many;               it is d if f ic u lt
to tell, but it c e r t ai nl y was not less than a thousand,
perhaps, and pr ob ab ly more than that, comi ng down the
tunnel.      In all p r o b a b i l i t y it was at least as many as
the total c a p a ci ty of those two pens, a s su mi ng there had
been no-one in them, that is 2,200 people, which meant
in all p r o b a b i l i t y that there were more than twice the
number of people who should have been in those pens in
those pens.

          This, of course, c o i n ci d ed with the arrival of the
p la yer s on the pitch.          There was not an imme di at e
r e a l i s a t i o n of what was happening, so the gates in front
were not o pened in time and steps were not taken to try
to get p eople out and to stop more p eople coming in.

         A n othe r factor which may have a dded to the trouble
was that just b efore the m atch was a ba nd o ne d or very early
on in the m atch there was a shot which hit the g o a l -p o st
at the far end, I think, and this, of course, i t se l f led
to a noth er surge b ecaus e people behind, h ea ring the
e x ci t e m e n t of that would want to come forward and bee*
what was h a p p en in g and this meant p eople in the tunnel
would have i ne vi t a b l y come forward, which added to the
p r e s su re s that al re ad y e xi st ed in the pens. So that is
the s t o r y .
                                                        MR.   COLLINS


     I have, I think, i nd i ca t ed to some extent the issues
as I have gone t hrough the account, but let me summ ar is e
them, I hope fairly quickly.
                  \*k'

          First of all, outside - late arrival.                   Some roadworks,
some h old-u ps on the road but they do not seem to have been
a greatly c o n t r i b u t o r y factor.      C er ta i nl y some people did
spend time d r i n ki ng and leaving it rather to the last moment
b efore they w alked down to the ground.                     It meant that there
was an arrival be tw ee n half past two and quar te r to three,
and p o ssi bly even later people a rr i vi n g at the ground.                     But
should that not have been a n t i c i p a t e d ?            There was no
e n t e r t a i n m e n t pr ov id ed in the ground.        There was no great
i nc en t iv e for people to arrive early and stand on a terr ac e
with n othin g to do for an hour or so befo re the (batch starts.
It was an a ll -t i c k e t match and it may well be that there was
a t enden cy among people to believe that if they have got
a ticket and if it is not going to be a q ue s ti o n of queu ei ng
up at turn st il es in order to pay, then it s hould be more
e f f i ci en t and they should be able to get in more quickly
and thus they can arrive a little later.                       It is c er t ai n ly
the case that the tickets have upon them in r e la ti ve ly
small print on the back that people s hould arrive not later
than 15 minutes before the match s tarts but, again, human
na ture being what it is, people do not a lways keep to that
sort of stricture.

        The other c o n s i d e r a t i o n is that the lay-out of this
p a rt ic ul ar ground meant that there was a lack of s u f fi c ie n t
t u rn st il es to cater for the numbers that were to come at
that end of the ground.

         Drink - I have a lready dealt with that.                C er t ai n ly
a lot had been consumed.              It may have c o n t r i b ut e d to the
a t ti t u d e of the fans, the i mp at i en c e and thus the form at io n
of the crowd ou ts id e and a cert ai n amount of push in g and
i m p at ie nc e there but, again, even w i th ou t drink, it is a
matter which s hould have been a n t i c i p a t e d by those who
were r es po n s i b l e for p la nn in g and d ec i di n g how there should
be c ontrol o utsi de and what should be done to prev en t a
b ui ld -u p in the k n o w le dg e that you have to get all these
p eople through these 23 turnstiles.

         Then there is the p robl em of the n o n - ti c ke t holders.
C er t a i n l y there were n o n -t i ck e t holders.   It may be there
were quite a lot of n o n -t ic k et hold er s who had come in the
hope of g etting into the grou nd - again, whet he r lawf ul ly
or unl awfully, one does not know.                There were some touts
about s elling tickets.            Again, this is s o m e t hi n g which
is not u n ex pe ct ed and the only way to guard a ga in st it is
to have some m eans of tryi ng to ensure that you do not get
n on - ti c k e t holders near the ground so that they cannot
mill around and c ause extra problems.
                                      39



                                                       MR.   COLLINS


       Many of the fans whose s t a te m en t s one has seen indicate
that on the pre vi ou s year steps had a p p a re n tl y been taken
to m arshal outside and to prevent at a d is t an c e n o n - ti c ke t =
ho ld er s g etting near the ground.      O b vi ou sl y this w ou ld not
have been wholly successful;      one cannot expect comp le te
s ucces s in that but steps maybe s hould have been taken to
ac hi ev e that and again that is one of the issues we will
have to go into.

          Then there is the questio n of the a l l oc a ti o n to
L i v e rp oo l of the L epping s Lane end rather than the other
end.          That is a matter one knows which has been raised
in p a rt ic ul ar by the L iv er po ol fans.        I have i nd ic at ed
the a r r a n g e m e n t s al re ad y and the effect that had.
U n d o u b t e d l y it did mean that a large number of L iverpool
fans who wanted to go could not go but even if they had
been a l l oc at ed the other end, the same would probably
have a pplied because, of course, for a match like this,
h aving regard to the sort of foll ow in g L i ve rp oo l has,
half of H i l l s b o r o u g h S tadiu m would not have been enough.

       The other thing that one says to o ne s el f is to wonder
whether, if the a l l o c a t i o n had been the other way round,
we would not be all si tt in g here but not i n ve s t i g a t i n g why
95 L i v e rp oo l s u p p o r t e r s had died but why 95 N o t t in g ha m
Forest s u p po rt er s had died, because there is little reason
to b elieve that the s i t u a t i o n at L e pp in gs Lane end would
have been any d i f f e r e n t had it been N o t t in g ha m Forest rather
than Liv er po ol fans.               This was not s om e th i ng which was
c aused b ecause it was L iv e rp o ol as o p po se d to other fans
who were a t t e m p t i n g to get into that match.

          That, of course, is spec ul at io n;              one s imply does
not know, but c learly there were : r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s made
on b e h a l f of Live rp oo l that they s hould be given the
other end.              Those were con si d er e d and the d ec i si o n was
made to the con tr ar y and it may be we will have to go
into that, albeit maybe that it was not in i ts el f a
s i g n i f i c a n t c o n t r i b u t o r y factor in what h ap pe ne d on this
occasion.             As I say, it meant it was L i ve rp oo l rather
than N ot ti n g h a m Forest.

          Then there is the q ues ti on of the a b se nc e of q u eu ei ng
and the pushing, the impa ti e nc e end the mob, the mass,
outside.             Well, as 1 have a l re ad y said, it is idle to
expect a football crowd - any football crowd - indeed,
one is tempted to say it is pretty idle to expect any
crowd going to any s p o r ti ng o cc a si o n anywhere, but I will
i m s e d i a t e l y be c o r r e c t e d by some on e who will say, "What
about W i m bl ed on and o rderly queues outs id e there?"               But
the fact is it must be - in r elat io n to c er t ai n ly football
crowds, and I am not p ic ki ng on any p a r t ic u la r football
crowd - idle to expect them to queue in an o r de rl y fashion,
                                                     MR.   COLLINS


p a r t i c u l a r l y - and this is the most impo rt an t thing - when
you have a dea dl in e and you have got a k i c k - of f at 3 o'clock.
People want to get in by 3 o'clock, and that is the key to
it.

          Wimbledon, after all, you go and watch your tennis;
you do not have to get there n e c es s ar i ly at any p ar ti c ul a r
moment or expect to;            it goes on all afternoon.         Some
events are like that, they go on all a f t e rn o on and you
do not n e c e s s a r i l y mind when you arrive but there are
some, like football matches, rugger m at ches or whatever, and
I do not include cricket matches because sometimes, again,
with those it does not really matter when you arrive.
C e r t a i n l y with football matc he s you have to be there when it
starts;          there is no point in a r ri vi ng late e f fe c ti v el y
and that, of course, means that people get worried, get
impatient, get concerned, if they see they                not going to
get in, or they think they are not going to get in by
3 o'clock.

          That is s o m et hi ng which ought to have been a n t ic i pa t ed
and c ontr ol to avoid this is essential, and the Police are
fully aware of this.                Let me read a passage from the
A s s o c i a t i o n of C h ie f Police O ff ic er s Guide, P a ra gr ap h 1.43.
It says this:            "Queues forming at t ur ns t il e s should be closely
m o n i t o r e d by police and stewards.            It is r e co m me n de d that
m ou nt ed officers, where available, should be used for this
purpose.            There is often f r us tr at io n at t u r ns t il e s if queues
remain after the game has started.                    O rd erly c on trol will
m in im iz e the risks."

         The South Y orkshir e Police s t an di ng i n st r uc t io n s
refer in P a r ag ra ph 7.6 to police horses being i nv al u ab l e
in their use for r eg ul a t i n g queues.          The o p e ra t io n al
order from South York sh ir e Police for this p ar ti c ul a r
match r equired that the police on the L e p p i n g sL a ne
t ur n s t i l e s and those police o ff ic er s posted to those
t ur n s t i l e s should, amorfg other things, “m ai n ta i n order
and ensure o rderly queues are formed."                The police
o f f i ce rs p osted to the L e pp in gs Lkne t u r n st i le s - this
is o utside the t ur n s t i l e s - c on s is t ed of some 44 officers,
that is 40 Police C on s t a b l e s and 4 S e rg ea nt s under 2
I nsp ec to rs and a Superin te n de n t, and there were also
present          6 Mounted Police Officers.

      Of course, it is all very well to say, "orderly
q ueues must be formed."              What you have got to do is to
ensure by tr ai ni ng and by i n st r uc t io n that that does
happen, and the fact is an orde rl y queue was not formed.
Why that happened, of course, is som et h in g that will be
very i m p or ta nt for c o n s i d e r a t i o n in this Inquiry.
                                    41



                                                     MR.   COLLINS


         There seems, unfortu n at e ly , to have been litt le
attempt to e nsure orderly q ue u ei n g from the outset.                      It
is, perhaps, i n s t r u c t i v e in this rega rd to q uote from a
report of a D e p a r t m e n t a l C o m m it t ee on Crow ds p u b l is h ed
as long ago as 1924 followin g an inqu ir y after the first
Cup Final at W embley in 1923 when some 200,000 people
turned up to try to watch the Cup Final.                     It was not an
a l l -t ic ke t match and 200,000, of course, was far too many.




                                               (No-one was i n ju re d. .. )
                        42




     No one was injured and control was kept but there was,
of course, there were a great number of people milling around
and don't forget at Wembley there is a pretty wide area
outside unlike the situation at Leppings Lane where there
is only a small area outside the relevant turnstiles.

     Be that as it may in the report, which is Command 2088,
I think, paragraph 17 they say this:

     "We desire to endorse the suggestion made to us
     that the control of crowds should begin at a point
     some considerable distance from the entrance to
     the ground."

     Now it may be that that advice, which is very good
advice, was not taken on board sufficiently in the circum­
stances of the 15th of April.

      Of course no two grounds are the same and there were
considerable problems at the Leppings Lane end, considerable
access problems due to the narrowness of people being
funnelled into this relatively small area in front of the
tur ns til es .

     Nevertheless it may well be that consideration should
have been given to trying to control arrivals and to
avoiding the build up of the mass that did build up.  As
I have said spectators, some of them talk about the difference
between this year and last year.

     Then deferring kick-off.  That is a matter that again
will obviously have to be considered.

     By 2.30 it was clear, or should have been clear, that
there was a mass of people outside.  The Officers in control
apparently believed that they, and their experience told
them, that nonetheless everyone should be in by 3 o'clock.
That may be a decision which was a perfectly reasonable
one at 2.30.

     By 2.45 it is difficult to see that it could remain
a reasonable consideration because by 2.45 if anything
the crowds outside had got worse not better in that
ensuing quarter -of -a n- hou r.

     Arrangements may be  should be made at all grounds
that there is a way of making a clear announcement following
a timely decision to defer the kick-off, a clear announcement
to fans waiting outside that the kick-off is being postponed
and that therefore there is no need to worry, they will all
get in in time.

     There were attempts made from outside it seems, although
the evidence is a little confused, to defer kick-off and
there is no doubt going to be some evidence of Police activity
in that regard.  Suffice it to say that no decision to post­
pone the kick-off was made.

     It seems from w hat one has seen so far, that it was
not until about 2.53/2.54 that a further consideration was
given by those in charge inside to the possibility of pos
poning.  By then the teams were beginning to come out on
the field and the decision was made, rightly or wrongly,
that it was too late because the teams were already out.

     Sadly too it appears to have been agreed on the part
of the Police in charge that postponement should be
sidered only if there was an "identifiable problem , that
to say an accident on the motorway, a serious incident of
some sort, fog on the Pennines which caused people to be
delayed and that sort of thing, but not if fans chose to
arrive at the last moment.

     That, if that was the decision, may have been somewhat
short sighted because it does not matter why the situation
builds up, it is the fact that the situation does build
up, that the crowd does build up like that that matters
and that should determine the decision rather than whose
fault it was that the situation had developed.

     It may be that there should be greater flexibility
in the light of knowledge of the behaviour of football
crowds, greater flexibility in the timing of kick-offs
and that there should not be or considerations of -
I am not saying they did play any part - but no considerations
other than safety should play any part in the decisions*of
postponement and there should be greater flexibility and
perhaps a greater readiness even for a few minutes.  One
can understand the difficulties, one can understand the
pressure of the players, but that is nothing compared with
the sort of thing that arose at Hillsborough on the 15th
of April.

      Then we have the decision to open    the gates.  0nce
 that situation had developed there was    little chance.   There
 was danger of injury or worse, but^ and   this is the big
 but, there appears to have been little    if any liaison
 outside to inside and vice versa.

      It should have been appreciated that 3 and 4 were
 already full.  It should have been appreciated that when
 the gate was open there would be an inevitable concentration
 of people into the tunnel putting yet more into 3 and 4.

      No steps were taken to seal off that tunnel.  There
 were in fact iron gates which could be shut at the mouth
 of the tunnel but there are may be good reasons why that
 should not happen because of course the ability of people
 to get out.  At least one of those gates may be could
 have been shut just at that time and certainly stewards and/
 or the Police and/or both, should have been prepared and
vi   -*   »


          fe                              44




               should have been available to block off that tunnel and
               to direct people to go around the sides on to either ends
               of the terracing.

                       Some spectators say there were such arrangements last
               year.     If there were there certainly were none this year.

                    Then we may have to look into the tunnel itself.      It
               is undoubtedly of a gradient which is steeper than that
               recommended in the Green G u i d e . The maximum gradient in
               the Green Guide recommended is 1:10.      This has 1:6 at the
               end.  Of course the result of that you start going; it
               gets steeper and steeper and there is a momentum buil€ up
               and it is much more difficult to turn round, particularly
               as it is worn concrete and therefore slightly slippery
               and if this was a dry day of course, if it was a w et day it
               could be even more difficult, but as I have indicated it
*              seems likely that no one actually died in the tunnel.

                    Then we have to look into the pens.  We have to consider
               the adequacy of the gates.  Perhaps I should say the in­
               adequacy of the gates because undoubtedly once the problems
               had arisen, once the crush had built up those gates at the
               front were wholly inadequate to enable people to get out
               in anything like sufficient numbers to relieve the pressures.

                    Whether if we are to have perimeter fences at all, and
               that is a matter obviously which will have to be taken into
               consideration by the Inquiry, it should be in the form of
               perimeter fencing which can be opened from outside, the
               whole of it can be opened from outside should emergencies
               make that necessary.

                    Then we have to consider Police reaction, not only
               the Police, the reaction of the others in authority, because
               I have referred to planning and allowing for example the
               pens to become over full.

                    That is a matter for the club as well as for the
               Police, perhaps more for the club than the Police because
               it is the duty of the stewards to monitor the build up in
               the pens and some sort of arrangement should have been made
               to ensure that there was proper communication and proper
               means to stop too many people getting into those pens.
               Their capacity was known.  There appears to have been no
               steps taken to ensure that they did not become over full
               and that is the start of the problem.  They were allowed
               to get over full and they they were filled yet more.
               As I say the Police reaction and indeed other reaction.

                    No suggestion of course that the Police Officers
               acted deliberately or were ignoring what was going on.
               They simply did not appear to appreciate in time what
               was going on.

                       Now there may be very good reasons for that and
                        45




we will hear from the Police Officers concerned, but it may
be at least in part that by their training and by their
orders they were conditioned to thinking in terms of stopping
people getting on to the pitch and to think in terms of
disorder rather than in terms of safety.

     Football fans, it may be particularly Liverpool football
fans, have a reputation which has come before them.  It may
be a wholly unfair and undeserved reputation but it has a
reputation and it may be that it is their reputation rather
than what they did on that day which has led at least in
part to the problem that arose, because as I say it would
seem that the Police may have been thinking more in terms
of hooliganism and invasion than otherwise.

     It is perhaps significant that there were a number
of Officers, I think about 20 but it may be 40, who were
detailed to the perimeter track and their instructions, and
I quote from the Operational Order included the following:

     "Particular attention should be paid to prevent
     any person climbing the fence to gain access to
     the ground.

     NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FROM
     THE TERRACES WITHOUT CONSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICER
     EXCEPT TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ATTENTION."

As I say, if that was the only briefing the Officers were
given and that certainly is in the Operational Order, then
they m ay have been conditioned to thinking in terms of
anyone coming over must be stopped rather than to have in
the forefront of their minds safety.   We can see why this
is happening.

     This is not to criticise the actions of the individual
Officers at the time because they could only act in the
light of what instructions they were given and what they
knew to be the position at the time, but this is something
that must be considered for the future and the reaction of
those on that sort of duty for the future.

     Of course it is also fair, it may be thought, to ask
the question:  "Why should there be a pitch invasion at
that stage? What possible purpose could there have been
in a pitch invasion at the very beginning of a game when
Liverpool seemed to be doing well?"

      Pitch invasions on the whole come when there are con­
troversial decisions or whe n your side is doing badly it
 has been known for fans to try and stop games perhaps in
 the hope if they do a replay will provide something better
or something like that, but a pitch invasion at the very
beginning of a match is unusual and perhaps in itself should
 have put on enquiry those whose immediate reaction was
 pitch invasion, but once they did realise individual Officers
undoubtedly did do all that they could and many supporters
praised individual Police Officers and indeed many owe their
lives to the actions of individual Police Officers, as do
other fans owe their lives to the actions of fellow fans.

      I have lothink two more aspects to deal with before I
come to the end of this opening.    It should take perhaps
another quarter—o f —an—hour or 20 minutes, but would that be
convenient afterwards?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose it would.   Yes, we will
break off now until 2 o'clock.

                    (Luncheon adjournment)
