                      MIDLAND REGIONAL CRIME SQUAD
Regional          Co-ordinator                                      Headquarters
DET CH SUPT M J FOSTER                                              341 Bournvilie Lane
                                                                    Birmingham B30 1QX

Your reference:                                                     Telephone: 0121 626 4052

O ur Reference:    MJF/MH(regcoI I/hills.aud)                       Fax: 0121 626 4160



                                                                    17 December 1997



Mr C Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
fcoom 1106
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London. SW1H 9AT




I have now considered the documentation forwarded to me on 3 December 1997 (Audit trail and
examination by Superintendent Hepworth) and I have researched the statements forwarded on
12 December 1997.

In order to respond to you I have spoken by telephone to Mr J M Jones (retired Chief Constable
of Cheshire) and sought his view and assistance on the process agreed for the early part of the
Hillsborough Investigation.

It might be easier if I try to put this response into numbered format as follows:

1.      There was agreement shared by South Yorkshire Police (SYP), West Midlands Police and
        by Treasury Solicitors acting for Lord Justice Taylor (Mr Collins QC) that the recollections
        forwarded to the Judicial Inquiry by South Yorkshire Police via West Midlands Police
        would be the 'final versions'. It was accepted that Counsel representing SYP would advise
        the Force on the removal of expression of opinions to keep statements factual.

2.      It needs to be understood that at this time West Midlands Police were serving Lord Justice
        Taylor and ALL such agreements would only have been entered into after consultation with
        Treasury Solicitors and particularly Mr Whalley who served Lord Justice Taylor.

 3.     West Midlands Police accepted that those same statements would be used for the basis of
        any other investigations (eg Coroner / DPP or Complaints).

                                                                                               Cont./..
/




          One primary reason for adopting this process was the constraint on time to ohtainthe
          necessary evidence for the set date to start the Judicial Inquiry proceedings. It would have
          been too cumbersome to use West Midlands Police Officers to take statements from SYP
          officers in those early stages.

           Later in the investigation (Coroners and DPP) further statements were taken in the
5.
           traditional way and you will find them usually with a letterprefix, eg; first recollection
           S1234, further statement re body identification S1234A, third one S1234

           West Midlands Police were no, party to the V ettin^offte SYP        but would have
6.
           expected all factual evidence to be retained m the final verston. We d.d not to my
           knowledge dip check or sample to ensure this was the case.

           The Policy File entered onto HOLMES is, I understand from SYP, no longer viewable and
           as such I am unable to check any of my policy decisions in this area.

8.         It is possible West Midlands Incident R oo m on                              ^     st w s w t

           S S S S S S . S S iV S i* .

 I have searched the HOLMES system and had sent to me t o e officers; s a


 recollections and the 'extra' material. My observations are as follows.

     1.     Powell, Raymond Lloyd

            Page 3, Line 23 "The first thing" to Page 4, Line 1 and Cordon.

             I would have expected this to be left in especially where it refers to previous games and the
            forming of the cordon.
             Comment: This was investigated and I recall the issue of poM ng in previous games being
             pursued, particularly in the questioning of Senior SYP officers.

     2.      Ramsden, Alan Andrew

     (a)     Page 6, Line 26 to end of page (Coventry City).

             Similar to above. I would have expected this to be left in.

              Comment: As for 1. above.


                                                                                                    Cont./.
Page 10, last paragraph and to end of Page 11.

This is perhaps opinion on the part of the officer.

Comment: The investigation teams asked these same questions.

NOTE: In the statement of PC Ramsden on Page 6, the final sentence was removed from
the original recollection, ie "I also felt" until "Coventry City". It also appears to me that the
removal of this totally changes the next sentence which clearly refers to 1987 in the original
recollection, but the edited version would refer the reader to 1989!

Huckstep, Brian Robert

Comment: We had both statements.

Woodcock, John Howard

Page 5, Line 9 to end of page.

I can understand this being seen as opinion and hearsay, but of course it may have been
valuable to the Investigation team in respect of Inspector White and his observation if that
were not already known. I question the objectivity here of the person vetting. In fairness,
a legal representative would not look at this as I would.

Comment: The issues raised were all considered during the investigation.

Groome, Maxwell Deryck Charles

Page 2, Line 6, starting "This was" to Line 10 ending in "waste"; and Page 2, Line 24 to
Line 26, starting "An Officer" and ending "ground".

This is opinion.

 Comment: Not issues of importance to the investigating team.

 Page 4, Lines 8 and 9 "The control room" ending "paralysis".

 I see no reason to take this out; it may have been a factor.

 Comment: All activity of the Control Room was investigated.

 Page 5, First full paragraph.

 Such identification issues could have been important in establishing who was where. It
 should have remained in.
          Comment: The investigation teams examined the movement and actions of all senior
          officers and this would not have caused a problem by being taken out.

(d)       Page 5, Line 16 (1) to Page 6, Line 1, ending "pressure".

          If correct, such specific information on policing arrangements could have been crucial in
          examining 1989 against other matches.

          Comment: This was in any event done by the investigation team and the editing out is not
          a cause for concern.

(e)       Page 6 - all of Paragraph numbered (5).

          This could be opinion, but if de-briefs recorded these facts such information was useful.

^         Comment: Such aspects were in any event looked at and examined by the investigation
          team.

(f)       Page 6, Paragraph 6, last line taken out.

          I would have said this was important as it deals with supervision, control and safety in one
          paragraph but removes the fact it did not happen in 1989.

          Comment: All aspects in relation to the command duties and activities of Chief
          Superintendent Duckenfield were examined thoroughly.

    (g)   Pages 6 and 7, Paragraphs (7), (8), (9) and (10).

          This is opinion and I can understand it being removed if the purpose is to produce a factual
          account only.

           Comment: I can say all these issues raised were considered and looked at by the
           Investigating team.

    6.     White, H arry

    (a)    Page 1 - 10 am "Short and sharp" removed.

           I can see no reason to remove this.

           Comment: We looked and examined all aspects of all of the briefings for the match so this
           removal made no difference.

    (b)    Page marked Additional Points Arising, and to end of Page 2, same paper.


                                                                                                Cont./...
                                                5

      Some of this is opinion and some thought provoking, but some may have been valuable,
      eg second paragraph "During etc" and referring to the tunnel and control of crowd.

      Comment: The issues raised here were all examined by the Investigation Team.

Conclusion

Although the West Midlands Investigation Team did not have access to the majority of original
recollection, I am confident not only from examining these sample statements, but from the
thoroughness of the investigation, that this has not had any bearing on the evidence gathered and
presented to the Coroner, the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority.

On reflection, it seems to me the original 'vetting' was focused on producing factual statements
although from the examples sent, the omissions generally centre on police officers and their
        or lack of action. I imagine this was based upon Counsel for SYP representing the best
interests of the Force and individuals.

As far as the Investigating Team were concerned, the objective of the Investigation was to seek
the truth about how the disaster happened. Few officers have experienced such investigations
but ALL relevant information can be of value, whether it is factual or opinion and much depends
on the direction given by the Senior Officers to determine the content of statements. It is exactly
for this reason that the questionnaire was designed to offer, at Questions 53 and 54, the chance
to give views, observations and opinions.

I hope this has answered the main points for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. If I can be of further
assistance, I can be contacted until 23 December on                | Howe;ver, from that date
our office closes administratively until 5 January 1998. My home number is|                 or
you can page me any time on                   , quoting

Yours sincerely




M J Foster
D/Chief Superintendent
Regional Co-ordinator
