HILLSBOROUGH LETTER


The Home Secretary and I are very conscious of the strength of feeling surrounding
the Hillsborough Disaster, and I understand that his decision not to hold a fresh
inquiry will be a disappointment to the families of those who died and for many who
have supported the families’ campaign.


As the Home Secretary explained in the House of Commons, one of his first concerns
on taking office last year was to ensure that there should be a thorough and
independent investigation of any material which cast doubt on earlier findings about
the disaster. He, therefore, announced on 30 June 1997 that he had asked Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny of the evidence and to report his conclusions.


The Home Secretary and I are satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a
thorough scrutiny of the evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report
is comprehensive and sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons
for his conclusions. He has considered all the material allegations about missing or
concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness
statements and concerns about the use of the 3.15pm cut-off time at the Inquest.


It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been heard publicly before. What the Scrutiny had to consider
was not only whether the evidence put forward was new, but also whether it was of
such significance that it would justify a new inquiry, or further consideration by the
Attorney General (with regard to the inquest) or the criminal or disciplinary
authorities.


The Home Secretary has considered the Judge’s report carefully and he accepts the
conclusion which the Judge has reached that the evidence submitted to him does not
add anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor
Inquiry and the Inquests.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90045# 1
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned what he described as Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that fans had opened Gate C.


The Home Secretary shares the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
in Chapter 7 of his Report when he says:


“I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing their job


There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which we
intend to address. In January, the Home Affairs Select Committee made some
important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures.
The Home Secretary has recently announced his response to the HAC
recommendations including his intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil
standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy
provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. He has
also endorsed the Committee’s recommendation that forces should show greater
commitment to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where
appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion
of disciplinary proceedings.




The Home Secretary also supports Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the
findings of a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of
the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the
Working Party was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after an
inquiry has been completed. If this had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough
Disaster, it would have spared the families of those who died unnecessary distress
when the Taylor Inquiry had covered substantially the same ground as the Inquest.




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90045# 1
For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept the Home Secretary’s
decision.   The original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in
identifying the main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the families will accept that
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was equally rigorous. The Home Secretary is, as
you know, ready to talk to the families further to explain his approach. He met a
delegation whilst in Southport on 7 March and he is arranging another meeting in
Merseyside.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90045# 1
