            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT        •
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007


Mrs T Sefton                                                     Your reference:

                                                                 Our reference:

                                                                 Date:               November 1997




Thank you for your letter of 5 November with its enclosed photographs.

You said when we spoke that you were concerned about why these photographs - which are
plainly, as you say, stills from the police video of the temporary mortuary - show more than one
body. I agree that the pictures seem to contradict what the police have told us about their
ensuring as far as possible that the pictures they release do not do that.

 The explanation we have had from the police is that this does not apply to stills from the
 temporary mortuary video which form part of a body file on a Hillsborough victim and which
 they release under the terms of the Coroners Rules to a relative of that person or to somebody
 else with what the Rules call a ‘proper interest’. They say that in these circumstances they
 release the still uncut, and it may show more than one body.

 As far as the timing of the pictures is concerned, the mortuary video - which as I told Mr Fallon
 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and I have had to see as part of the scrutiny - does not show times at
 all, either actual clock time or ‘reel time’. When the police give a time to a particular still, they
 must as I understand it rely on what is shown on the play-back machine they are using. That
 might not give altogether consistent results, but it may be that it is the best that could be done.

 You mention the black plastic covering the floor of the gymnasium in these pictures. When
 we visited Hillsborough on a match day we went into the gymnasium, which the police were
 using as a mustering point. The club had covered large parts of the floor in thick black
 plastic sheeting so that it was not damaged by officers’ boots. I understand they do that
 before every match.

 The police operational plan for the 1989 semi-final had them using the gymnasium as a

 C:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SEFTON. 1 86
 parade and meal point, and it may be (though I do not know for sure) that the club had done
 the same then. Certainly we have seen no indication in all the material we have seen about
   e disaster that helping people or getting them into the gymnasium was held up to see that
 the floor was covered.

 I don t suppose that any of this is of much help to you, but I pass it on for what it is worth.   I
 am returning the photographs you sent me.


         Ou*«>



 C F BONE
 Secretary to the Scrutiny




C:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SEFTON. 186
