                                                            LScltvo/

NOTE OF MEETING WITH THE POLICE FEDERATION OF ENGLAND AND WALES
HELD AT 2.30PM ON TUESDAY 28 NOVEMBER IN QUEEN ANNE'S GATE


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor        Mr R Coyles
           Mr Johnson                 Mr J Webber
           Mr Whalley                 Mr A Judge
           Mrs Wither



1.   The Federation begem by saying that their members in South
Yorkshire felt that Lord Justice Taylor had not been given the
full evidence available and had therefore not reached correct
conclusions. Lord Justice Taylor pointed out that his Interim
Report did not criticise the officers whom the Federation
represented and had indeed praised them. Whilst Mr Brown had
made an application for separate representation which had been
turned down, Mr Whalley had explained in his letter of 3
November that the issue had not been closed and that the
application could have been renewed at any time, but this had not
been done.


2.   The Federation, whilst appreciating the praise of their
officers, expressed concern that due notice had not been taken of
the drink problem at the match. They hoped therefore that the
Final Report would fully recognise the problem. Lord Justice
Taylor assured them that he would be addressing the general
problem of alcohol but he would not be going over its part at
Hillsborough again.


3.   The Federation said that their officers felt that not all
the evidence in their statements had been given to the Inquiry
                                                             \
and that the Inquiry had not been directed towards the behaviour
of the Liverpool supporters.     They said there was evidence of
widespread drinking and that the crowds might have arrived
earlier had it not been for the ban on alcohol. The Federation
feel that facilities at the clubs should be improved and the
alcohol ban relaxed making it similar to a private club.


4.   Lord Justice Taylor referred them to paragraph 196 of his
Report which illustrated the variety of evidence he had received
on drink and that both drink and the issues of late arrivals
would be dealt with in the Final Report. It was recognised
however that while traffic delays are understandable, regular
delays to kick-off could lead to a chaotic situation, but safety
should always be the paramount consideration.


5.   The Federation were also concerned that, since members of
the police force could now face criminal and disciplinary
charges, detailed consideration should be given at future
inquiries to separate representation for different ranks.   Lord
Justice Taylor pointed out that they had made full use of the
Salmon letters principle even though it was not a tribunal of
inquiry.


Football Membership Scheme


6.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for the Federation's views on this
subject. They agreed that the Football Membership Association
should be chaired by someone independent of football since
football could not be relied upon to "police" itself.


7.   However, they felt   there could be problems with the
technology of the card system creating a situation      similar to
that at Leppings Lane and that the police resources used would be
colossal.   Lord Justice Taylor pointed out that the Government's
view was that the scheme would reduce the number of hooligans in
the ground and that the number refused entry at the gate might
not be as many as the Federation feared.   However, he agreed that
initially, heavy resources would be needed.


8.   The Federation were also concerned that in dealing with the
variety of incidents at the turnstiles, many officers would be
removed from their normal policing duties. Lord Justice Taylor
asked if the Federation   felt they were winning the  battle against
hooliganism.   They said   they felt they were inside   the groundbut
not outside and that hooligans would still come to the grounds
even if they knew they could not enter. They believed that the
hooligan would take part in the membership scheme and as each
generation of hooligans was excluded by the scheme, it would be
replaced by another. The Federation also believed clubs should
have the option of banning away supporters as has happened at
Luton.


Alcohol


9.   The Federation believed ferns were not coming by the special
trains, in order to evade the law. They feel that if proper
facilities were provided at the clubs with adequate supervision,
fans might be encouraged to come earlier. Lord Justice Taylor
referred to the success of the total ban in Scotland but the
Federation pointed out that there were very few clubs with big
crowds in Scotland.


Cost of Policing


10. This was a major problem for forces since they only
recovered a fraction of the cost from the clubs. The full cost
of the resources should be met by clubs or else they should use
other means. Other police services were denied to the rest of
the public because of the number of officers taken up by
football. The Federation also believed that stewards were not
paid enough to ensure quality and that clubs should train them to
perform duties in different areas at particular times.

Touts


11.     The Federation feel it should be made an offence to try to
charge excessive prices for tickets.     Lord Justice Taylor asked
if this was practical.     It was recognised that it might be
preferable to make it an offence for someone other than the clubs
and agencies to sell tickets or to sell on the day of the match.


12.     As a final point, the Federation believe players and
officials should not be excluded from the Football Membership
scheme in that if they misbehaved they should also be banned from
attending since they could incite ferns.
