                                  THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                   Queen Anne's Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS

DX 123242 St James's Park            Direct Fax: 0 1 7 1 -2 1 0 3257   Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)




C F Bone                                                      Please quote:
Secretary to the Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106                                                     Your reference:
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW 1H 9A T                                             Date:                 5 N ovem ber 1997




Dear



LORD TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 23 October which arrived whilst I w as on leave but w hich w e had
the opportunity to discuss before I went away.

Compilation Video

As I explained, one of the m embers of the Treasury Solicitor's team, H ussein Kaya, attended
on the W est Midlands Police in the early stages of the preparation for the Inquiry to look at
various videos and to assist in preparing the compilation video shown at the Inquiry.

My recollection is that he spent one or two days with the Police looking at videos but clearly
he is the only one who can directly help as to the process, bearing in mind that we are talking
about an exercise which took place several years ago.

Mr Kaya is presently with the DTI Solicitor and Director General Legal Services, 10 Victoria
Street, London SW 1. Telephone: 0171 215 3444. I have mentioned the possibility that you
might be in touch with him and if you decide to do this it will therefore com e as no surprise.

Evidence

As I may have said to you in our telephone conversation, the gathering of evidence for Inquiries
varies somewhat from case to case. In this particular matter the W est M idlands Police had
been called in as an outside Police Force to investigate the actions of the Y orkshire Police.
There was also some suggestion of possible prosecutions. The result of this was that the W est
Midlands Police set up a HOLM ES Inquiry and put a considerable am ount of m anpow er into

Peter W hitehurst - Head o f E m p loym en t Litigation Team
Edward S o lo m o n s - Head o f C om m ercial Litigation Group
 interviewing hundreds of witnesses. There was great cooperation between the Inquiry and the
 West Midlands Police and it was agreed at an early stage that they would supply the legal team
 with all the statements as they were produced. This meant that even before the Inquiry began
 (and throughout) we received on a daily basis literally box loads of statements. These
 statements were not taken in chronological or other order and consequently were a mixture of
 football fans, police, em ergency service personnel etc etc.

 As part of the process of dealing with the evidence it was decided at meetings betw een Lord
 Taylor and the legal team that effectively a chronological story would be told. Consequently,
 my recollection is that the Liverpool fans gave evidence first followed by the Police then by
 Sheffield W ednesday Football Club and some others.

With this framework in mind, m yself and other colleagues on the team together w ith the three
Inquiry Counsel read through as many statements as w e could by w ay of a 'sifting' exercise to
p roduce core evidence in each of the areas w e were interested in. Those w ho actually gave
evidence were selected by Leading and Junior Counsel and the Treasury Solicitor Team made
the arrangements for them to attend. In addition to this schem e for preparing evidence, w e
w ere obviously also aware of the Police Officers w ho w ere in charge of various parts of the
football ground. We were therefore able to identify at an early stage w hich of those w e w ished
to call evidence and I think it likely that we would have asked the solicitors for the Yorkshire
Police to supply us with statements from those individuals and they w ere then called by the
Inquiry and questioned on the basis of those statements. There was som ething of a similar
process w ith regard to evidence for Sheffield W ednesday FC and others in that we again
identified who should give evidence and asked for those parties to supply us with statements.

There w ere a group of people who w ere not represented in any w ay eg those w ho lived in
proximity to Hillsborough and after advertising for any w itnesses of this sort who might have
evidence the Treasury Solicitor Team followed these leads up and w here appropriate took
statements from the individuals.

Finally, because the HOLMES statements continued to arrive throughout the Inquiry, there w as
a period of one or two weeks between the last evidence and the final submissions w hen the
Treasury Solicitor Team continued to read statements and some additonal ones w ere selected
and formally put before the Inquiry as evidence although without the individual appearing.

Roger Houldsworth

It is extremely difficult now, with a few notable exceptions, to recall w ho did give evidence let
alone why an individual did not do so. I do not recall Roger Houldsworth at all but that is not
to say that one of my colleagues was not involved in considering his statement. I shall make
enquiries with those still within the office who w ere involved with the Inquiry to see if any
mem ory is jogged.

Finally, I will be at Queen Anne's Gate more or less full time for 2 - 3 w eeks from 10
N ovem ber probably with Stephen Wells and if I can assist at all w hile I am there then I am
more than happy to do so. Perhaps even seeing the papers that you have will help me in
recollecting matters. From what I can see from the papers retained here, there has been both
a sifting and transfer to PRO exercise which has clearly led to som e gaps in the docum ents that
Yours sincerely




P F O W hitehurst
Assistant Treasury Solicitor




c\pwnov.5f
