June 12, 1989   Yo«,
       sen'- ti •nel
       It means one who watches
       or guards.

       Never before has mankind so
       needed to “watch” for spiritual
       reality.
       The Christian Science Sentinel
       confirms the fact that spirituality
       is a powerful influence for good
       in even the most devastating
       situations. The Sentinel presents
       victories over disease, hatred,
       immorality, loneliness, poverty,
       stress. Victories that prove the
       power of spiritual understanding.
       Your spiritual understanding is
       worth guarding and defending.
       That’s what the Sentinel is
       all about.


C h r ist ia n S cience S e n t in e l ®
            June 12,1989      Vol. 91, No. 24    $1.25


        .HRISTIAN
SCIENCE                                          ,'
           ENTINEL                                       f
                                                 MARCAS REGISTRADAS




     ARTICLES AND FEATURES IN THIS ISSUE____________

     What is your motive for praying?
     B y M arjorie C. Stephens
     Anyone struggling with illness naturally yearns to be healed. Yet
     scientific Christian healing is bom of a larger yearning—to know
     more o f God, the divine Principle, Love.

     Second Thought
     Bringing to remembrance
     B y M ary Louise M oseley
     Memory doesn’t have to be a campground packed with past fail­
     ures and hurts. This writer found that a more Christly love of
     others clears the way for forgiveness and peace.

15   Baptism, communion, and Christian Science
     B y M argrit Engelhardt
     What is it that brings the purity, sustenance, and vision so
     important in healing?

19   Know the truth
     B y Joel M agnes
     God’s power to heal is not “too good to be true.” Nor is a ca­
     pacity to demonstrate that power.

24   Share the recipe
     B y Robert J. Rowan
     If we think we don’t have much to offer those in need, we should
     consider what the Christ Science has done for us.
                                                          (continued)
     POETRY____________
13   Forgiveness
     By Patricia P. Wilson
14   On caring for disciples
     By Jeannie J. Ferber

     EDITORIALS
28   Safety under God’s law
     Crowds don’t have to get out o f control and become destructive.
     Each o f us can, through prayer, act as a responsible individual and
     help to maintain order and calm.
32   Family matters
     If the body were injured, ill, or in pain, we would seek healing.
     When families are hurting, we need to do the same.

35   TESTIMONIES
     Accounts o f contemporary Christian healing. Individuals from
     all walks o f life give examples o f ways the power o f Spirit has
     brought healing, freedom, and greater commitment to God.

43   LECTURES AND NOTICES
     A current list of public lectures on Christian Science, including
     places, dates, and times.


     Photograph on page 14: Kenneth H. McKelvie.




     Founded in 1898 by M ary Baker Eddy, author of the Christian
     Science textbook, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures
     Christian Science Sentinei (ISSN 0009-563X). Published weekly by The Christian Science Publishing
     Society, One Norway Street, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 02115, an activity of The First Church
     of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A. Second-class postage paid at Boston, Massa­
     chusetts. The design of the Cross and Crown seal is a trademark of The Christian Science Board of
     Directors, registered in the United States and other countries. Used by permission. Subscription
     price, postpaid to all countries, one year, $40.00; six months, $20.00; single copy, $1.25. To subscribe
     see coupon near the back of this issue.

     Postmaster: Send address changes to Christian Science Sentinel,
     P.O. Box 11342, Des Moines, IA, U.S.A. 50340.
     © 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society. All rights reserved.                 [Printed in U.S.A.]
         What is your motive
           for praying?
          At some point we begin to see that
           spiritual healing has a far deeper
             purpose than simply allowing
              us to get on with our plans.

                    Marjorie C. Stephens


    OR several months some friends and I had been preparing to
F    enter a popular twelve-kilometer event held annually in our
area. But two days before the race I found myself in a predica­
ment. My foot, which had become swollen and painful a few
days earlier, was unhealed despite my earnest prayer. I decided
to call a Christian Science practitioner to help me through
prayer.
    She asked, “ What is your motive for praying? Is it to be
healed by Saturday, or is it to glorify God?” Her intuitive ques­
tions jolted my thought. I had been concentrating so earnestly
on having a change in the physical condition of my foot that my
motive had little to do with knowing more about God. Yet I had
learned from my study of Christian Science that understanding
God and realizing more of one’s true, spiritual relationship to
Him are the very basis of healing. As we understand God, Spirit,

                       3   JUNE 12, 1989
                   CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


better and come to see our actual identity as the child of God
rather than as an ailing mortal, we begin to comprehend that we
can never be separated from the divine source of all good: God.
And this, in turn, shows us how illness and suffering can be
overcome by prayerfully turning to God.
     Christ Jesus understood that God is Spirit and that man,
God’s very expression, is therefore necessarily spiritual. He
proved man’s identity as the spiritual child of God by healing
---------------------------- people of disease, sickness, sin, and
The more we base             death. Of course, his healing work was
our prayers on this          not motivated by self-glorification but
spiritual point of           by a desire to evidence and praise God’s
view, the less we will love and healing power—to glorify Him.
vacillate between the        Jesus said, “Let your light so shine be-
true and the false.          fore men, that they may see your good
---------------------------- works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven.” 1 It was to glorify God that Jesus let his light
shine. When he healed the woman who had been stooped over
for eighteen years, she “glorified God.” When he raised the wid­
ow’s son from the dead, the people of Nain “glorified God.” 2
     When faced with challenges in our lives, we too can pray
from the basis of glorifying God, as Jesus did. We can begin
to comprehend and to prove through Christian healing what
St. Paul meant when he said, “ Glorify God in your body, and
in your spirit, which are God’s.” 3
     A logical question at this point is “How do we do this?”
Well, for one thing, Jesus identified man spiritually instead of
materially. In Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures, the
Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science, Mary Baker Eddy,
writes: “Jesus beheld in Science the perfect man, who appeared
to him where sinning mortal man appears to mortals. In this
perfect man the Saviour saw God’s own likeness, and this correct
view of man healed the sick.” 4
     Perhaps we are entangled in viewing ourselves as physical be­
ings who are sick, injured, or diseased. Then, our thoughts are

                        4   VOL. 91, NO. 24
               WHAT IS YOUR MOTIVE FOR PRAYING?


taken up wondering why we hurt or are sick, what the difficulty
is called, and what it is doing or may not do next. Even when
our illness seems very severe, however, perhaps even hopeless,
we still have a choice that we can make. We can choose to put
our prayers and our lives on a spiritual rather than a material
basis.
     If we are looking to the material body as either a cause or
controlling condition of our well-being, aren’t we denying the
allness of God, omnipresent good? In effect we would be accept­
ing the reality and power of something in addition to or apart
from Him. For, as the Scriptures indicate, God is Spirit, and
man is God’s image, His reflection. A reflection is the exact rep­
resentation of the original. Like produces like. Therefore it is
impossible for God, Spirit, to create a material man. Whatever
the material evidence may suggest, we don’t have to accept it as
final, because matter is a mistaken belief about reality. Creation
is spiritual.
     So, instead of considering injury, disease, or sickness as sim­
 ply a condition to be changed, improved, or eliminated, we can
 perceive it as a misconception about our perfect, spiritual iden­
 tity—a misconception that needs to be corrected through spirit­
 ual progress. Healing in Christian Science does not actually seek
 to change man; it reveals what man already is—the spiritual and
 perfect offspring of God. In I John we read, “Beloved, now are
 we the sons of God.” 5 Now—not going to be.
     Through the study of the Bible and the writings of Mrs. Eddy,
 we gain a greater spiritual understanding that man is, at this mo­
 ment, the full expression of God. And the more we base our
 prayers on this spiritual point of view, not on an ever-changing,
 material point of view, the less we will vacillate between the per­
 fect and the imperfect, the true and the false. This prepares the
 way for healing.
     Mrs. Eddy writes: “ We cannot fathom the nature and quality
 of God’s creation by diving into the shallows of mortal belief.
 We must reverse our feeble flutterings—our efforts to find life

                         5   JUNE 12, 1989
                     CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


and truth in matter—and rise above the testimony of the mate­
rial senses, above the mortal to the immortal idea of God. These
clearer, higher views inspire the Godlike man to reach the abso­
lute centre and circumference of his being.” 6
     In my situation, I knew that the first steps I had to take were
those of understanding my spiritual identity more fully. I turned
to God in prayer and acknowledged His allness and my insepara­
ble unity with Him. I strove to realize that I was not truly a suf­
fering mortal but was God’s child, the object of His perfect care;
and that I was forever the perfect, spiritual reflection of the per­
fect creator, regardless of the physical evidence.
     I stopped constantly examining my foot. Instead, I prayed to
exemplify more fully such spiritual qualities as immortality, per­
fection, harmony, strength, unchangeableness, and completeness.
As I gained a clearer concept of what was true, of perfect spirit­
ual reality, I began to understand that God is the divine Principle
of all existence forever. I was not—and never could be—sepa­
rated from goodness, because I was inseparable from God. I was
His beloved expression.
     I woke early on the day of the race. As I lay in bed I felt
an adjustment in my foot. The pain ceased. I was healed. It
seemed so natural to thank and to praise God! As I pinned the
race entry number on my shirt, I considered something else that
I had learned too. Healing is the opportunity to glorify God by
bearing witness to His unchanging goodness, love, and power.
    ‘ Matt. 5:16. 2 See Luke 13:10-17; 7:11-16. 31 Cor. 6:20. 4 Science and
Health, pp. 476-477. 51 John 3:2. 6 Science and Health, p. 262.




                            6   VOL. 91, NO. 24
  Looking again at news and commentary



   From The Wall Street Journal, October 21, 1987
           . Universe of You, a new Marin County salon, offers
   help for high-strung people too busy to meditate. Now they
   can try to zap stress by hooking themselves up to a device
   called a Synchro-Energizer, which is supposed to ‘tune up’
   the wavelengths of the brain.
   “Balancing H em ispheres
       “The machine costs about $50,000 and can accommo­
   date up to 32 serenity seekers at a time. It uses electronic
   sound impulses and flashing light—to balance, so the pitch
   goes, the left and right hemispheres of the brain.. ..
       “ ‘Yogis are out, gurus are out. No one wants dogma
   anymore,’ says Randy Adamadama . . . . ‘This can get a
   person to a level of meditation in 15 minutes that would
   take a yoga instructor 10 years.’ ”
                        Reprinted with permission of THE WALL
                        STREET JOURNAL. Copyright© 1988 Dow
                        Jones & Company, Inc. All rights reserved.



    Editors’ comment: If there’s really a market for this sort of
thing, it’s easy to ridicule. But what is it that people are look­
ing for so strongly they’ll even consider going to extremes such
as this to gain it?
    Perhaps the synchro-energizer vogue serves to remind us of

                        7     JUNE 12, 1989
                    CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


people’s restless reaching—and the need to look a lot deeper—
for the spiritual satisfaction that truly fulfills what Mary Baker
Eddy referred to as the “immortal cravings” of man. In this
more basic context some familiar words—Christ Jesus’ invita­
tion—sound as though we’re reading them for the first time:
“Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.”




            I kno w the thoughts th a t I th in k tow ard you,
                   saith th e Lord, thoughts o f peace,
                                an d n ot o f evil,
                       to give yo u an expected end.
             Then shall y e call upon m e, a n d y e shall go
          a n d pra y unto m e, a n d I w ill hearken unto you.
                  A n d y e shall seek m e, a n d fin d me,
                       when y e shall search fo r m e
                             w ith all y o u r heart.
                        A n d I w ill be fo u n d o f you,
                                saith th e Lord.
                           Jeremiah 29:11-14




                          8   VOL. 91, NO. 24
    Bringing to remembrance
          Clinging to past injustices and hurts
            can lead us to think of them as
             a permanent part of our lives.

                    Mary Louise Moseley


       HEN experiences seem harsh, injustices go unchecked,
       appreciation is lacking, and friends are unfaithful, do we
sometimes throw up a tent around these images of hate to house
them and give them a home within our consciousness? We don’t
have to. Nor do we need to believe that bitterness or sorrow is
inevitable.
     Right where bitterness would make its camping ground in
our experience, the sweet words of Scripture can be accepted—
and proved—that we are not alone in our struggle to refuse evil,
because our God is there! Just as God was with the children of
Israel in their quest for freedom, He is with us, with you and
with me. When we understand this, we gain a consciousness de­
voted to God, one that is freed of whatever idol or tent of hate
we may be tempted to set up. We can apply to the “city” of our
consciousness Ezekiel’s words “The name of the city from that
day shall be, The Lord is there.” 1 And because God, Love, is
there always, man, the totally spiritual expression of Love,
is likewise there.
     Christ Jesus said, “A new commandment I give unto you,
That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love
one another.” 2 This is the healing love that requires us to see
only what is true of man as God made him. And the Comforter,
the spirit of Truth, which Jesus promised his disciples, will lead
us into this healing love if we will let it. Through the operation

                        9   JUNE 12,1989
                  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


of the Comforter, or divine Science, we learn that we cannot be
separated from God, who is All. Only that which expresses His
goodness, His love, is or ever has been present. These spiritual
facts, understood, can bring healing to our lives.
    I recall a time when I felt a definite demand to express more
of that love. I had tried to do for someone else what the individ­
ual indicated would be most helpful. It was contrary to my own
best judgment, but time after time this person indicated that this
was what would help most. Later this effort on my part was mis­
represented, and it worked against my best interests.
    Although my work carried me eventually into a very desir­
able sphere of activity, there remained in my thought some of
the resentment, a distrust of others, and a deep sense of having
been greatly wronged. This was no brief experience but left a
sense of sadness that lasted over a number of years. Many other
beautiful healings came during the time this larger lesson of Love
was being learned. But my thought frequently went back to the
circumstances even when I was removed far from them.
    It finally became very clear to me that I had to give up
these thoughts. This conclusion is supported by a statement
Mrs. Eddy makes in the Christian Science textbook, Science and
Health. She writes, “Until the fact concerning error—namely, its
nothingness—appears, the moral demand will not be met, and
the ability to make nothing of error will be wanting.” 3 I had
not met “the moral demand,” and “ the ability to make nothing
of error” was wanting! I must be the one to see its nothingness
in order to rid myself of its hold on my thinking. No one else
could ever do that for me, regardless of what seemed in the past
to contribute to its cause!
     Then I recalled a similar experience of a very fine co-worker.
All of us who knew him knew that something someone had said
to try to discredit him could not be true. I heard another co­
worker ask him what he thought about the aspersion the other
one had cast on him. There was hardly a moment’s hesitation as
he replied, “Well, I can’t get to heaven without him!"

                       10   VOL. 91.N O . 24
                   BRINGING TO REMEMBRANCE


     Neither can you or I, without the true sense of everyone
within our consciousness. I have always treasured that and other
precious examples that have made my experience rich with love.
I also recalled the story of Joseph in the Bible.4 When his broth­
ers worked against him and caused him to be sold into slavery,
their act seemed to affect his whole human experience. But he
overcame each resulting difficulty, and because he trusted God,
he was always in a position to do more good.
     I later found as I moved into other spheres of work that I was
able to help both myself and others far more. I could feel, with
Joseph, that no one else forced me into these higher spheres of
thought and activity—it was divine Love that led me on. With­
out this I could not have understood so well the Mother-love of
God, which turns us, as the human mother tends to turn her
child, from the things that hurt in any way.
     Finally I realized that instead of feeling I was being followed
by this past evil, I could recognize that God was leading me, lov­
ing me. I was being given vast opportunities for spiritual growth,
and my needs and desires were beautifully supplied wherever I
was guided. Just as Joseph was in no way bitter about what his
brothers had done, but followed God everywhere he was guided,
so all hate, resentment, and distrust could be shut out by letting
love dwell where hate wanted to have a lasting place.
     There is now no bitter memory of that experience. There
remains only the lesson I learned that we are all God’s children,
created to express Him! It is natural for me now, because of this
lesson, to put out hate, resentment, bitterness, and righteous in­
dignation immediately when they claim a place. I know that
Love’s promise of the Comforter is with us now, bringing to re­
 membrance the Master’s command “As I have loved you, . . .
love one another.” There is no way except in following this
commandment that I can express how clean the slate has been
 erased by Truth—how deep the love is that I feel for mankind.
     Among the clippings in her book Pulpit and Press, Mrs. Eddy
includes an article by a perceptive writer for a Boston publica-

                        11   JUNE 12, 1989
                      CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


tion. That article, written in 1895, speaks of the ideal of the
“new woman” and shows the power of love and peace. Of
this “new woman” the article observes: “She brought to warring
men the Prince of Peace, and he, departing, left his scepter not
in her hand, but in her soul. ‘The time of times’ is near when
‘the new woman’ shall subdue the whole earth with the weapons
                           of peace. Then shall wrong be robbed
We feel the strength       of her bitterness and ingratitude of her
that comes when we          sting, revenge shall clasp hands with
substitute compassion      pity, and love shall dwell in the tents
for indifference, peace    of hate . . . . ” 5
for conflict.                   Individually and universally to­
                            day, heavy demands for the expression
of a higher sense of love are being made upon the world. We
need to get at the root of hate and war and cast these evils out.
Although this time may seem long in coming, there will be a day
when willing obedience follows the clear revelation of God’s love
on earth.
     The teachings of Christian Science strengthen our endeavors -
to rise above the weaknesses of mortal mind into purer desires
and demonstrated spirituality. We feel the strength mentally and
physically that comes when we substitute kindness for unkind­
ness, compassion for indifference, true understanding for resent­
ment, peace for conflict. Thus we find that we have forgiven our
debtors, those human experiences that seem to exact from us an­
ger, resentment, fear—sorrows and faults a loving Father never
knew and would never send.
     As our own debts are forgiven, we are released from evil
thoughts of ourselves and others—thoughts that a loving Father
never gave us. Through a purer heart we see ourselves and oth­
ers as the perfect image of perfect Love. There is no past or fu­
ture in the consciousness bom of God—it knows only the eter­
nal now, the kingdom of heaven within.
    1 Ezek. 48:35. 2 John 13:34. 3 Science and Health, p. 92. 4 See
Gen. 37:12-36; 39:1—45:7. 5 Pulpit and Press, pp. 83-84.


                            12   VOL. 91, NO. 24
Forgiveness
Oh, Absalom! Your brother's
evil deed led me to wrath,
and you to hate. It could
have ended there. Forgiveness
would have worked its balm.

During all those years
when you were stealing hearts,
surely you knew I could have
called a halt. But even when
you armed yourself, and sought
to take my throne, I charged
my people to deal gently
with you, for my sake.

Here in my chamber I have wept
a lake. Oh, might it have been
I who died, instead of you!
But there is comfort. The
Great Shepherd sees me through.
I know that He will guard and
guide you too, my son.

So mourning must begin to cease.
The time has come to rise.
I wipe the tears from off my eyes.

But, son . . .

I take you with me in my heart,
where you have always been—

                   will ever be.
            Patricia P. Wilson
On caring for disciples
"I have given you an example, that ye should
do as I have done to you." *
                               Christ Jesus

He washed their feet. Soiled, no doubt,
on the road to the blind man, the adulteress,
the leper, the centurion's servant. Why
should we not concede that common men
such as these might occasionally need
cleansing? Walking in the earth it must ever be,
even on the holiest of missions. He did not
seem surprised or dismayed—only insistent
that they do the same one to another. Perhaps
frequently. And even to those disciples
close to their Master, who needed it then
as now. The laborers are here the same
servants. No saints of self-appointed rank.
All must wash—and be washed. You must
wash those who, by means of much walking,
much working (that it might be trodden under
foot), have kicked up much earthly dust. You
must be washed of them. That sandals of
firm resolve may properly fit, to keep pace
in unbroken unity, with all who serve God.
                           Jea n n ie J. F erber

•John 13:15.
        Baptism, communion,
        and Christian Science
          Water, bread, and wine are symbols
           o f a much deeper spiritual reality

                       Margrit Engelhardt



[Original in German]
     OW happy I was when my sister registered me with the
H    clergyman’s office as her daughter’s godmother! A very
special bond had developed between my niece and me because
I had cared for her soon after she was bom.
    However, the minister refused to let me serve as a god­
parent because, he said, Christian Scientists disregard the sac­
raments. He also was very concerned because children of
Christian Scientists were not being baptized in the traditional
way he held so dear. His words impelled me to delve into this
subject intensively.
    In the Bible I read that Jesus himself did not baptize, only
his disciples did.
    John the Baptist had waited humbly and longingly for one
who was greater. He knew that a future baptism of Spirit—
which characterizes true Christianity—would replace his bap­
tism with water.
    In prayer I asked God, divine Mind, to cleanse me and all
mankind of prejudgments based on ignorance. All sadness had
vanished. I even felt gratitude that I was about to gain a clearer
understanding of true being and the spiritual significance of
Christian baptism.

                        15   JUNE 12, 1989
                  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


     I realized even more clearly that Christian Science does not
disregard the sacraments; it makes higher and more rigorous de­
mands on their practice. The spiritualization of thought, some­
thing each of us needs to do, is of utmost importance in this.
As we begin to spiritualize human thinking, outward ceremonies
yield to the spiritual substance of our worship and devotion. We
may not use the material symbols—water, bread, wine—but we
need and love the deeper spiritual reality they represent.
     The deep meaning of baptism as seen in Christian Science is
a giving up of a mortal concept of self, a progressive cleansing
from sin and belief in evil of every sort. It includes relinquishing
ungodlike behavior and attitudes through the understanding of
the allness of divine Mind, the one and only Spirit, and through
Christ, Truth—the Way. Thus we begin to demonstrate the sig­
nificance of true baptism, which Mrs. Eddy defines in Science
and Health as “purification by Spirit; submergence in Spirit.” 1
     Since this purification can occur only in thought, it is not
a ritual to be performed only once; we must be baptized day
after day. Human thinking must be cleansed daily so that
we can see God. The Christian Science textbook, Science and
Health, shows the profound spiritual basis for both baptism and
the Eucharist. It explains: “ Our baptism is a purification from
all error.. . . Our Eucharist is spiritual communion with the one
God. Our bread, ‘which cometh down from heaven,’ is Truth.
Our cup is the cross. Our wine the inspiration of Love, the
draught our Master drank and commended to his followers.” 2
     I rejoiced in this profound understanding of the sacraments
gained from my study and prayer, and I recognized that every­
one is able to take part in these sacraments of baptism and com­
munion daily through living the truths gained in deep study of
the Bible along with the Christian Science textbook.
     Self-examination in the light of this spiritual understanding
of sacrament has led to many new questions: “ Have I really
taken the bread of Truth and drunk the wine, ‘the inspiration of
Love,’ this morning? Have I had communion with the one God

                       16   V O L.91.N O . 24
          BAPTISM, COMMUNION, AND CHRISTIAN SCIENCE


in my daily life by using what I read in the Bible Lesson?” 3 My
morning prayer for spiritual understanding reaffirms the possibil­
ity of daily demonstrating obedience to Christ Jesus’ command­
ments. Thanks to the revelation of Christian Science, the Master’s
command that we should “heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise
the dead, cast out devils” 4 can be put into practice.
     Christ Jesus came to glorify God, to heal, awaken, purify—to
cast out evil; and now, to some degree, we are experiencing for
ourselves the wonder and joy of the Christ-spirit that animated
Jesus. It is at work within every one of us.
     We cannot stop at the last supper, which Christ Jesus shared
with his disciples before the crucifixion, be­
cause, truly, the Eucharist speaks to us of the Self-examination in
morning meal he had with them after he rose light of this spirit-
from the tomb.5 This spiritualized sense of ual understanding of
communion leads to new life, to rebirth, sacrament has led to
And as the disciples discerned the Christ by many new questions.
the Sea of Galilee, so too, all Christians can --------------------------
now joyfully celebrate the morning meal.
     The Eucharist, as a ritual observance, serves to commemo­
rate Christ Jesus, but Science and Health tells us, “If Christ,
Truth, has come to us in demonstration, no other commem­
oration is requisite, for demonstration is Immanuel, or God
 with us; and if a friend be with us, why need we memorials of
that friend?” 6
      Every healing in Christian Science is a purification of our
 consciousness, similar to baptism. It involves turning away from
 materiality and overcoming subjection to mortal sensuousness.
 Indeed, it means separating oneself from the belief that Mind
 and Life are in matter. It is a turning to the divine, a rising to
 new life in Christ, for as Paul says, “If any man be in Christ, he
 is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things
 are become new.” 7
      Of the many healings my family and I have experienced
 through Christian Science, one in particular seems to me to rep­

                         17   JUNE 12, 1989
                       CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


resent the morning meal, the appearing of the living, renewing
Christ.
     In the general jostling of the crowd at a dedication ceremony
for a bridge, my small daughter fell from a poorly secured po­
dium and gashed her thigh on a railroad tie that was nearby. In
spite of the many people around us and her crying, I immedi­
ately and unswervingly declared the truth of God and His man.
This man is and has always been intact and protected as God’s
own expression. The little one immediately quieted down. I
took the child in my arms and shared with her all the truths of
God that came to thought. We strove to look away from the
body, to keep our thoughts clear of the frightening, unpleasant
picture that would fool us into believing in evil instead of know­
ing the allness of God, good. Continuing to pray silently, I knew
that God forever maintains man as His own expression in the
eternal order of His law, in indestructible harmony—indeed, that
no one can fall out of this unchangeable order.
     During this prayerful work, this “ submergence in Spirit,” I
felt the deep peace and conviction of the allness and all-presence
of divine Love. This powerful truth did its work as an unchang­
ing law, and not even half an hour had gone by before the
wound had closed completely. My daughter had experienced
true baptism through the influx of the Christ, which purifies,
blesses, and heals.
     The appearance of the omnipresent, healing Christ, reveal­
ing man’s oneness with God, is always like a miracle to human
sense. It causes us time and again to be deeply grateful for the
baptism and communion we truly do experience in Christian
Science.
     1Science and Health, p. 581. 2 Ibid., p. 35. 3 In the Christian Science
Quarterly. 4 Matt. 10:8. 5 See John 21:1-17. 6 Science and Health, p. 34.
7II Cor. 5:17.




                             18    VOL. 91, NO. 24
                Know the truth
             Truth isn’t merely something to
           believe in or hope for. It’s spiritual
                 reality to be certain of!

                           Joel Magnes




          HAT does it really mean when we talk of knowing the
W         truth? Part of the definition of know in one dictionary is
“to be aware of the truth or factuality of: be convinced or certain
o f . . . to have a practical understanding of.” We may find it
helpful, then, to think of knowing the truth in Christian Science
as being convinced of the reality of what is spiritually true, de­
spite what may seem contrary evidence of the physical senses.
And when we understand what’s true, our understanding is prac­
tical because it invokes the law of God to bring our experience
into accord with spiritual good.
      If, for example, we’re tempted to believe in the reality of sin­
ful traits or symptoms of sickness, we have spiritual and moral
authority for refusing to be persuaded or frightened— knowing
what is true of God and man. Christian Science explains that
Christ Jesus healed through obedience to this law of God. He
proved by his healing works that really to know the truth is not
a mere mental exercise. Jesus’ kind of knowing had the effect of
healing all manner of human ills, even death. He never allowed
the false claims of a sick body or character to alter his firm
knowledge of what is true of God and of man’s relationship to
Him. Through our own daily study and practice of what Chris­
tian Science teaches us of these same Biblical truths, we can, to

                         19   JUNE 12, 1989
                  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


some degree, follow Jesus’ example. And our knowledge of what
is true becomes so vivid and natural that we are freed from be­
lieving or experiencing a lie.
     Because divine Spirit, God, is the only creator, His only cre­
ation is spiritual man and the spiritual universe. Man is spirit­
ual; he is the wholly good idea created by God, who is infinite
good. And man is created in God’s exact image, to express Him.
Hence the relationship of God and man is eternal and is as in­
separable as that between the sun and its ray of light. And like
the sunbeam, man reflects all the attributes of his divine source,
including such qualities as health, harmony, immortality, purity,
perfection, dominion, wisdom.
     This wonderful, incorporeal order of being might seem too
good to be true! To human perceptions, intelligence and exist­
                           ence seem to be in matter and threat­
When troubles seem         ened with uncertainty and danger. But
so aggressive that it’s this is simply not so. Man is already
difficult to discern       spiritual, immortal, harmonious. As
what’s true, an under­ such he remains intact even though
standing of spiritual      we may not always recognize it.
reality begins to              For us to know in daily living that
remove confusion.          these spiritual facts are now the reality
                           requires a persistent effort. Physical or
moral troubles may seem so aggressive or entrenched that it’s dif­
ficult to discern what is true and what isn’t. An understanding
of spiritual reality can take away this frightening confusion. In
the Christian Science textbook, Science and Health, Mrs. Eddy
explains, “If you wish to know the spiritual fact, you can dis­
 cover it by reversing the material fable, be the fable pro or con,—
be it in accord with your preconceptions or utterly contrary to
them.” 1
     As we learn more of man’s spiritual identity in Christian
 Science, we begin to realize that disease, sin, and even death are
not hard realities we must accept as true. They are just the op­
posite: they are material fables, lies about God’s spiritual man.

                       20   VOL. 91, NO. 24
                        KNOW THE TRUTH


Our belief in these lies can be destroyed and their seeming effects
erased as we replace them with a knowledge of Truth, God.
    How can we know this is really true? Let’s reason together.
Since man is God’s image and likeness, God, who is good, would
have to know or experience evil in order for man to reflect it.
But good, God, cannot be expressed by evil; pure Spirit cannot
make a material likeness; Truth cannot produce or include error;
God, eternal Life, cannot end in death. And a creator who is
infinite Love, Father-Mother God, cannot inflict evil on His infi­
nitely lovely creation, man. Evil, therefore, does not come from
God, who made all. It is unreal, is only the illusion of a fake
material mentality—nothing but a suggestion that God, infinite
Spirit, and His spiritual creation can be finite. Sin, sickness, and
death are false claims, without any genuine presence or power.
     Once we understand that spiritual being is actually the fact
of our being, we can prove the nonexistence of evil and material­
ity. We can demonstrate practically that man is eternally Love’s
—God’s—spiritual, perfect child. This demonstration is accom­
plished by putting our knowledge of Truth to work destroying
sin and illness and seeing evidence of God’s, divine Principle’s,
government of our lives. Every such awakening, or healing, in
Christian Science is proof that faultless, spiritual existence is the
only reality of man’s being. Mrs. Eddy states: “If sickness is real,
it belongs to immortality; if true, it is a part of Truth. Would
you attempt with drugs, or without, to destroy a quality or condi­
tion of Truth? But if sickness and sin are illusions, the awaken­
ing from this mortal dream, or illusion, will bring us into health,
holiness, and immortality.” 2
     We need to nurture a deep assurance that Truth is true.
However alarmingly the material senses seem to be portraying
a situation, God is still All, and evil is still nothing.
     Step by step as we pray, the Christ—the true idea of God
that Jesus so fully exemplified—imparts what we need to know
and impels us to live our understanding. Jesus told his followers,
“He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also;

                        21   JUNE 12, 1989
                   CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


 and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my
 Father.” 3 Mrs. Eddy comments: “The context of the foregoing
 Scriptural text explains Jesus’ words, ‘because I go unto my
 Father.’ ‘Because’ in following him, you understand God and
 how to turn from matter to Spirit for healing; how to leave self,
 the sense material, for the sense spiritual; how to accept God’s
power and guidance, and become imbued with divine Love that
                          casts out all fear. Then are you baptized
A sense of God’s          in the Truth that destroys all error, and
comforting closeness you receive the sense of Life that knows
fills our thought and no death, and you know that God is the
lifts discord and         only Life.” 4
fear. This is living           We can know God now! Even a lit­
Christian prayer.         tle right knowing reflects infinite power,
                          is supported by divine law, and heals.
Christ is present this very moment in consciousness, gently re­
vealing God’s allness and so exposing and dissolving any mortal
illusions. Christ meets us right where we are, bringing healing.
     Our part is to be receptive, to let go of misconceptions. To
yield, and listen to Truth. Truth may come to us in words or
perhaps as spiritual intuitions. As we entertain these spiritual
ideas, we commune with God. A sense of rightness, of God’s
comforting closeness, fills our thought and lifts discord and fear.
This scientific knowing is living Christian prayer that brings re­
sults. We find that our thinking and then our circumstances are
harmonized.
     Each of us possesses innate God-given ability to respond
to the presence of Christ. This is the Christianly scientific
way to work out our salvation, and our blessings are inevi­
table—nothing can stop them. We can join Paul in saying,
“Now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I
am known.” 5
     Our deep yearning to know God cannot be thwarted by error.
A knowledge of God, Truth, and of man as His image is our in­
alienable right. In fact, this gift is ours already. It’s part of our

                        22   VOL. 91, NO. 24
                             KNOW THE TRUTH


inheritance as the children of our Father-Mother God. We must
accept it and confidently assert our real, spiritual identity.
    So rejoice with gratitude for Jesus’ promise “If ye continue in
my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 6 Because it’s true!
    1Science and Health, p. 129. 2 Ibid., p. 230. 3 John 14:12. 4 Miscellane­
ous Writings, p. 194. 5 1 Cor. 13:12. 6 John 8:31, 32.




       What is most significant about placebos is not so
    much the verdict they supply on the efficacy of new
    drugs as the clear proof that what passes through the
    mind can produce alterations in the body's chemistry.
    These facts also indicate that the same pathways and
    connections that come into play through the use of pla­
    cebos can be activated without placebos. The main in­
    gredient is the human belief system.
                                             Norm an Cousins
           Excerpted from Human Options by Norman Cousins.
           Copyright © 1981 by Norman Cousins. Reprinted
           with permission of tne publisher, W. W. Norton
           & Company, Inc.




                             23    JUNE 12, 1989
               Share the recipe
            Sharing freely with our neighbors
              and fellow church members
                   is a form of loving.

                       Robert J. Rowan



     OR several years we had a friend and neighbor who, when
F    she baked apple pies, would occasionally send one of her
boys over with a whole pie. They were delicious and always had
just the right amount of spices. We appreciated the thoughtful­
ness and love in this sharing. And, of course, we also tried to do
nice things for this family.
    Haven’t we all at one time or another wanted to share some­
thing with a friend or neighbor? Or even with a stranger we
might be talking to? Maybe we’ve found a new vacation spot,
perhaps a great new book, a recording, or a new recipe. Or we
could have had an enlightening thought that was so helpful to
us we felt we wanted to share it with another. In a similar way,
don’t we usually enjoy hearing and sharing the joyful experiences
of others? Their inspiration? Isn’t this sharing a form of love?
    I recall one Wednesday evening I was enjoying visiting a
branch Church of Christ, Scientist, in a distant city. These
Wednesday testimony meetings at Christian Science churches—
open to everyone—are times when those attending have oppor­
tunities to share. These testimonies of gratitude may relate the
healing of a physical illness, a meeting of a need for employ­
ment, a healing of a human relationship problem, or perhaps an
explanation of the enlightenment found in studying the Bible
in conjunction with the writings of Mary Baker Eddy, who

                       24   VOL. 91, NO. 24
                       SHARE THE RECIPE


discovered Christian Science and established The Church of
Christ, Scientist.
    During the testimony part of that particular meeting, a
woman spoke about her freedom from some difficult situation.
The word freedom immediately reminded me of a healing I had
had. About a year prior to this Wednesday evening, a physical
difficulty had been bothering me almost constantly for quite
some time. I was healed while I was pondering the deeper spirit­
ual significance of freedom. Hymn 136 in the Christian Science
Hymnal offered the helpful thought “I love Thy way of freedom,
Lord, / To serve Thee is my choice.” For many years I had been
happily serving as a member of The Mother Church and at dif­
ferent times of various branch churches. And I had been turning
to Christian Science in times of need most of my life. Because
the healing of this particular difficulty was so complete, I had
forgotten about it until this woman spoke. After listening to
what she shared about freedom, I was impelled to get up and
to tell of this wonderful healing, to share some of the truths that
had helped me.
     The Manual o f The Mother Church by Mrs. Eddy says: “ ‘Glo­
rify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s’
(St. Paul). Testimony in regard to the healing of the sick is
highly important. More than a mere rehearsal of blessings, it
scales the pinnacle of praise and illustrates the demonstration
of Christ, ‘who healeth all thy diseases’ (Psalm 103:3).” 1
     Why are testimonies of healing “highly important” and to
whom? For me, the answer is that the giving of a testimony is
important to the testifier because it provides a means of express­
ing gratitude for the goodness of God that has been evidenced in
individual experience and progress. Good that is received but
unappreciated is permitted to lie dormant and could seem to
wither and disappear, but if such good is shared in loving help­
fulness and gratitude, it increases. St. Paul said it this way: “He
which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which
soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.” 2

                        25   JUNE 12, 1989
                   CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


     There may be times, though, if we are new to these Wednes­
day meetings, and sometimes even if we have been attending for
years, when we feel that we don’t have the education, experi­
ence, or understanding to stand up and give a testimony of
gratitude. These arguments of inadequacy, timidity, self-
consciousness, fear, and anxiety can be ___________________
confronted. And when they are, they can Good that is unappre-
also be overcome as we behold and ac- dated could seem to
knowledge the perfection of God, divine wither, but if it is
Mind, and the ability and dominion we shared, it increases,
truly have as His wholly spiritual child.     ----------------------------
     We might recall that when God commanded Moses to lead
the Israelites out of Egypt, Moses, feeling inadequate, asked how
he, who wasn’t eloquent, could talk to the people in a way they
would understand. And God told Moses, “I will be with thy
mouth.” 3 So when we get up to testify, can’t we also feel trust­
ingly that God will guide us? And in an article called “Heart
to Heart” in her Miscellaneous Writings Mrs. Eddy encourages,
“When the heart speaks, however simple the words, its language
is always acceptable to those who have hearts.” 4
     When we give a testimony, we are sharing with others our
love for God and for Christ Jesus, our gratitude for Mrs. Eddy’s
discovery of Christian Science, and our acknowledgment of the
good that is ours, individually and collectively. But isn’t there
also something more?
     Would you offer someone a piece of apple pie without the
apples and spices that make it an apple pie? It’s the same with
our testimonies. If we don’t include some of the inspired
thoughts that helped us along the way, aren’t we leaving part
of the “filling” out of our testimony? If we are truly sharing,
we should also include some of the spiritual truths that helped
us arrive at the point of healing, some of the understanding
gained—as well as the gratitude we feel.
     And what about our part as members of the congregation?
Shouldn’t we enjoy the testimony and rejoice with the testifier?

                         26   VOL. 91.N O . 24
                              SHARE THE RECIPE


As we do this, we are sharing some of the enrichment that came
into the speaker’s life, and we are consciously or unconsciously
storing away a crumb or two of the truths that we found helpful
and that we may someday use as ingredients in our own healing
work.
     As is true of that pie mentioned earlier, whether the piece
is large or small, it’s the filling that counts, just as a testimony,
whether simple or profound, is filled with the expression of
Truth, love, and gratitude. Every sincere testimony evidences
in some way God’s completeness and goodness. For this reason
every experience can be seen as informative and progressive.
     We can all contribute our ingredients, our share—newcomer
and seasoned worker alike—by attending, participating in, and
supporting the Wednesday testimony meetings. Science and
Health by Mrs. Eddy tells usr “Millions of unprejudiced minds
—simple seekers for Truth, weary wanderers, athirst in the
desert—are waiting and watching for rest and drink. Give them
a cup of cold water in Christas name, and never fear the conse­
quences.” 5 Let’s be sure that we share the spiritual inspiration
that is rich and full, and so satisfying.
     1Man., Art. VIII, Sect. 24. 2 II Cor. 9:6. 3 See Ex. 4:10-12. 4 Mis.,
p. 262. 5 Science and Health, p. 570.




                Whosoever shall give you a cup o f water
          to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ,
                          verily I say unto you,
                      he shall not lose his reward.
                                   Mark 9:41




                             27    JUNE 12, 1989
            E d it o r ia l s
                 Allison W. Phinney, Jr., Editor
            William E. Moody, Michael D. Rissler,
               Ann Kenrick, A ssociate Editors




        Safety under God’s law
    In the aftermath of the recent soccer tragedy in Sheffield,
England, in which many lives were lost, we naturally ask our­
selves what can be learned to prevent such calamities. It is
easy after the event to try to find the cause of the disaster and
apportion blame, but a more constructive way is to realize that
we all share a collective responsibility. Obviously, practical
steps will need to be taken in crowd control and improved sta­
dium facilities. But, at a deeper level, society needs to look for
the spiritual solutions that will help to change mental attitudes
which have led to these all-too-frequent tragedies. We need to
pay much more attention to the mental atmosphere we all
share.
    In the wake of such an event, for instance, we might be
tempted to believe that at any moment we could become the
victims of other people’s mistakes or that we are just pawns in
some fatalistic scheme where this sort of thing is bound to hap­
pen one day anyway. But this negative thinking doesn’t con­
tribute to practical solutions and certainly never heals. In fact,
it adds to the burden of guilt and sorrow that would weigh
heavily on the families that have been bereaved.
    Many of the people in Jesus’ time believed that calamities
were the result of sin. After eighteen men, who were building
an aqueduct under the walls of Jerusalem, were killed when a
tower fell on them, the Master asked, “Think ye that they were

                      28   VOL. 91, NO. 24
                           EDITORIALS


sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?” He unequivo­
cally repudiated such a notion: “I tell you, Nay: but, except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.” 1
     This stem warning can be a reminder that we all have a
responsibility in how we think about the events we hear of
around the world. We may be tempted to dismiss them as no
concern of ours because we are not directly involved in them,
but to understand more fully, as Jesus did, that accidents have
no place in God’s ordered kingdom, where divine law gov­
erns, can help to prevent disasters from occurring in the first
place.
     Christ Jesus was an example of someone who thought and
acted under the supreme aegis of God’s law. He proved that
divine law was in control of his life and the lives of others.
He maintained the highest degree of self-government, even
when situations would threaten to overwhelm him. On one
occasion he escaped from an angry mob that was intent on
throwing him over the brow of a hill. He passed through the
middle of the crowd and went his way, the gospel account
tells us.2
     Jesus had a clear understanding of his individuality as the
Son of God, always protected and supported by his loving
Father. His teachings and healing works showed that each one
of God’s spiritual children has a distinct individuality, which is
sustained and maintained by the divine law of Life. For in­
stance, he freed lifelong cripples from incapacity, healed blind­
ness, and lifted the burden of sin off men and women. He
acted as an individual who was free from the biases and prevail­
ing mentality of his time.
     It is worth remembering that every crowd is actually made
 up of individuals. Indeed there were many reports of heroic in­
 dividual courage among young people at the soccer match;
 they resuscitated their friends and supported the injured by
 helping them to stay awake and alert until other assistance
 came. Instead of succumbing to crowd hysteria or the trend of

                      29    JUNE 12, 1989
                CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


thought toward confusion and alarm, they acted calmly and on
the basis of their own moral convictions.
    The teachings of Christian Science urge us not only to think
for ourselves but, most important, to gain a clearer understand­
ing of our own individuality as spiritual and ever safe under
God’s law of harmony. Mary Baker Eddy, who founded Chris­
tian Science and who had long known the rugged individual­
ism of a New England background, writes: “God has endowed
man with inalienable rights, among which are self-government,
reason, and conscience. Man is properly self-governed only
when he is guided rightly and governed by his Maker, divine
Truth and Love.” 3
    As we learn to exercise our right to “self-government, rea­
son, and conscience” through a deeper awareness of our spirit­
ual nature, we find our lives becoming more and more amena­
ble to divine law. We take responsibility for our own thoughts
and actions and bring them into accord with Christ through
deeper humility, purity, and love. This greater self-awareness
also includes our responsibility for and compassionate consid­
eration of others and helps to build an atmosphere of calm and
order in our communities that is not brushed aside at a time of
stress.
    Jesus had something to teach us about crowd control, too.
One day, thousands of men, women, and children had fol­
lowed him to “a desert place” to hear him teach.4 When it was
late, the disciples reminded Jesus that the people had had
nothing to eat. Mark’s Gospel tells us: “He commanded them
to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass. And
they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.” And
when Jesus had blessed the few loaves and fishes that were on
hand, the disciples gave them to the people, and they all ate
and were satisfied.
     Next time we have occasion either to enjoy a sports event
where we are one in a large crowd or to think of people appar­
ently acting en masse, we can regard it as an opportunity to

                     30   VOL. 91, NO. 24
                              EDITORIALS


bring our own thought and actions under the control of Christ.
We will be helping to hasten the day when God’s rule of har­
mony will more universally be recognized and accepted, with
healing results for society.
                                                      Ann Kenrick
     1 Luke 13:4, 5. 2 See Luke 4:28-30. 3 Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures, p. 106. 4 See Mark 6:32-42.




                He that dwelleth in the secret place
                    o f the most High shall abide
                 under the shadow of the Almighty.
              I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge
            and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust.
                     Surely he shall deliver thee
                    from the snare o f the fowler,
               and from the noisome pestilence....
            For he shall give his angels charge over thee,
                     to keep thee in all thy ways.
                              Psalms 91:1-3, 11




                         31     JUNE 12, 1989
                Family matters
     Readers of the Sentinel recognize the title of this editorial
as the heading for one of the continuing features in this maga­
zine. Obviously it has a dual meaning. We talk about matters
that are part of family life, and we’re also affirming that fam­
ilies do matter tremendously.
     Of course there are many kinds of families. Most basic, we
care about our parents and children, brothers and sisters,
grandmothers and grandfathers, aunts and uncles, nieces and
nephews. It’s a long list. There are also people that we come
to love and trust so much that even though there is no blood re­
lationship, they too become family.
     Family can be as far-reaching as to extend back to early
Christian pioneers or out to our fellow church members on the
other side of the planet. And at this moment we are related to
people we don’t even know. Everywhere there are men and
women who are reaching out to know God’s presence and care.
Even without knowing exactly who they are, we share a bond of
family interest, that our prayers will find what they search for.
     All of this counts. It has to do with the awakening of man­
kind to bonds of spiritual affection that uplift the purpose of
our lives. Ultimately such spiritual uplifting satisfies us as
nothing else can and enables us to feel something of what it
means to be the sons and daughters of God.
     We need to think about these things because large, almost
unimaginable numbers of men and women aren’t satisfied. In
 fact, that’s putting it mildly, far too mildly, when one considers
 how many people suffer from abuse in so many ways. The sex­
ual abuse of children, for example, was difficult for me to com­
prehend until a friend several years ago told me about her own
childhood. As a result of repeated abuse, she had grown into
mature adulthood feeling wholly unworthy. Her learning
about Christian Science, she said, was her salvation. But even

                      32   VOL. 91, NO. 24
                           EDITORIALS


after many years of studying Christian Science and making
much progress, she still had times of severe struggle in order to
appreciate her own true worth.
    From time to time, there have been articles and testimonies
of the healing of such cases that have appeared in this maga­
zine. One “Family Matters” article said, “When I was little, I
kept the most horrible secret: my father beat me.” In an ac­
count of healing, another person wrote: “As a child of
five,. . . I was sexually abused on two separate occasions.
[The people] who molested me were people in our neighbor­
hood.” And yet another writer began, “A few years ago I was
held hostage by a gunman and raped.”
    With each of these persons, the stories are heart-rending;
we don’t want anyone to suffer such hurt. But there is also
in each person’s experience a powerful spiritual change that
couldn’t be held back by the tragedy.
    In one testimony of healing, a woman tells of a time of es­
trangement from her family, a time during which she suffered
in many ways, including a violent episode that left her with lac­
erations and apparent broken bones. Friends found her and,
as in the parable of the good Samaritan that Christ Jesus re­
lated, they cared for her. This person had been raised in Chris­
tian Science but had been away from it. She found out later,
though, that her family had never stopped praying for her. She
learned that on the night of the attack her mother had wakened
from sleep with an urgent impulsion to pray. She said that her
family had continued to pray in the days that followed, al­
though they didn’t know her whereabouts.
    After receiving a telephone call from someone who knew
their daughter, the family sent her brother to look for her. She
reports that in those intervening days her wounds healed
quickly. “I am convinced,” she wrote, “that it was my family’s
and church members’ prayers for mankind and their dedica­
tion to beholding the spiritual nature of man that healed me.”
This person was soon reunited with her family.

                      33    JUNE 12, 1989
                  CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


     The mother wrote of the night of the attack: “This night
proved to be a turning point in our lives.. . . I learned to en­
rich deeply my love for mankind, especially our daughter, by
being less judgmental, more compassionate, and more forgiv­
ing. No matter how difficult our situation . . . , our prayers
and affections were not in vain. The support given by our fam­
ily and church friends was of the highest Christian character.”
     Those who are reading this magazine are really part of
a family. We have spiritual resources that are still largely
untapped. We can and do need to purify our love and pour
it forth in overflowing measure. Not only because there are
many who need to feel such love, but because the very divine
Principle that bases all life is God. Satisfaction comes from
true, redeeming, forgiving, healing love that derives from
God. This is what we’re all capable of, no matter how abusive
human experience has been. We all need such love.
     There is complex and tragic error, or evil, in human
thought. But this is not the true mind of man, who is God’s
creation. And we must come to see and to prove that man’s
one real Mind is God. The conviction of such powerful spirit­
ual truth alone can meet either the victim or perpetrator of evil
on healing grounds. “The way to extract error from mortal
mind,” Mary Baker Eddy writes in Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures, “is to pour in truth through flood-tides of
Love. Christian perfection is won on no other basis.” 1
     We all are family. Sexual and physical abuse isn’t some­
thing “out there” that has nothing to do with where we live and
the people we know. Society has made significant advance in
its willingness to face this social disease. And students of
 Christian Science have an important contribution to make in
its healing, just as they would seek healing of a contagion or the
aftermath of any disaster.
                                                Michael D. Rissler
    1 Science and Health, p. 201.


                         34   VOL. 91, NO. 24
             T e s t im o n ie s
           of Christian Science Healing


   T is with deep gratitude that I write this testimony after almost a
I   lifetime of practicing the spiritual truths of Christian Science.
     A sister of mine was healed of chronic indigestion during one
visit to a Christian Science practitioner. My sister had eaten no
solid food for a number of months. Following her healing, she be­
came a student of Christian Science and wrote my mother, sending
her a copy of Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures by Mary
Baker Eddy. Mother knew this teaching had to be wonderful to
bring about healing, and she eventually became a student.
     Along about this time, I had a severe case of athlete’s foot and
was taken to a doctor. The medication used was so painful that
I cried every time it was applied. Then blood poisoning set in. I
pleaded to be sent to my sister who had had the healing. I was,
and my sister engaged a practitioner, who prayed for me.
     The practitioner asked me to study page 475 of Science and
Health, where begins Mrs. Eddy’s answer to the question “What is
man?” Before I got to the bottom of the page, the foot was pink
and clean. I had been completely healed. After the healing, I per­
formed a tap dance in a revue. This was amazing to some who had
seen the condition of my foot earlier.
     Years later, while I was living in Texas, another memorable
healing took place. I developed a painful difficulty and could not
sleep at night. My husband, who was not a Christian Scientist,
took me to a doctor. The trouble was diagnosed as an ulcerated co­
lon, and the doctor recommended surgery. But I was determined to
rely on God for healing.
     Over a period of time I studied and prayed in Christian Science.
One day these words in Science and Health stood out to me (p. 39):
“Now is the time for so-called material pains and material pleasures

                         35   JUNE 12,1989
                    CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


to pass away, for both are unreal, because impossible in Science.”
Often when the pain came, I would ponder this passage. Before
long the trouble completely left me. I was so grateful for this fur­
ther assurance of God’s healing power.
    God has indeed blessed me, and so much good has been evi­
dent in my life.

                                          Roberta Moore Ford
                                          Franklin, North Carolina


    I am the sister mentioned in the above testimony. I am grate­
ful for my healing of acute indigestion. My sister, Roberta, was
healed, as she has stated. My gratitude to God for His many bless­
ings is immeasurable.
                                       Molly B. Ryder Southard

                                  □------

    It is with deepest gratitude that I tell of a healing brought about
through Christian Science. A few years ago, at a time when I was
dealing with a stressful work situation, I began to suffer from symp­
toms of rheumatic fever, which I had had in childhood. Medical
treatment had been given for this illness when I was a child, but I
had been earnestly studying and practicing Christian Science the
previous few years and knew that healing could be brought about
through prayer. As Science and Health by Mrs. Eddy, the Founder
of Christian Science, states (p. 261), “ Hold thought steadfastly to
the enduring, the good, and the true, and you will bring these
into your experience proportionably to their occupancy of your
thoughts.” I needed to give up fear and discouragement and “hold
thought” to the truth of God’s perfection and the perfection of His
idea, man.

                         36   VOL. 91, NO. 24
            TESTIMONIES OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE HEALING


     At first a Christian Science visiting nurse came to our home to
help with my physical needs, and then I went to a nursing facility
where I was cared for and where I could continue to rely com­
pletely on Christian Science. As each challenge arose I trusted in
God’s ever-present, omnipotent care. The fear expressed by family
and friends was healed, and I continued to pray to see the truth of
God’s spiritual creation.
     Science and Health states (p. 264), “When we learn the way in
Christian Science and recognize man’s spiritual being, we shall be­
hold and understand God’s creation,—all the glories of earth and
heaven and man.” Through daily prayer, the spiritual reality of
man as God’s image—the image of Life, Truth, and Love—began
to grow clearer to me. As I studied the weekly Bible Lessons (out­
lined in the Christian Science Quarterly) I found strengthening spir­
itual inspiration. Each day revealed a stronger understanding of
God’s perfect creation until I was able to return home to my fam­
ily, completely healed.
     I am very grateful for the wonderful understanding and quiet
rejoicing brought about by the study of Christian Science.
                                  Claudia Anne Clark Luzadder
                                  Sterling, Virginia

                                  o-------------
[Original in German]
     At one time I was looking for a new job. It seemed hopeless;
all I received was rejections. When I started to understand that the
important thing was not to practice my profession but to perceive
my real calling—to express God’s goodness in every area of my life
—I was led to answer a want ad that had already appeared about
ten days previously. I was given the job, even though more than
eighty applications for that position had already been received.
     The First Church o f Christ, Scientist, and Miscellany by Mrs. Eddy


                          37   JUNE 12, 1989
                   CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


states (p. 165): “As an active portion of one stupendous whole,
goodness identifies man with universal good. Thus may each mem­
ber of this church rise above the oft-repeated inquiry, What am I?
to the scientific response: I am able to impart truth, health, and
happiness, and this is my rock of salvation and my reason for
existing.”
    A housing problem was solved in a wonderful manner several
years ago when I realized that I could completely trust divine guid­
ance. It was a time of confidence and inspiration, and when the
matter was resolved, it was clear to me that God, divine Principle,
governs His creation in perfect harmony.
     One day I was at home when I suddenly suffered severe
abdominal pain. I had been studying the Bible Lesson in the
Quarterly.
     Turning to the Bible, I pondered the passage on how Christ
Jesus refused to yield when he was tempted by the devil (see Matt.
4:1-11). After being tempted three times, the Master finally com­
manded, “ Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt wor­
ship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” And the
Bible continues, “Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels
came and ministered unto him.”
     At no moment was I tempted to view the difficulty as being
true or irreversible. I recognized that God, Spirit, is omnipresent
and omnipotent. In a short time the symptoms vanished.
     Complete freedom from recurring headaches came many years
ago as I grew to understand more fully that man is not material but
is a spiritual idea, the pure expression of Soul. The healing took
time, but I held fast—sometimes with the prayerful support of a
Christian Science practitioner—to the fact that “in him [God] we
live, and move, and have our being” (Acts 17:28). I am very grate­
ful for this healing.
     Once when we returned home from vacation, we learned that
someone had been in our house. He must have felt he was being
observed by a neighbor and left immediately. Each time our house
had come to mind during our absence, I had held the firm convic-

                        38   VOL. 91, NO. 24
           TESTIMONIES OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE HEALING


on that “there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth,
either whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie” (Rev.
 1:27). How glad we were that everything was all right and noth-
lg was missing.
   I have had countless healings and experiences in Christian
cience. Whether they have been physical in nature or chal-
;nges of other kinds, the most valuable thing for me has always
een the spiritual gain—the realization of the omnipresence and
mniscience of God. I am particularly grateful for this spiritual
isight.

                                     Lea von Daniken-Steiner
                                     Rheinfelden, Switzerland

                                o--------
    Science and Health by Mary Baker Eddy defines the word tithe
s “contribution; tenth part; homage; gratitude . . .” (p. 595). And
i Malachi we read (3:10): “Bring ye all the tithes into the store-
ouse . . . and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if
 will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a
lessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.” Every
ranch church provides a Wednesday evening testimony meeting
/hen students of Christian Science can share experiences of heal-
lg. The testimony meeting is one way to tithe and is important
oth to those who listen and to those who testify.
    Over a year ago, during a testimony meeting in our branch
hurch, I told of a healing I had had of a painful condition. Some
 fteen or sixteen years earlier my arms and elbows started hurting,
ometimes three or four times a night I was wakened by pain in my
rms. A Christian Science practitioner helped me through prayer.
)ften when the symptoms were apparent, I thought of this state-
lent in Science and Health (p. 151): “The divine Mind that made
lan maintains His own image and likeness.” I knew that in my
sal nature I was the spiritual image and likeness of God, divine

                        39   JUNE 12, 1989
                   CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


Mind, untouched by pain or fear. Confidence in God’s love and
care for me enabled me to have the rest I needed. I persisted in
working this problem out through Christian Science, and I was
completely healed. The condition has not returned.
    As I sat down after giving this testimony, I realized that I was
not using the spiritual truths I had learned to heal a current diffi­
culty. I had had an injury on a tennis court some time before.
Because I was able to get around, I had neglected to address the
situation. Eventually it had become hard for me to walk and to sit,
and then I had prayed more consistently about the trouble. The
situation had improved considerably, but I was far from free.
    On the way home from the testimony meeting that night, I
thanked God for His loving care and for revealing to me what
I needed to do—pray more consistently. From that point on, I
prayed for myself more regularly and often used the statement
“The divine Mind that made man maintains His own image and
likeness” as the basis of my prayer. Before long I was free and have
remained so.
    I am very grateful that I was raised as a Christian Scientist and
am continuing to grow spiritually. I am grateful for every member
of a branch church or society who works to make it possible for us
to attend services almost anywhere we are. I particularly appreciate
the practitioners who serve so selflessly in helping us.

                                          Marion Alice Sanborn
                                          Hudson, Ohio


                      ----------- O-----------

    My parents became interested in Christian Science when I was
a small child, and for over fifty years God has been my sole physi­
cian. I could recount many wonderful healings that have occurred
during this period.
    When I was growing up, diseases often associated with child­
hood were healed through study and prayer in Christian Science.

                        40   VOL. 91, NO. 24
           TESTIMONIES OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE HEALING


  recall having been sent home from school one morning by the
;chool nurse, who said I had mumps. A Christian Science practi-
ioner was requested to pray for me, and I was healed and allowed
o return to school the same day.
     While I was in college, one day I struggled to open a stuck
loor. When the door finally yielded, my hand went through the
;lass; I received a deep cut. The glass appeared to have cut an
irtery. The person with me was quite concerned and wanted to
;all a doctor. I assured her I was fine and asked for a cloth to tie
iround my arm. Then I called a Christian Science practitioner,
vho prayed for me. Immediately the bleeding stopped, and I was
lealed.
     Throughout my schooling, including law school and the times
! took bar examinations in three states, I relied on an understand-
ng that intelligence is God, divine Mind. Science and Health by
vlrs. Eddy defines intelligence as “substance; self-existent and eter-
lal Mind; that which is never unconscious nor limited” (p. 588).
\n d on page 506 we read, “Spirit, God, gathers unformed thoughts
nto their proper channels, and unfolds these thoughts, even as He
)pens the petals of a holy purpose in order that the purpose may
ippear.”
     An early proof of the validity of the latter passage occurred
vhile I was studying for a trigonometry test in high school. I was
[electing problems at random in the text and solving them. I came
.0 one that I just couldn’t seem to solve and became quite frus-
 rated. Finally I had almost decided to forget it when the thought
:ame that, in Science, there are no unsolvable problems, and I
should keep at it. Well, I finally solved it, and on the test the next
lay there were just four problems—including the very one I had
itruggled with. I breezed through it and was the only one to solve
ill four. My gratitude was boundless.
     After I had worked for a company for twenty-eight years, my
 ob was terminated. At first, this was quite a shock. My experience
vas fairly limited to the type of work I had always done and was
lot in line with what was in wide demand. However, I knew that

                         41   JUNE 12, 1989
                         CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


God was my source of supply. I had several months before I would
leave the company, and this gave me time to pray over what to do.
    Of great help were the words of several hymns in the Christian
Science Hymnal, especially Hymns 148 and 224. Hymn 148 begins,
“In heavenly Love abiding, / No change my heart shall fear.” It
goes on to say, “The storm may roar without me, / My heart may
low be laid; / But God is round about me, / And can I be dis­
mayed?” Indeed, the outlook at first seemed stormy, but I was
determined not to be dismayed. The second verse of Hymn 224
begins, “All good, where’er it may be found, / Its source doth find
in Thee; / 1 must have all things and abound, / While God is God
to me.” So I found added assurance that my supply did not come
from a particular employer but from God.
    The thought came to me to open my own office. While driving
along a main thoroughfare, I noticed a sign advertising office space.
The space was exactly suitable for my needs and was near my
home. Then a name for the business came to mind, one that has
since proved very helpful in attracting business. My wife lovingly
offered to be my secretary. Her assistance in the business has been
invaluable.
    In the seven years since that time, the business has grown and
prospered beyond my wildest hopes—proving much more profit­
able than my former job and much more satisfying. Indeed, the
words of Hymn 148— “My hope I cannot measure”—were proved
prophetic. The statement in Science and Health (p. vii) “To those
leaning on the sustaining infinite, to-day is big with blessings” is
beyond a doubt demonstrable.

                                                               Paul V. Lutz
                                                               Houston, Texas

The statements made in testimonies and articles with regard to healing have been
verified in writing by those who can vouch for the integrity o f the testifier or know o f
the healing. Three such written verifications or vouchers are required before a testi­
mony can be considered. (The Mother Church is The First Church o f Christ, Scientist,
in Boston, Massachusetts. Its branches are called Churches o f Christ, Scientist, and
Christian Science Societies.)                                           -j^g Editors


                               42    VOL. 91, NO. 24
                            L ec tu r es
                         on Christian Science
          YOU ARE INVITED TO A FREE LECTURE COMING TO YOUR AREA
   These lectures share with the public the healing approach of Christian
   Science to contemporary issues. Local Churches o f Christ, Scientist,
      welcome their communities to the lectures, which are given by
         members o f The Christian Science Board o f Lectureship.
                  t Indicates that child care is available during the lecture.
                •Please contact the sponsoring church for complete details.




  AUSTRALIA
 QUEENSLAND         Gold Coast: June 24, Sat, 3pm, “The 23rd Psalm in the 20th Century”
                    (Lona Ingwerson) Maher Hall, Matilda st, Burleigh Heads

   ENGLAND
        KENT        Gravesend: June 18, Sun, 3prr4, "Christian Science— What Does It
                    Teach?” (George Millar) Kent Rm, Woodville Halls, Civic Center
   LONDON AND       Kingston-Upon-Thames: June 20, Tues, 7.30pm$, ‘‘Law and Order— A
[EATER LONDON       Scientifically Christian Approach” (George Millar) Main Lecture Theatre,
                    Kingston Polytechnic, Penrhyn rd
                    London (Eleventh): June 22, Thurs, 7pm$, “We Can Rely on God"
                    (Deborah Hedin) Victory Services Club, Carisbrooke Hall, 6 3-79 Seymour st

      WALES
       CLWYD        Rhyl: June 22, Thurs, 7.30pm, “ Facts of Christian Science Which Lead to
                    Healing" (Janet A. Dagley) Exhibition Hall, Rhyl Library, Church st

SIITED STATES
   CALIFORNIA       Beverly Hills: June 24, Sat, 11 am:): (Robert Coe Gilbert) Church, 142 S
                    Rexford dr*
                    Gualala: June 18, Sun, 2prr4, “How Our Spiritual Innocence Sets Us
                    Free" (John A. Grant) Community Center, Center st
     GEORGIA        Atlanta (Second): June 18, Sun, 3prr4, "Christian Science: Its Healing
                    Theology’’ (James Spencer) Church, 3372 Peachtree rd, NE
      INDIANA       Michigan City: June 23, Fri, 7.30pm:):, “Healing Through Prayer: A Reli­
                    able Choice” (Elaine Natale) Church, 510 E Coolspring av
                    Muncie: June 18, Sun, 2.30pm, "Christian Science: A Reasonable Basis
                    for Hope" (Mario Tosto) Minnetrista Cultural Center, 1200 N Minnetrista
                    Pkwy




                                 43    JUNE 12,1989
                          CHRISTIAN SCIENCE SENTINEL


        MAINE    South Portland (First, Portland): June 18, Sun, 3pm^, “Controlling the
                 Body Through Spiritual Law” (Margit O. Hammerstrom) Portland Players
                 Theater, 420 Cottage rd
      MICHIGAN   Grosse Pointe Farms: June 20, Tues, 8pm^, “What Are You Worth? A
                 Search That Heals.” (Godfrey John) Church, 282 Chalfonte av
                 Ludington: June 18, Sun, 2pm^:, “The 23rd Psalm in the 20th Century”
                 (Lona Ingwerson) Church, Filer and Delia sts
    MINNESOTA
                    \A    Minneapolis/St Paul: June 18, Sun, 6.30am and 12 noon, “The
                          Ring of Truth" (Harvey W. Wood) KARE, Channel 11

NEW HAMPSHIRE    Portsmouth: June 18, Sun, 3pm^, "Your Life: Spiritual, Uncontaminated,
                 and Safe in God's Care" (Jon G. Harder) Comfort Inn (at Yokens Restau­
                 rant)
NORTH CAROLINA   Waynesville: June 24, Sat, 2.30prr4, “Directions Toward Healing”
                 (Virginia T. Guffin) Church, 509 S Haywood st
     WISCONSIN   Merrill: June 18, Sun, 3pm, “Healing Through Prayer: A Reliable Choice”
                 (Elaine Natale) Church, N Lake st at Hwy 17




                                 44   VOL. 91, NO. 24
      N o t ic es

Visitors   Former homes of Mary Baker Eddy
welcome        1908-1910 C hestnut H ill hom e— 400 Beacon
           Street, Newton, Massachusetts. Here Mrs. Eddy com­
           pleted work on the M anual o f The M other Church and
           brought to fruition the publishing of the daily news­
           paper The Christian Science Monitor. An exhibit
           traces Mrs. Eddy’s role as Founder and Leader of the
           Christian Science movement—preaching, teaching,
           writing, and commenting on issues still current.
               1875-1882 L yn n hom e— 12 Broad Street, Lynn,
           Massachusetts.   Here Mrs. Eddy completed her
           manuscript for Science and H ealth with Key to the
           Scriptures. This is also where she initiated many
           foundational steps in establishing the Christian
           Science movement, including the formation of the
           Christian Science Association, the Church of Christ,
           Scientist, and the Massachusetts Metaphysical Col­
           lege. Here also Mrs. Eddy was ordained as Pastor of
           her Church.
           Tour days and hours of these homes vary. To
           arrange a visit, please get in touch with:
                   The First Church of Christ, Scientist
                   Visitor Services
                    175 Huntington Avenue, P-133
                   Boston, MA, U.S.A. 02115
                   Telephone: (617) 450-3790
 Are you ready
  to stand up
and be counted?
 No one can take a stand for you. But when
 God leads you, no one can slow you down. The
 Mother Church is a moral and spiritual force for
 good in the world. If the teachings of Christian
 Science have come to mean more and more in
 your life, you may feel it is time to unite with
 the worldwide members of The Mother Church.
 For an application, ask at a branch church, a
 Reading Room, or write to The First Church of
 Christ, Scientist, Clerk of The Mother Church,
 A-172, 175 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA,
 U.S.A. 02115.
 Take twelve Bible Journeys
 without leaving home.
   Now you can follow the paths of six great Bible characters
 (Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Jesus, and Paul) in
 their travels throughout the Holy Land.
 Their inspiring adventures are
 brought home to you in a
 remarkable new publica­                                        A
 tion, “A Light Unto My
 Path,” based on the Bible
 Exhibit at The First Church        I#*?*'®8’*
 of Christ, Scientist, in
 Boston, Massachusetts.               e>S6S5fP*
                                             V)
    Through 48 pages of breath
 taking color photographs, art
 and time-lines, with fold-out
 maps and two corresponding
 audiocassettes, you can trace
 these “ Journeys of Light,” and
 follow the footsteps of those
 who followed God.

cc
 'A Light Unto
 My Path”
 on audiocassettes w ith
 booklet and maps is
 available for $29.50 at any
 Christian Science Beading
 Boom. O r order direcdy from:
 The Christian Science Publish­
 ing Society, P-135, One Norway
 St., Boston, MA 02115, USA.
    «                    That's how a Sentinel reader
                           pictures its writers and
                         sitting around talkingin my                          o i l c l l . tJ
    they’re Utchen,iSh‘”;'rehere                                             their
T T lP T ln ft  Through the words of these " P p p l l 'n CTQ
1 1 1C11LAO. . . friends .you glimpse the      J -C C llllg O ,
                healing effect of God's care.
                And see how you can prove         .  -          ..
                   it in your experience.     W 1 S C L 0 II1 .




C h r is tia n S c ie n c e S e n tin e l®   p.o. Box 11342, Des Moines, i a 50340- 1342*
Please start my 6-month subscription to the Sentinel.
D    My cheque/money order for $20 is enclosed. D Bill me (N. America only).

Name (Please print)                                     /; :v'.               ■■■■           .
Address                                                             Apt. #

City                      State/Province                  ZIP/Postcode                PHS8F

ordering informatiion.)
* Address is for U ■S. only. In all other countries, retuim coupon to:
                             o r Box 56, Astor Statiori, Boston, MA, U.J3.A. 02123
      rom hand to hand
 The Sentinel is meant to be shared. And these days it’s
going fa r beyond church walls. In a world that is increas­
 ingly hungry for spiritual meaning, the Sentinel is vital
food. Here’s how our readers share it. Each month we’ll
 tell you about what happens when readers either give or
 receive a copy or a subscription. (Let us know your own
experience. We may be able to use it in this space.)
                                      The Editors




                                  iubS?S^lleIld’
                        sbe    °n tei^0icmf vie^ atld
        -The otbf veiY use                  me suck
        Senti nf       n a tfva    sen<iinS _ the




             Ceg°> P^ne-. G°d
        Family: here to stay
To parents who travel constantly in their work, to single
parents, or to those who divorce, the strengths and joys
of family life may seem scarcely more than an old-fashioned
memory. Is the world drifting toward rootless, nonfamily
society?
There’s much help to be found
for any family in the Bible—
and in a book which presents a
deeply practical understanding of family
and marriage based on the teachings of
Christ Jesus. It’s called Science and
Health with Key to the Scriptures by
Mary Baker Eddy. These two
books can give you clear
understandable explanations
about strengthening the
family.
The Bibie and Scicncc and
Health can be purchased in a
variety of bindings from any
Christian Science Reading
Room, Or ordered
directly from:
Publisher’s Agent,
P-135, One Norway
Street, Boston, MA,
U.S.A. 02115.




                        Now available in Black Leathe*»#Si   sfe«.®3?'iaiww

                        and Burgundy Bonded Leather
   Recreation and Leisure Trades Association




RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE
  SPECIFICATION AND USE
            OF
    TIERED TELESCOPIC
           AND
  DEMOUNTABLE SEATING
INTRODUCTION

For some years, there has been a certain amount of confusion rega   g
the specification of Telescopic and Demountable Spectator Seating.
With the absence of any specific recommendations, interpretation of
guide lines were available, has been inconsistent and arbitary.

This document is the result of in-put by ten UK Manufacturers of
Telescopic and Demountable seating, using every available reference
d oc um e nt .
Our obiective is to provide authoratitive recommendations concerning the
“la out'and specification of this type of product and also simp y to get us
 speaking the same "technical language". We manufacturers came toge
 under the auspices of the Recreation and Leisure Trade Association (RALT ),
jl-.he largest capital goods section of the BSAIF. This enabled us Council
l i r e c t l y with many other interested bodies, including the Sports Cou 1 ,
  Institute of Structural Engineers, The Health and Safety Executive and the
 British Standards Institute.

 I would like to thank all contributors and in p a r t i c u l a r , the Secretariat
 at BSAIF for their assistance in producing this booklet.


 John Poyner
 Chairman, Audience Seating Group.
 RALTA.




  Audience Seating Group
  Recreational and Leisure Trade Association
  Prudential House (10th Floor)
  Wellesley Road
  Croydon
  CRO 9HU
   Tel: 01- 681 12^2
                                                  1.


         R E C O M M E N D A T I O N S F OR T HE S P E C I F I C A T I O N A N D U SE OF,

               T I E R E D T E L E S C O P I C AND D E M O U N T A B L E S E A T I N G



1.       DEFINITIONS

1.1     Seatway      (Fig.       1)

The minimum clear space ('seatway') measured at right angles between
perpendiculars from the back of one seat to the front of the seat
immediately behind.

1.2     Row Depth        (Fig.        2)

The distance measured at right angles to a riser to the top of the next
riser.

1.3     Row Rise       (Fig.      2)

The difference in levels between one tread and the next tread either in
front or behind.

1.*t    Aisle/Gangway            (Fig.     3)

The space where people pass from the end of a seat row to an exit door.

1.5     Lateral Aisle/Gangway                   (Fig.   3)

The aisle that runs from the aisle/gangway across the body of the seating,
to the aisle on the opposite side of the body of the seating.

1.6     Half Step        (Fig.        2)

The small step that occurs in the junction of the riser and the tread in
the aisle/gangway
1.7     Guard Rail

Safety rails adjacent to seats fitted to the side of the seating block or
to the front or rear of seating block but not adjacent to an aisle/gangway

1.8     Handrail

Safety'rails fitted adjacent to an aisle/gangway be it at the end of the
seating block or immediately in front or behind an aisle at the front or
rear of the seating block.

1.9     Fixed Telescopic Units

Telescopic units that are fixed to the main fabric of the building in which
:hey are situated.

1.10     Mobile Telescopic Units

Telescopic units that can be positioned in any location within the building
that they are situated.

1.11    Demountable Seating

Tiered seating system designed to be erected and dismantled and deployed, in
various configurations both indoors and outdoors.
FIGURE 1




                      NDIVIDUAL   CHAI RS




                                            CROSS   S E C T I ON S




                  B EN CH     SEATING




           S EATWAY    =    DI MENSI ON X
FIGURE 2




                       RI SER


                       HALF     S TEP


                       TREAD /G O IN G




                                         ROW RISER




           ROW     TREA D / DEPTH




           CROSS     SECTI ON
                                                                                         FIGURE
            REAR   GUARD   RA                                    LATERAL   SLE/GANGWAY




GUARDRAIL                         F RONT   GUARD   RAIL                       HANDRAIL


                                                          AISLE/GANGWAY


                           PLAN    VIEW
                                            6.

2.             LAYOUT

2.1            Seatway Width



      Seatway                          Maximum No. of seats in a row
      Dimension X
      Fig. 1                   Gangway on one side           Gangway on two sides


       300mm                            7                              11*
       325mm                            8                              16
       350mm                            9                              18
       375mm                           10                              20
       ^OOmm                           11                              22
       ^25mm                           12                              Zb
       ^50mm                           12                              26
       V75mm                           12                              28
       500mm                           12                              30

Notes

A)             The maximum number of seats in a row must not exceed 12 and 30
               respectively.

B)         The seatway should be of constant width throughout the length of
            row, where seats tip-up automatically, should be measured between
            the back of one seat unit and the maximum projection of the seat
            unit behind when the seat is in the 'up' position.

2.2        Seat W idths

Where seats are provided with arms, the minimum seat spacing is 500mm.

Note

It is permissible that 1 0 % of the total quantity of seats may be spaced at
^75mm with arms in order to facilitate flexibility in seat layout design.

Where seats are provided without arms, the minimum seat spacing is ^50mm.
                                    7.

2.3     Row Depth

Where seating is arranged in rows, the row-depth allowed for each person
should be 750mm deep where backs are provided to the seats, or 600mm deep
where backs are not provided.

Note

Providing the constraints of the seatway are observed the row depth may be
reduced to 700mm.

2.b     Aisle/Gangways

2.^.1   Minimum aisle width on tiered telescopic and demountable seating
         units should be 1100mm.

2.^.2   An aisle/gangway should be of uniform width throughout its length,
         except that it may be widened iniformly immediately approaching
         the point of dischange into an enclosure exit to a width equal
         to thw width of the exit.

2.^.3   If the seat rows are staggered, the end of the rows should be
         suitably adjusted so as to maintain a clear aisle/gangway
         width without projections or recesses.

2.b.b   For general open floor access to tiered and portable seating    the
         following table can be used.


                            Width of Aisle           No. of People
                                  (mm)                using aisle

                                  1100                   200
                                  1300                   250
                                  1500                   300
                                  1700                   350
                                  1900                   kOO
                                  2100                   *t50
                                  2300                   500
                                  2500                   550
2.5           D i s t a n c e of T r a v e l

Maximum distance of travel from any seat to an exit or agreed place of
safety should comply with those distances stated below.



      Type of Building                         Max. Distance                   Definition
                                                 of Travel


      T raditional Theatre                          18m               Buildings constructed
                                                                      primarily for stage events

      One Court Sports Hall                         2^                A hall that accommodates a
                                                                      single basketball court

      Two Court Sports Hall                         32m               A hall that accommodates two
                                                                      basketball courts

      Arena                                         32m               A hall that accommodates
                                                                      more than two basketball
                                                                      courts

      Out Door Grandstand                           32m               A Grandstand erected in
                                                                      an open area for temporary
                                                                      use where the point of
                                                                      safety is deemed to be the
                                                                      exit from the stand.

2.6           Lateral Aisle/Gangwyas

A lateral aisle/gangway where used should not be less than 1100mm wide

2.7           N u m b e r of S t e p s in A i s l e / G a n g w a y

Because of the nature of the construction of telescopic and demountable
seating steps in an Aisle/Gangway should not be classified as a staircase
as defined in Part H of the Building Reglations
                                                     9.

For telescopic seating which is considered to be permanent or a semi
permanent fixture within a building the maximum number of steps in one
aisle/gangway is *t0 after which a landing should be provided.

The landing should be square the dimensions of which should be 'the width
of the aisle/gangway by the width of the aisle/gangway' e.g. 1100mm x
1100mm minimum.

For demountable seating deamed to be of a temporary nature, the maximum
number of steps in one aisle/gangway should be agreed with the local
licencing authority

2.8      D i m e n s i o n s of H a l f s t e p p i n g s

In stepped tiers the maximum height of each step in a gangway should not
exceed 190mm. Where there are two or more risers to each row of seats each
step should be of equal height. The minimum height of a step should
preferably be not less than 125mm. Minimum depth/going of a half-step
should not be less than 280mm

2.9      E x i t s a d j a c e n t to a i s l e w a y s or l a t e r a l a i s l e w a y s ( g a n g w a y s )

There should be a landing or clear space at least 1100mm x 1100mm
immediately in front of the exit doors. Particular attention should be
given to the siting of exit doors in the side walls or tiers when these are
approached by stepped gangways to allow sufficient space for the landing
and to avoid the need for splayed or tapered steps.
                                                 10.


3.       STRUCTURE

3.1      L o a d i n g of T e l e s c o p i c or D e m o u n t a b l e U n i t

A telescopic unit apart from being self supporting must be able to support
a live load of ^ .O KN / m 4 and a horizontal load equivalent to 5% of the live
load.

N o t e - Loadings applicable only when units are open or deployed.

3.2      Locking System (Telescopic systems)

Arrangements should be made to ensure, by locking devices or other suitable
means, that each stepped platform in a telescopic unit is rigid in the
fully extended position and cannot retract.

3-3      Seating Capacity

A clearly visible label should be applied to each unit stating the maximum
number of seating positions that the unit is designed to accommodate.

3.1*     Fire Retardancy

All surfaces of fascia panels, side panels and back panels should comply
with Class 1 surface spread of flame. BS ^76 Part 7

3.5      S af et y Rails

3.5.1    General

All safety rails should be constructed so that a 100mm diameter sphere
cannot pass through the body of the handrail.

Safety rails are to protect the entire unit except where aisles occur.
Safety rails for the purpose of this document are categorised as guard
rails or hand rails as previously defined.
                                     11.

 3-5.2   Guard Rails

Where a seat is next to the edge of a Seating unit, a guard rail should be
provided. The guard rail is to be a minimum of 900mm high. The rail
should be able to support a horizontal load, applied at the top of the
rail, of 0.75KN/m run. The loading should only be applied where access
to the guard rail is possible, (seatway dimension)

3.5*3    Handrails

Where an aisle is next to the edge of atelescopic or demountable unit, a
handrail should be provided. The handrail is to be 900mm high minimum,
this dimension being taken vertically from the junction of the riser and
tread.

The rail loading should be 1.5KN/m run.

3.5.^      Rear Safety Rails

Rear rails are to be a minimum of 1100mm high. Where a rear rail is
immediately behind a row of seats, the rail should be able to support a
horizontal load, applied at the top of the rail, of 0.75KN/m run.

Where a rear rails is adjacent to an aisle/gangway, the rail should be able
to support a horizontal load, applied at the top of the rail, of 1.5KN/m
run.

3.5.5    Front Saf et y Rails

Front rails are to be provided to all Seating units except in the following
cases:

a)        Where a bench seat is provided to the first riser.

b)        Where a row of seats is positioned immediately in front of the
         first riser.

Where front rails are positioned in front of a row of seats, the minimum
height of the rail can be 800mm in order to facilitate sight lines. Such
rails should be able to support a horizontal load, applied at the top of
the rail of 0.75KN/m run.
Where front rails are positioned at the bottom of an aisle, the minimum
height of the rail should be 1100mm. Such rails should be able to support
a horizontal load, applied at the top of the rail of 1.5KN/m run.

3.5.6   All seat and aisleway risers should be constructed such that a
         100mm diameter sphere cannot pass through.


it.0    MOBILE TELESCOPIC    UNITS

The height to width ratio of mobile telescopic units when the units are
closed should not exceed 3-5:1, in cross section, to ensure stability.

5.0     AISLE/GANGWAY LIGHTING

         Where aisle/gangway lighting is required or specified it should
         comply with relevant I.E.E. electrical standards/specifications.


6.0     SEATING                  13-

6.1     Tiered Seating

All seating that is provided to tiering is to be fixed to the tiering,
except that only the end seats of such rows need to be fixed to the floor
if all seats in each row are secured together.

All fixed seating is to comply with the previously stated layout
recommendations wherever possible.

6.2     Portable Chairs

Temporary provisions for a closely seated audience should comply with the
previously stated layout recommendations wherever possible.

All chairs or other single seats (except chairs in boxes or other similar
enclosures) should be secured together in lengths of not fewer than four
seats. If seating for more than 100 persons is required, the provision
should be made for fixing to the floor the rows of seating flanking the
front, the back and the cross gangways and the seats near exits, except
that only the end seats of such rows need be fixed to the floor if all
seats in each row are secured together.
Note

Where the fixing of seating to the floor is impracticable or undesirable
(eg. on polished dance floors) the use of floor bars instead of floor
screws may be permitted. Such floor bars should have a cambered top
surface so as to avoid the risk of tripping by persons using the seatways.

If seating is provided upon rostra or other removable or demountable units,
these should be of rigid construction, and suitable means should be made
for interlocking adjacent rostra in position. Any castors fitted to rostra
should be fully retracted.




                                       n.

7.          Flame Retardancy

7.1         All upholstered seating is to comply with BS 5852 Part 2, 1982
             Ignition Source 5 in respect of flame retardance.

8 .° S I T I N G

Before erecting any stand, whether indoors or outdoors, a thorough
inspection of the site should be made to ensure that the layout takes into
account all the necessary information concerning levels, ground conditions.
Loadings will normally be supplied by the manufacturer ir installer.

On outdoor layouts, allowance should be made for possible overhead power
lines or areas that could suffer from wind funnelling.

All supporting structures outdoors, should be located on suitable base
pads of sufficient dimension to support the point loads, taking into
account the possibility of weather conditions changing the state of the
ground between erection and use.
9.0     U SE

The end user should arrange that all temporary stands are suitably
marshalled and ensure that the maximum capacity of the stands are not
exceeded. Before and during use stands should be kept clear of debris and
accumulated rubbish both on and beneath them.

Where applicable a method of barriers should be installed to prevent
unlawful access to the underside of stands before and during events.

If seat risers are not completely infilled then any public access under the
stands should have overhead protection capable of withstanding debris or
rubbish falling on it.

10.     E R E C T I O N AND D I S M A N T L I N G

'he end user should ensure that the erection and dismantling of seating
structures is carried out by competent installers, experienced, trained
and under proper supervision. Proper layout drawings should be available
and used on all installations however small.




      REFERENCES




1.     Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds by
       Rt Hon Lord Wheatley
       (Published by Home office, Scottish Home & Health Department)
2.   Fire Safety and Safety of Place of Sport Act 1987
     (published by her M a j e s t y ’s Stationery Office ISBN 0 10
      5^2787 X)

3-   Design Loading for Buildings Part 1 - BS 6 3 9 9: Part 1:198^
     (British Standards Institution)

it. Protective Barriers in and about Buildings - BS 6180: 1982
    (British Standards Institution)

5.   Fire Tests for Furniture - BS 5852: part 1:1982
     (British Standards Institution)

6.   Fire Tests for Furniture - BS 5852: part 2:1982
     (British Standards Institution)

7.   Second Draft BS 5588 Code of Practice for Fire Precautions in
     the Design of Buildings - Part 6 Places of Assembly
     (published in 1978)
     (British Standards Institution)


8.   Safety Considerations for The Design and Erection of Demountabl
     Grandstands.
     (The Institution of Structural Engineers)

9.   Code of Practice : Means of Escape in Case of Fire
     (published by the Greater London Council)

10. Places of Public Entertainment Technical Regulations
    (published by the Greater London Council).

11. Guide to Safety in Sports Grounds
    (published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office)

12. Code of Practice for access and Working Scaffold and
    Special Scaffold Structures in Steel. BS 5973 1981
    (British Standards Institution)

13. BS ^76 Part 7

1*t. Building Regulations.
