                                                    dfr (j'dtW
NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM 149 QUEEN ANNE'S GATE ON THURSDAY
30 NOVEMBER AT 11.30am


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor     Various journalists
           Mr Whalley
           Mr Sweet
           Mr Willis


1.   Lord Justice Taylor stressed that this was not a press
conference and that he was still gathering evidence and had not
formed final views. He expected to complete his report in
January. The purpose of the meeting was to hear views on a range
of issues.


All-Seater Stadia


2.   Jeff Powell from the Daily Mail said he thought spectators
were not only less likely to riot from seats but were more open
to detection. He said standing at any event was hazardous
whatever the density.


3.   Martin Thorpe from the Guardian said he thought people liked
to stand and that they would lose people to the game if grounds
could not expand.   David Lacey from the Guardian said that all-
seater stadia could not be looked at in isolation since egress
and ingress could lead to panic.   David Miller of the Times
pointed out that at Celtic Park 50,000 of the 60,000 crowd stand
and that some of the ambience was lost with all-seater since
football was, after all, a contact sport.


4.   Bob Harris of Today pointed out that seating could provide
weapons as at the Luton v Mi11wall game, but it was argued that
this could be remedied by indestructible seating.   Jeff Powell
said he felt it was a matter of education and that people had
become used to primitive conditions because not enough money had
been invested.


5.   Chris Lightbown from the Sunday Times said that Rangers had
educated their public and that just over 10% of the ground
capacity was not seated. Jeff Powell pointed out that Italy
would be all-seater for the World Cup and UEFA were bringing in
regulations in 1993 that clubs in the European circuit should be
all-seater.


6.   Patrick Barclay of the Independent said that the question of
the number of turnstiles was the single most lethal factor at
Hillsborough and he felt it should be stipulated that the number
of turnstiles be at least doubled or trebled.

Fencing


7.   Bob Harris of Today said he felt if fencing was to be kept,
the different types should all be brought in line, but his view
was that moats would be more useful as in South America, Spain,
Sardinia. It was said that it was impossible to regulate grounds
because each was subject to the safety control of each local
authority and decisions varied from council to council. Brian
Butler of BBC Radio said uniformity was the key in that if a
particular type of gate was recommended after testing, it would
be financially beneficial to bulk buy.


8.   Christopher Davies from the Daily Telegraph said the fences
were put up in the 1970s because of the hooligans but now
hooliganism has been controlled in grounds. Lord Justice Taylor
asked if there had been a recent improvement and it was generally
felt that there had been.    Brian Moore from ITV said he felt
hooliganism had been transferred to the streets.


9.   Lord Justice Taylor asked if it was thought that the
Government scheme would more closely monitor the crowds and
thereby reduce the need for fences.    Brian Moore said it may well
resolve the problem.     Lord Justice Taylor then asked if
psychologically the intimidation caused by fencing was in itself
a contributory factor to bad behaviour.    The view taken was that
Old Trafford had the best fences where the gaps were controlled
by a single policeman.


10. Lord Justice Taylor asked if there was room for a moat in
most grounds in this country and it was generally felt that this
would only cost the clubs a row of seats. Bill Hamilton from the
BBC remarked that people would travel by car to the outskirts of
cities if good purpose-built stadia were introduced.

New Stadia


11. Lord Justice Taylor pointed out the problems of financing,
planning and persuading people to share and move. Chris
Lightbown said that the Football League had been told by the
Government that green field sites were environmentally not a
possibility.


12.   Jonathan Foster from the Independent said that the
difference in treatment of home and away fans contributed to the
adversarial situation and that the facilities available to away
supporters should be the same as for the home. Children should
not have to pay as adults and away supporters should not be put
in the most derelict part of the ground.

Awav Supporters


13.   Lord Justice Taylor asked if following the example of Luton,
there was any argument in extending the ban on away supporters
nationally.   David Lacey said that Luton was a peculiar situation
in that the residents suffered due to rioting and they found it
was costing more to police the terraces than they were receiving
in gate receipts.   However, it was not necessarily right for the
rest of the country and could be viewed as unethical.


14. It was said that the concept of the travelling away
supporter started in the last 25 years but that the long term
problem was "who is football played for?" A small number of
players, football clubs, TV and advertising do very well from
football and yet the fans no longer feel safe in going to
matches.


15.   It was also pointed out that it was very difficult to define
an away supporter. Sheila Gunn of the Times said she couldn't
see a way of banning away supporters and the only way of doing so
was the membership scheme.


16. Jeff Powell from the Daily Mail said football was fortunate
that the Government were going for a national membership scheme
rather than home registered supporters associations.


17. Lord Justice Taylor asked what they thought of the
suggestion of allocating tickets to away teams through away club.
It was said that this was too restrictive and would stop real
fans going. However, Manchester United was much Improved by
ticketing arrangements.


18.   Lord Justice Taylor asked why only football was afflicted?
It was suggested that there was a qualitative difference in the
crowd and it was not necessary to have an adversarial audience.
Also the chief objective of the hooligan element was to gain
notoriety by attaching themselves to football which had a higher
profile than rugby.


Government Scheme


19. Sheila Gunn from the Times said the aim was to stop
hooligans going to matches but that the scheme was full of holes
and there was a danger of transferring violence to outside the
matches.   Mr Lacey from the Guardian said it was irrelevant to
hooliganism and would drive away the people they want to attract.
He suggested that grounds could be shut if there was a long
record of misbehaviour. However, Mr Miller from the Times said
this would give power to the hooligans to close grounds. The
membership scheme might take time but he believed it would make
it easier for people who want to go.


20.   Stuart Jones of the Times said 6 million would be
inconvenienced when they could spend the money on punishing those
who misbehave. It was mentioned that it would be difficult to
identify a football related offence - at what point does one
become a football supporter? However Jeff Powell from the Daily
Mail said if the hooligan was persistently discouraged to travel,
the scheme would work and cause little inconvenience.
21. In all there was no consensus of opinion and views were
expressed both for and against the system.
