       SEC Rgr
       W         cc WVtss NctWeVso^v.                                                       ^
                    WV     CVsilco* •                           QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9
                    W r * & c^S>          S rv O L V W .

                    ty r    T v c r r v ftA A   •

                     ITir- ft«idu.&oYv                                     2 October 1989
                    W r    • fe o t V 'o r v        •

                     tVkr • W\ov4*r-
                     rOr-
                     WV-

                     tyr - L»                       ►fftv

             iLe ^-v v        D cw v                    TVrlUoV /
          Thank you for your letter of 20 September about the costs of the
^pinquiries by the West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium tragedy.

           When I said earlier in the year that the additional costs of these
   inquiries should not fall on the West Midlands police authority, I added that
   it would take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the West
   Midlands police should be reimbursed.

           Following meetings with representatives of both police authorities
   concerned - West Midlands and South Yorkshire - Lord Ferrers informed the
   South Yorkshire police authority in June that, in view of the exceptional and
   unforeseen circumstances of the Hillsborough tragedy, the Government was
   prepared to give South Yorkshire a special payment from central funds to help
   them with the additional costs of the work carried out on their behalf by the
   West Midlands police.     Following this offer of special help, the South
   Yorkshire police authority sought clarification from us about the scope of our
   assistance. This has been given and was followed by a meeting between Home
   Office officials and representatives of both authorities on 14 September.

           I am pleased to say that after that meeting the Clerk to the South
   Yorkshire Police Authority wrote confirming that his authority was prepared
   to accept our offer of special assistance, and arrangements are being made to
   put this in hand speedily. The West Midlands police authority can, therefore,
   now look to South Yorkshire for reimbursement of their additional costs in the
   near future.




   Dave Nellist, Esq., MP.
   House of Commons
   LONDON SW1A OAA


                                                                                                  J
