      PUBLIC               INQUIRY
                    Into


THE   HILLSBOROUGH                 DISASTER




                   Before


             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

                     and

               MR. B. JOHNSON
  (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                     and

              PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                 ( ASSESSORS)



                     At

               The Town Hall.

                 Sheffield,

                     On

          Friday, 28th April,   1989.




      TRANSCRIPT OF PRELIMINARY MEETING




   From the Notes of J.L. Harpham-, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    As the whole nation knows, there was
on the 15th April a horrendous disaster at Hillsborough Football
Stadium in this city.  Ninety five people lost their lives and
many were injured.  I have been appointed by the Home Secretary
to hold an Inquiry into the disaster.

     I wish first to express my deepest sympathy to the bereaved
and injured.  In saying that I am sure that I also speak for
everyone associated with this Inquiry.

     My terms of reference are as follows: to inquire into the
events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on the 15th April.
1989, and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd
control and safety at sports grounds.

     Although I alone am responsible for the conduct of the
Inquiry, for making recommendations and preparing the report, I
shall have the welcome assistance of two Assessors.   Sitting on
my left is Mr. Brian Johnson, the Chief Constable of Lancashire.
On my ri'ght is Prof. Leonard Maunder, Professor of Mechanical
Engineering at the University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.   I am very
grateful to them for agreeing to assist me with their expert
knowledge and experience.

     Today's proceedings are by way of Preliminary Hearing.   The
objects are to indicate the nature of the Inquiry and the
procedures I propose to follow.  As already announced. I will
also consider applications from parties wishing to be
represented.

     First, as to the character of the Inquiry. It     is not a law
suit in which one party wins and another loses.   It   is not akin
to the legal process of a criminal or a civil court.    No-one is
on trial or being sued here.   This is an Inquiry to discover
first what happened, secondly why it happened, and thirdly, what
lessons can be learned and recommendations made.    If criticisms
are levelled at organisations or individuals which are relevant
to these issues, I shall of course consider them and make anv
necessary finding, but it is not the purpose of the Inquiry to
apportion blame.  I hope, therefore, that everyone concerned,
both at the Inquiry and outside it, will play their parts
responsibly and without rancour.   I want to find the facts and
learn from them.  I want to do it with all possible speed.     It
would be a further tragedy if that constructive purpose were to
be prejudiced by emotive accusations and counter accusations.

     Secondly, the scope and length of the Inquiry:    Because of
the numbers at the ground and the intense public reaction, the
number of potential witnesses runs into thousands.    The West
Midlands Police, who are through their Chief Constable, Mr.
Deere, directly responsible to me for conducting the
investigation, have launched a massive exercise to gather the
evidence.   There has also been a spontaneous response from the ..
public.   I have already read hundreds .of letters.' It is vital'
that all relevant evidence should be made available, but it is
equally important that this Inquiry should be conducted as
                                               2


                     speedily as possible consistent with thoroughness, so that
                     recommendations can be made and action taken promptly to avoid
                     danger in the future.

                          Accordingly, the oral evidence before the Inquiry must be
                     kept within bounds.  There will be many, many witnesses who will
                     not be called because their account does not add to evidence
                     already given.  Those not called should not feel aggrieved.
                 B   Their statements will have been considered and their points
                     noted.

                           The task of preparing and presenting the evidence will be
                     undertaken by the three Counsel to the Inquiry who have already
                     been appointed.   They are Mr. Andrew Collins, Q u e e n ’s Counsel.
                     ^ r. Alan Goldsack and Mr. Bernard Philips.  They are instructed
                     by the Treasury Solicitor, and their role will be one of strict
                     impartiality. All witnesses who give oral evidence are to be
                     regarded as called on my behalf in order to elicit the facts, and
                     not as called by any particular party.   Although for the most
                     part Counsel to the Inquiry will call and examine the witnesses,
                     where a witness is represented he may be called by his own
                     advisors. No witness shall be called to give evidence unless he
                     or she has first given a written statement.   Once a witness has.
                     been examined there will be an opportunity for cross-examination,
                 D   but I should make clear that cross-examination will be subject to
                     such limits as I think it necessary to impose.

                          If and when any allegation is made against a person or body,
                     that person or body should be informed of the allegation.  The
                     substance of the evidence supporting it will be given so that the
                     person or body can deal with it by cross-examination or by
                     evidence.  Accordingly, Counsel to the Inquiry will see that this
                     procedure is carried o u t .

                          The oral hearing will begin here at 10.30 on the morning of
                     Monday, 15th May.

                           The first phase of the Inquiry will concentrate on what
                     lappened on the 15th April and why.   That part of the Inquiry
                     will be held in public unless for any reason, which I do not at
                     present foresee, it should become necessary to depart from that
                     cou rs e.

                          The second phase of the Inquiry will relate to the
                     considerations bearing upon recommendations for the future.  I
                     shall give directions later as to how that part of the Inquiry
                     will be conducted.  I appreciate that there will inevitably be
                     some overlap of evidence bearing upon the two phases.

                          I shall be glad to receive as soon as possible any written
                     submissions from any source concerning recommendations for crowd
                     control and safety at sports grounds.

                          A word to the press:    I recognise the legitimate interest
                     the press have on behalf of the public to report what takes place
                 H   at the Inqu i ry . It is my intention and desire to give every
                     assistance that can properly be given to aid them in that


l. Harpham Ltd
                                                 3


                        function.  To that end I propose, save in exceptional
                        circumstances, copies of statements made by a witness will be
                        available to the press as the witness is called to testify.
                        However, there must be rules, some of which I can impose and some
                        which I shall have to trust to the press to impose on themselves
                        at my request.  There will be no television filming or
                        photography of any kind in this building during the Inquiry.
                        There will be likewise no sound recording of the proceedings.
                        These rules I can and will enforce.  However, I request the press
                    B   not to interview any witness before that witness has completed
                        evidence to the Inquiry.  I believe if that request is not heeded
                        it may have an adverse effect on the difficult task I have to
                        carry out.

                             I turn now to representation.   It is entirely within my
                        discretion as to which bodies or persons are allowed to be
                        represented at the oral hearing.   Since this is not litigation
                        there are strictly speaking no parties.   However, it is right
                        that certain persons or bodies should be allowed to be
                        represented so that they may be able to cross-examine witnesses,
                        lead evidence themselves and make submissions.    I would expect
                        representation to be by lawyers, although I would consider
                        other forms of representation where appropriate.    A person or
                        body wishing to be represented must show good cause.    I must
                    D   be satisfied that a person or body has a reasonably direct
                        interest in some aspect of the Inquiry which as a matter of
                        fairness requires protection by such representation.    If a
                        number of persons have such an interest but for present
                        purposes there is no discernible difference between their
                        interests, I would not be disposed to grant separate
                        representation.  The correct course would be for them to be
                        jointly represented by one advocate or team.

                             Any decision I make today about representation will not be
                        final.  I will be prepared to entertain an application for
                        representation at any time.  It may be that a party will only
                        wish to be represented at a later stage of the Inquiry.  It may
                        be that some parties are undecided whether they wish to be
                        represented or not.  They may await to see what emerges.   I will
                        deal with later applications in the light of circumstances as
                        they develop.

                             I should stress that if a person does not wish to be
                        represented but merely wishes to make his evidence available to
                        the Inquiry, the correct course is for him to submit a statement
                        or offer to make one in written form as soon as possible.  I
                        emphasise that during the first phase of the Inquiry what is
                        required is factual evidence as opposed to mere comment or non­
                        expert opinion.

                             A word about costs:  There are no statutory provisions
                        governing this Inquiry, but the Secretary of State is able to
                        meet the costs incurred by any person for the purposes of the
                        Inquiry.  He will look to me to assess costs and to make
                        recommendations to him.  I propose at the end of the Inquiry to
                H       consider what recommendations to make.  When I do recommend
                        payment it will be on a common fund basis, that is a reasonable


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  A


                        amount in respect of all cos t s.

                             It may be helpful if I say now that I intend to make a
                        recommendation in respect of the reasonable taxed costs of any
                        party who I consider would be prejudiced in seeking
                        representation now were he in doubt as to funds becoming
                        available.  For example. I shall certainly recommend that the
                        costs of the injured and bereaved being represented here should
                    B   be borne out of public f u n d s . I am also very anxious that the
                        evidence and views of football supporters in general and
                        Liverpool supporters in particular should be heard and
                        considered.  The Liverpool supporters clearly have an interest in
                        the first phase of the Inquiry.      I shall therefore be receptive
                        to any application which may be made for them to be represented,
                        and I shall also recommend that their costs be met from public
                        funds.  So far as the supporters up and down the country in
                        general are concerned, their interest will primarily be in the
                        second phase, and it may well be that what they wish to present
                        to the Inquiry could be done in written form, but I will consider
                        that later.

                             With those preliminary remarks I am now prepared to hear any
                        applications which anyone wishes to make for representation.     I
                        did, through my Secretary, invite anyone who wished to apply
                    D   today to notify the Secretary in advance, and some parties have
                        already done that.     I would therefore ask certain parties who
                        have indicated their names to make their applications in
                        turn. I d o n ’t know necessarily who all of you will be, but I
                        will start by referring to some who I do know about.

                             I would like to hear first anyone who is appearing on behalf
                        of injured or bereaved.

                             MR. KING:   Sir, my name is King of counsel.  I am
                        instructed by a consortium of solicitors from both within and
                        without the City of Liverpool. who have come together to provide
                        combined representation for the bereaved and the injured.  They
                        have had a preliminary meeting, and they call themselves the
                        Hillsborough Group of Solicitors, and through that agency there
                        are now some 74 firms representing over 200, either bereaved or
                        injured.  Indeed, if anybody who is interested in contacting that
                        group, they can do so through the Liverpool Law Society.  It is
                        anticipated there will be more additions, and the aim is to have
                        combined representation, obviously for saving of costs.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I say I am very grateful that
                        obviously sensible co-operation has taken place already, and that
                        what I was going to suggest in any event has taken place, namely
                        that the injured and bereaved should be represented by one team
                        at this Inquiry.  Apart from yourself, Mr. King, is there anybody
                        else here who is appearing or wants to appear on behalf of any of
                        the injured or bereaved?

                             MR. COOMBES:   Sir, I appear on behalf of one deceased
                        family who are not yet represented in the -consortium, and could
                H       consideration be given to that.  At this stage my instructions
                        are confined to deceased and injured who are not yet members of


J. L. Harpham Ltd
the consortium.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Well, Mr. C o o mb es , I hope it will be
possible that the interests you represent can be combined with
those already referred to by Mr. King, because I would propose in
this Inquiry, as has been done in other Inquiries, there is only
one team f.or the injured a n d 'bereaved. and that accords with your
intentions, does it?

     MR. COOMBES:   Subject to the availability of the right
counsel, sir.  I think that might well be the sensible wav
forward.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.  I hope that can
be achieved.  I formally therefore grant representation to the
injured and bereaved for one team of representatives.

     MR. KING:    I am obliged.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And I have already indicated as far
as recommendation on costs is concerned what I shall be saying.

     MR. KING:    I am grateful.

     MR. M A K I N :   Sir, my name is Makin. I represent at the
moment, and unfortunately the numbers are growing, seven deceased
and 50 others.       I think my figures....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     When you say 50 others, 50 injured?

      MR. MAKIN:   Fifty injured.    Unfortunately, I think my
 figures are contained in Mr. King's total of 200, because we were
represented at the meeting.   I am a little diffident at saying
anything, but I am not entirely happy, and I say that with great
diffidence, about what took place at the meeting when certain
decisions were taken.   My Lord, you will appreciate one does not
want to expand on that at the m o m e n t . M r . King is a very good
friend of mine, very busy counsel indeed, and instructed by me
on numerous occasions, and this is going to be a lengthy
Inquiry.   So I am a little diffident that one team should
represent all the injured and bereaved when, as I say, my Lord, I
represent so many interests already and I am continuing to have
my numbers added to.   I did send a list in of specific names, and
as I- left today I understand four appointments have been made for
me for this afternoon.   So I am a little diffident to be included
;-n that team there-which already includes my number.        I know it
is difficult for you, my Lord, to say there should be two lots or
more than one lot, but there may be difficulties if only one team
represents or one advocate represents,

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Well, Mr, Makin, you may be
d ^ff4d e n t * 1 do not at Present see there should be any
difficulty about this, and at the present time I am not going to
enlarge on what I have already said.          If for good reason it
appears later that there is some ground for granting different
representation I will hear what is s a i d , but it would have to be
something quite extraordinary.       I d o n ’t envisage that will
                                                      6

                        happen.

                             MR. MAKIN:   I understand you, my Lord, and having said what
                        I said I have made the point clear at an earlier stage.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.  Yes, now does
                        anybody here represent the Liverpool football supporters?

                             MR. JACKSON:   Sir, Jackson of counsel.  I am instructed by
                    B   the Football Supporters' Association.  Written representation to
                        the Tribunal has already been made by my instructing solicitors.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Indicating that you are going to
                        apply today?

                             MR. JACKSON:   Yes, setting out the reasons why in my
                        submission it is essential that the football supporters are
                        represented separately.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           I have not actually seen that, but I
                        am willing to look at it.         (Document produced) I have run my eye
                        over i t .

                             MR. JACKSON:   My Lord, in essence I represent an
                    D   Association formed ironically and tragically after the Heysel
                        incident, who have for the last three years in the corridors of
                        power sought to conduct proper discussions about the very matters
                        which are the matters to be discussed in this Inquiry.  In my
                        submission, if it were thought proper for the supporters not to
                        be separately represented, we would once again confirm the view
                        of the vast millions who support football that all the decisions
                        are made in what I can say in the power houses that sit alongside
                        me, the Football Association and the like.  I simply say this,
                        that it would be impossible to properly, and of course I don't
                        use the word "fairly", properly to encompass all the problems in
                        this Inquiry without having a separate voice for the consumer.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Jackson, it may have appeared
                        from what I have already said that I already had formed that
                        view.   My only concern is that we have got the right organisation
                        to present that view.

                             M R . JACKSON   j   May I indicate,   my Lord, as follows

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   There is the Liverpool Supporters'
                        Association, as I understand it. and there is also a Merseyside
                        Supporters' Association, is there not?

                             MR. JACKSON:   There are hundreds of supporters' clubs
                        throughout this country whose main aim is to support their
                        particular club.  The Football Suppor te rs ’ Association goes above
                        and beyond that.  It has been concerned with the matters this
                        Inquiry is concerned with of ground safety and crowd control.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, I am not entirely clear
                H       at the moment.
                        is what?
                                        The organisation for whom you make application



J. L. Harpham Ltd
      MR. JACKSON:     The Football Supporters' Association.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Nationally?    Ah.

     MR. JACKSON:   Yes, but ironically the strength of the
association is in Liverpool, born out of the H e y s e J .tragedy,•and
we are therefore able, through" the bulk of'our members, to
present as is indicated in the letter to the Tribunal, as much
first hand information as to the movements of the Liverpool
supporters from Liverpool to Sheffield a week last Saturday as
would be required.  Much more and more appropriate, in addition
the same people are involved in the national problem of ticket
allocation, crowd control and the like.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   As I have sought very, very generally
to indicate in my opening remarks, there are in effect two phases
here.   I am very concerned in the first phase to find out what
actually happened at Hillsborough, and of course Liverpool
supporters have the most central part in helping on that.   But
then one has to look at the rival arguments of what should be
done about football grounds in the future, and in that as I
envisaged it the whole nation and all its football supporters
will also have a special interest.   I am just wondering whether
there ought to be representation, at any rate at the first part
of the hearing, more particularly of Liverpool supporters, and
that submissions about the second part of the Inquiry, which
would be primarily, I hope, in writing, because we are talking
about sensible ideas for the future and considering what ought to
be done, that that might be done separately.

     MR. JACKSON:   If I may indicate the position at the moment.
It is, I hope, accepted by all that one of the advocates on
behalf of the Supporters’ Association, Mr. Taylor, is accepted by
the media, the Football Association and the like, as probably the
leading voice on behalf of supporters generally.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Well,   I heard it.

     MR. JACKSON:   And even more importantly, on behalf of
Merseyside supporters in particular.  Indeed, already my
instructing solicitors have found it necessary to say there may
well be a conflict of interest between the families and bereaved
and the supporters, and to such an extent have declined to take
instructions from families of bereaved because they represent the
rest of the supporters.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Don't worry.  I recognise there is a
separate interest which must be represented, and I just want to
be quite sure we are getting the right body represented.            You are
for the Football Supporters’ Association.         What I want to be
satisfied about is that although that is a nation-wide
organisation that giving representation to that organisation will
properly cater for the views and needs of the Liverpool
supporters as well as the broader picture-         What I d o n ’t want to
do is to have the na t i o n a l .Football Supporters Association
represented and then having an application from Liverpool
                                                        8


                        supporters saying they want to be separately represented.

                             MR. JACKSON:   My Lord, I anticipate no such difficulty,
                        because I am personally acquainted with the relationship between
                        my clients and the Liverpool supporters.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well, then, I am content with
                        that, and the Football Supporters’ Association will be
                    B   represented.  What I would like you to do, and in this no doubt
                        you will consult closely with Counsel to the Inquiry, is to work
                        out what part you want to play in the first phase, and not deluge
                        the first phase of the Inquiry with a great deal that would be
                        more appropriate to the second phase, if you follow what I mean.

                             MR. JACKSON:   Can I confirm already my instructing
                        solicitors and I have been concerned to make sure we only appear
                        here as and when essential for the purposes of the Inquirv.
                        /

                        f    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have also noted, because I had not
                        seen it before, what you say in here about costs, and I have
                        already indicated my view about that, that I would in all
                        probability recommend - in fact I will recommend - that the
                        Football Supporters' Association's costs be borne out of public
                        funds.

                             There is one further thing I should say about
                        recommendations for costs, and it is this.  Should I consider
                        that the person representing any party has wasted the time of the
                        Inquiry - I am not using you particularly to say this, Mr.
                        Jackson, but I want it to be generally understood - should I
                        consider any person representing a party concerned has wasted the
                        time of the Inquiry that would be reflected in any recommendation
                        as to costs that I might make, and I would expect and hope to be
                        able to give a warning if and when I consider that point is being
                        reached, if it is, and I will not make any adverse recommendation
                        without giving the party concerned an opportunity to make
                        representations to me.

                             M R . J A C KS ON :   On behalf of us all I am grateful for those
                        observations.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.  Now, there is also an
                        application, I think, on behalf of the Sun Alliance Insurance
                        Group regarding the Football League and Sheffield Wednesday
                         ootball Club.

                             MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, my name is Edwin Glasgow.  I am
                        instructed by Davies Arnold Cooper to represent the club and its
                        insurers, making it absolutely plain our object and my
                        instructions are to provide such assistance you may need, simply
                        in order to provide our officers and staff to give any assistance
                        which may be of help to this Inquiry.  That is the spirit in
                        which we respectfully apply for leave to be represented.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Y e s , but I want to be clear about
                H       this.   Via the insurance company and including also the
                        Football League, you would represent Sheffield Wednesday


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       9

                        Football Club?

                             MR. GLASGOW:   I would, sir, and our representation at this
                        stage of the Inquiry would be limited to that club.  If at a
                        later stage it was thought helpful to make representations to you
                        on behalf of the League as a whole I apprehend we would think it
                        right to do that in writing at a later stage, but I would not
                        suggest it was remotely helpful to represent any wider interests
                    B   than the club itself in the first phase of the Inquiry before
                        you.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   There   is as far as you know, and
                        anybody can get up in response tothis if    they wish, there is no
                        application for any other representation in regard to the
                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club or any of its members of
                        component parts?

                             MR. GLASGOW:   I believe not. sir.  Certainly nobody has
                        told us of any, and we would be surprised.  Of course, that is a
                        matter in your hands and not o u r s .

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I have a note here that somebody
                        wishes to represent the stewards.   I will come back to you, Mr.
                        G lasgow.
                    D
                             M R . PURC H AS :   That is the stewards at Sheffield Wednesday
                        Football Club.

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       What is their relationship to the
                        club?

                                MR. PURCHAS:     They are casual employees of the club.

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       They are employees?

                             MR. PURCHAS:   They are casually employed.  My name is
                        Purchas. I am addressing you with regard to the stewards, the
                        turnstile men and the gatemen.  They are all distinct functions.
                        These are all casual employees of the club.  Since the tragedy,
                        my Lord, there have been attempts to group the stewards so that
                        they can discuss between themselves what has happe ne d , and the
                        club has made very little attempt, I am instructed, to contact
                        the stewards, and certainly my instructions are critical of the
                        club with regard to that and with regard to several other
                        matters.  Principally, my Lord, their point of view is that their
                        interests are distinct from those of the club.  They have'come in
                        for individual criticism.

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;       Have they?

                             MR. PURCHAS:   That is my instruction, my Lord, and
                        certainly on the day they were in the front line facing physical
                        and verbal abuse, and inevitably being blamed for what had
                        happened.  My Lord, they are anxious they should be separately
                        represented because they feel their interests do conflict with
                H       those of the club in some of the things they will say.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Do or may?

     MR. PURCHAS:     That they do.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     In what way?

     MR. PURCHAS:     They are critical of the lack of consultation
by the club.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Afterwards?

         MR. P U R C HA S: Before, my Lord. Although obviously at this
stage, my Lord, I would not wish to go into a great deal of
d e t a i l , they feel there has been a lack of consultation and
communication between themselves as a group and the club,
principally.

     LORE) JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It does not necessarily follow that
if some employees of a body are not in agreement with the
management that that necessarily, as far as the purposes of this
Inquiry are concerned, merits separate representation.

     MR. PURCHAS:   My Lord, I appreciate that point.   They are
surprised that they have not been contacted by the club within
the last 14 days or 13 days since the tragedy.   There have been
instructions for them not to speak to the press.   That is not
surprising, my Lord, but as far as actually approaching them and
gathering their evidence, as I say, they were on the front line
on that day, and there is obviously the issue, there are central
points about how the tragedy unfolded relating to the opening of
gates of which we have heard.  Some of those workers were there
and obviously their evidence is welcome.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.  I will hear what Mr.
Glasgow says now.  What do you say about this, Mr. Glasgow?

     MR. GLASGOW:    Sir, we are acutely conscious of the
sensitivity that some of the employees of the club must feel
because we recognise the position in which they stand, but I
think there is, with very great respect to my friend, a
misunderstanding as to the role which we seek to play.       I think
it may have been believed and understandably believed by some of
the people he is representing or seeking to represent that we are
in some way preparing a case before you, either a case to attack
others or to defend ourselves.   It was for those very reasons
that I opened with the remarks I did by saying to y o u , with
respect, our object was to make available such evidence as we
could to assist the Inquiry.   We have deliberately refrained, and
I am very sorry if this has been misunderstood, but we have
carefully and deliberately refrained from going round the place
taking statements and preparing c a s e s , because we do not believe
that is our function.   We did not see this as preparing for a
Diece of litigation.   We are, of course, available to act as a
conduit or whatever neutral word one can think of as being
appropriate for helping to marshal evidence to prepare from
whatever quarter it may come in order to help you and Counsel to
the Inquiry in providing information.
                                                    11



                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        But if, which I had not heard about
                        until now, there were to be      any criticism made of the stewards or
                        the turnstile men or others      in your employ, would it be the wish
                        of those instructing you to      act on their behalf?

                             MR. GLASGOW:    It most certainly would.  Apart from anything
                        else, as you have been told openly from the start, they are
                    B   protected by insurers who would be answerable for the
                        consequences.   My sensitivity on the subject, sir, is simply it
                        might be misunderstood that because we do not go round seeking to
                        take proofs of evidence or to prepare cases for people, people
                        might in all innocence and wholly understandably believe that we
                        had not got their interests at heart.   Nothing could be further
                        from the truth.   We are very happy to see anybody who wants to
                        make that approach either through us or directly to the Treasury
                        team, but ue would certainly initially seek to be as
                        representative as we can.   We think it would be regrettable in
                        the extreme if divisions were occurring within the club and
                        separate people were to be represented.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.  Well, I agree with that.   What
                        I am going to do is I shall grant representation to the club, and
                        I shall not grant representation at present to the stewards. I
                    D   would hope there can be discussion and co-operation, and the
                        stewards may be reassured that their interests will be looked
                        after.  If at a later stage they feel that is not so. or if any
                        allegation is made against them which seems to justify their
                        being represented I will hear any further application.  For the
                        moment I am going to reject your application and grant yours.

                             MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, on that understanding perhaps you would
                        leave it for Mr. Purchas and myself to discuss the matter
                        outside, and if at any later stage we feel there is a conflict
                        you should be invol/ed in perhaps we might have liberty to raise
                        the matter before you and seek guidance at an appropriate stage.

                             LORD JUSTICE T.'.YLOR: Yes.  In your case, Mr. Glasgow, I am
                        not giving any indication that I shall make any recommendation
                        for payment out of public funds.  I will consider that at the
                        end.

                             MR. GLASGOW:   No, sir, I make it quite plain we have not
                        sought that.  We are here in a spirit of co-operation to help if
                        we can.

                               MR. SMITH:   My Lord, at this juncture can I mention I
                        appear today instructed on behalf of three members of the Medical
                        and Defence Union of Scotland, three doctors.    Can I say this in
                        this context at this point it perhaps only touches on one of
                        those doctors, and I use phrase ”at this stage” because perhaps
                        it may require better definition later    There is a Dr. Purcell
                        who is referred to as the doctor to the Sheffield Wednesday Club,
                        ’’'hat is the reason I mention it at this stage, my Lord. He of
                        course....
                    H
                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Is he a doctor employed by the club?

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         MR. SMITH:   He is not employed.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     An independent contractor?

                         MR. SMITH:   He is as   I understand it   an independent
                    contractor.  My Lord, we have been asked to    represent his
                    interests, and it is difficult to know what    if anything in due
                    course will or will not be   said about that   aspect of the case.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     As I indicated at the start, I would
                    have to be satisfied at this stage if I was going to grant any
                    representation that somebody's interests did need protection, not
                    that remotely possibly in the future it might turn out so.    So if
                    anything did crop up later I would hear anything you have to say.
                    You mentioned that one doctor.   There are two others, are there?

                         MR. SMITH:   Two are not connected with the comments     you
                    have just dealt with, my Lord, vis-a-vis the club.  One I     think
                    on the comments you have made perhaps I accept should be
                    considered at a later stage in any event.  The second one     comes
                    more to the medical position.  He is a medical analyst as     opposed
                    to on the day.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    A medical analyst?

                         MR. SMITH:   It is his question of the medical evidence as
                    to the investigation after the event.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not following you.     Are you
                    applying for representation or not?

                         MR. SMITH:    Again, in respect of those two people in the
                    light of your comments I reserve my clients' position, but in
                    respect of Dr. Purcell, the club doctor, the consideration there
                    is even in phase 1 as to what actually took place and what the
                    medical position was on the day.   My Lord, I can foresee - I say
                    it that way;   I am not saying there is - one can foresee the
                    suggestion there is a conflict between club and doctor there.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am against representation of any
                    individual unless there is good reason to think he is going to be
                    criticised or his position would be otherwise unprotected at the
                    Inquiry.  If that were to develop then I would hear what you have
                    to say, but at the moment it does not seem to me that it has.

                         MR. SMITH:   My Lord, so be it.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   Now, I think there are
                    two Health Authorities represented here?    Is that right?

                         MR. CALLAGHAN:   Yes, sir.  My name is Callaghan, sir.  I am
                    a solicitor and a partner in the firm of Dibb, Lupton, Broomhead.
                    We act on behalf of the Trent Regional Health Authority, of which
                    the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service is an
                    operating arm.  They were clearly involved in the incidents on
                    the 15th at the ground, some of their representatives at the time


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    13


                        the tragedy occurred, and obviously many more of their employees
                        were involved later on.  I make application for representation on
                        behalf of the Regional Health Authority.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Well, why?

                             MR. CALLAGHAN:    Because of the involvement of the Ambulance
                        Service.
                    B
                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   A lot of people were involved         but
                        why should they be represented here?

                             MR. CALLAGHAN:   Because it is possible that criticisms and
                        comments will be made on the conduct of the Ambulance Service.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I see.  There is also somebody
                        representing Sheffield Health Authority, is there? Miss Haliett?

                             MISS HALLETT     Yes, my Lord.        I represent Sheffield Health
                        Authority.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You are under the umbrella of the
                        Regional Health Authority, are you?
                    D        MISS HALLETT:    No, my Lord, we are a separate statutory
                        body.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes,   I appreciate that.

                             MISS HALLETT:   If I can explain my position.  I
                        represent Sheffield Health Authority who are responsible
                        “or the two hospitals who were primarily involved.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Has anybody criticised them?

                             MISS HALLETT:   Sir, only that would be revealed during the
                        course of the Inquiry.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Oh, well, I should have thought
                        everything I have heard so far and seen myself is to their
                        cre di t.

                             MISS HALLETT:    Well, sir, I accept that my clients may only
                        have a very limited involvement in the Inquiry, and certainly the
                        presentation during part 1 of your Inquiry they were heavily
                        involved on the 15th.   We have several hundred staff who were
                        involved at the hospitals.   Two teams were called out to the
                         round.  I do accept that there is only limited involvement of
                        the two hospitals and its staff.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You do appreciate if they have any
                        evidence which they can contribute then that can be contributed
                        without them being separately represented?

                       MISS HALLETT:   Sir, my friend and myself would wish       to make
                H representation to the Inquiry on the basis that we do not       see any
                        conflict of interest between the National Health Service bodies

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  14


                        in this m a t t e r , and we would intend to be represented by one
                        counsel at the Inquiry.        Certainly, sir, my presence at the
                        Inquiry would be limited specifically to those matters relating
                        to the   medical and nursing staff, and the hospitals' involvement
                        in the   matters on the 15th A p ri l.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    C a n .I put it this way. both, to Mr.
                        Callaghan and Miss Hallett, that there is nothing’ to stop anybody
                        having   a watching brief at the Inquiry if it is thought an eagle
                    B   eye should be kept open in case some criticism is made. There is
                        nothing to stop that, but I am not going to grant representation
                        just on the speculation that there might be criticism.       If it
                        does arise and you feel the situation merits it the application
                        could be renewed, but as at the present I d o n ’t propose to grant
                        representation to either Health Authority.

                             I am told some people are having difficulty hearing
                        representations which are being made.  There are microphones.
                        Will anybody proposing to make representation please use the
                        microphone if it is in range and then everybody, particularly the
                        press behind, can hear.

                             The City Council, Sheffield, Administrative and Legal
                        Department?
                    D
                             MR. MURPHY:   Sir, my name is Michael Murphy, and I
                        represent the City Council.  We would make application for
                        representation before the Tribunal.  The City Council is the body
                        responsible for licensing the Hillsborough ground, and the City
                        Council would propose to assist the Inquiry in any way possible
                        with regard to how decisions were made with regard to licensing,
                        what inspections were carried out, when they were carried out.
                        and indeed any other point which can be of assistance to this
                        Inquiry.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think your client would be
                        particularly concerned with the perimeter fencing, is that right?

                             MR. MURPHY:   Indeed, yes, sir, amongst other things, but
                        particularly as criticism has been made of the whole question of
                        perimeter fencing, then that is one issue.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are there any other services within
                        the local authority which are able to be brought under this same
                        umbrella?

                             MR. MURPHY:   Perhaps not specifically, but it has occurred
                        to us that in granting the certificate and in carrying out
                        inspections on a periodical basis, the City Council hears
                        representations from a variety of different bodies, such as the
                        3olice, the Health Authorities that are responsible, the Fire
                        Services, and all of those matters, sir, are matters which are
                        taken into account by the City Council in deciding whether or not
                        to grant and renew certificates.

                H            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I shall grant representation to the
                        local authority, and the same applies as far as any


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    recommendations as to costs are concerned as to what I said to
                    'lr. Glasgow.

                         MR. MURPHY:   I am much obliged, sir.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.   The Football Association?

                         MR. DYSON:   I am John Dyson.  Sir, I apply on behalf of the
                    Football Association.  Our interest in this matter really is
                    general and specific.  Taking the specific first, the Football
                    Association - of course, this is the Football Association's Cup -
                    and the Football Association is responsible for selecting the
                    ground.  Consequent upon the selection of the ground, in the
                    light of the attitude of the Police in regard to the segregation
                    of fans, the inevitable consequence appears to have been that the
                    Liverpool supporters were given the Leppings Lane end, and
                    therefore had allocated to them fewer tickets than the Nottingham
                    supporters.  That decision and that consequence has been the
                    subject of considerable criticism both in the media, sir. as you
                    may have noticed, and that has also been a specific criticism in
                    the form of a letter from a solicitor acting for a number of
                    bereaved, wholly unspecific, recently, simply asking the Football
                    Association to admit liability for negligence and breach of
                    statutory duty.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I want to make it quite clear that
                    this Inquiry is not concerned with deciding any civil claims.

                         MR. DYSON:    Sir, we fully understand that.  I mention that
                    merely to illustrate the fact that the Football Association's
                    interest in this matter is a specific one, quite apart from the
                    fact that in its capacity as the Football Association with its
                    responsibility for promoting football in the country at all
                    levels, and it has responsibility for running and administering
                    this competition.   Of course, it has a general interest and
                    concern in this competition and the decisions that were made with
                    regard to it.   I thought it right to indicate that the Football
                    Association's interest is not merely of a general nature, but as
                    you have indicated, sir, that you are interested in knowing about
                    criticisms which have been made relating to the catastrophe
                    itself, criticisms have been levelled against the Football
                    Association, ones which naturally have given rise to concern on
                    the part of the Association.   Apart from that, although I don't
                    put this in the forefront of my application, there were important
                    representatives, officials, the Chief Executive, to mention one
                    only, who attended the game in his official capacity, and would
                    certainly if it be at all helpful, be wanting to give evidence
                    before you as to what he saw and so on.

                         The main interest that the Association has, as I say, is
                    the general one concerned for football in this country and the
                    running of this competition and the performance of its functions
                    in connection with this tie, and the specific matter - the only
                    specific matter of which we have notice so far - is in relation
                    to the allocation of tickets and the fact that Liverpool having a
                    very substantially larger following than Nottingham Forest, it
                    appears that it is going to be a matter for consideration, and

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     16


                        that is a matter of considerable concern to the Association.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.   I think you should be
                        represented.  I am just wondering, since in the matters to be
                        covered in the first phase your interest is on really only one
                        aspect, to what extent it is going to be necessary for you to
                        have a full team there all the time.   That vou will have to
                        consider, I think.
                    B
                                MR. DYSON:   It is a matter we have already thought about,
                        s i r , and I think we will have to make a decision subject to any
                        views you may express in the light of the way the thing develops.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     You will, of course, get in advance
                        from the Counsel   to the Inquiry an indication of what witnesses
                        are going to be called and and what they are going to say,
                        because interested parties who are represented will receive
                        copies of witness    statements in time for them to prepare and deal
                        with them.   So you may be able on a given day or two tosay.
                         Well, we can raise our bat to that for the moment".

                             MR. DYSON:   It is very much a matter we have in mind, and
                        we will give active consideration to it.

                    D         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        So be it.     Thank you.   Mr. Woodward?

                             MR. W OO DW AR D:   Sir, with my learned friend, Mr. Patrick
                        Limb, we are instructed by Messrs. Hammond Suddards on behalf of
                        the South Yorkshire Police.      We have considerable interest, being
                        involved in almost all aspects of the matters touching on and
                        concerning this Inquiry, and my Lord, it is perhaps unnecessary
                        for me to be more      specific or go into greater detail.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        I think so.

                              MR    WOODWARD:   We would ask, please,'to be allowed to
                        app ea r.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Y e s , it is quite clear that the
                        Police ought to be represented, and I shall certainly allow them
                        to be represented.  Again, as with the other substantial bodies,
                          shall not give any promise about recommendations with regard to
                        funding.

                             MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, we are not asking for recommendations
                        at this stage.  Thank you.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Sheffield City Fire Services?

                              MR. ROBERTSON:   Sir, Andrew Robertson, counsel.  I
                        represent, I think the full name is South Yorkshire Fire & Civil
                         )efence Authority.  Sir, they are involved at both stages in the
                        Inquiry inasmuch as their Officers attended on 15th April, and I
                        myself have seen criticism made in the press of what happened on
                        that particular day.   Perhaps more importantly, they are also
                    H   involved in the licensing of the ground, the granting of the fire
                        certificate, which concerns matters of access and egress, but


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    17


                        they are also consulted by the local authority when it comes to a
                        granting of the certificate under the 1975 Act, the Safety at
                        Sports Grounds Act, and have played an important role in that
                        over the last ten years.  Sir, it is my application they be
                        represented at both stages of the Inquiry for those reasons.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        What criticism do you anticipate?

                    B        MR. ROBERTSON:   As regards the day in question?

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;   Perhaps that is an unfair question.
                        What criticism do you say you have seen?

                             MR. ROBERTSON:   Criticism as to the time that was taken for
                        the various fire engines to arrive at the ground.  I d o n ’t know
                        if the criticisms extend as to the equipment carried in the fire
                        tenders or not, but that is a criticism I have seen in the press.
                        Of course, their Officers were involved in the cutting down of
                        the fences and the like on the day in question, as I understand
                        it.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        After the event?

                             MR. ROBERTSON:   Yes.  Well, after the worst part of the
                    D   event, yes.  I have seen the allegations refuted in the press.
                        In my respectful submission they should be refuted at the Inquiry
                        if they are raised again.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr. Robertson, at the moment I am
                        rather inclined to regard your clients in a somewhat similar
                        position to the Health Authorities in that I think this
                        application may be premature.   I think if there is criticism made
                        then you can renew it.  It will always be open, of course, for
                        your clients to provide evidence which Counsel to the Inquiry can
                        call to rebut any suggestions without having separate
                        representation, because you are only concerned, if you are
                        concerned at all, with one aspect of the affair, not the main
                        subject of the Inquiry, and at the moment I am not persuaded that
                        this is the time which to grant you representation.   I will hear
                        anything more you wish to say.

                             MR. ROBERTSON:   Yes.  As regards the granting of the
                        certificates and the licence for the ground, the Fire Service is
                        heavily involved.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You are one of the bodies consulted
                        by the local authority?   Is that right?

                             MR. ROBERTSON:   As regards the safety certificate for the
                        ground obviously the fire certificate comes from the Fire Service
                        itself.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        There was not a fire.

                             MR. ROBERTSON:   No.  Obviously we have not had time yet to
                H       go into all the evidence, but the situation is that the Fire
                        Service will be laying down conditions and terms in the granting


J. L. Harpham Ltd
of fire certificates which will have an effect on the overall
layout of the ground, and in particular matters of fencing,
access and e g r e s s .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, I suppose access and egress,
although it was not related to fire here, is related t o . ...

     MR. ROBERTSON:      Safety generally.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   .... safety generally of large
c r o wd s.

     MR. ROBERTSON:   Y e s . That is the major concern of the Fire
Authority, the matter uppermost in their mind.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, I shall grant you
representation on reconsideration, but I hope it is clear that
those bodies who are being represented and are largely concerned
with one, what may be thought to be minor aspect of the Inquiry,
will be selective in the part which they play.

     MR. ROBERTSON:   Sir, the local authority, the Police
Authority and the Fire Authority, I understand are going to
liaise throughout the Inquiry.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, very well.  National Council for
Civil Liberties?  A lady called Maaelene Colvin?  (No response)
Very well, we will leave that.

     Mr. Coombes, do you have an application?

     MR. SWAINSON:   I make the application referred to, my Lord.
My name is Swainson, and I am a solicitor.  I make the
application on behalf of Liverpool City Council, and also on
behalf of the Sefton, St. Helens, Knowsley and Wirral
Metropolitan District Councils, and also on behalf of the
Lancashire and Cheshire County Counc il s.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      They are fully appraised of this
application, are they?

     MR. SWAINSON:   They are, indeed, and have consented to it.
The application is for representation in a collective and joint
capacity.  The good cause in my submissions can probably be
summed up in this way.  Firstly, unlike most disasters of
national proportions and evoking national sympathy, this one has
had a particular if not exclusive effect on the communities of
Merseyside and Greater Merseyside.  The local authorities whom I
represent today believe they can justifiably represent the wider
communities of Merseyside and Greater Merseyside and can make a
contribution to the Inquiry in that guise.

     Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the authorities
believe that by granting representation to the authorities
concerned they can demonstrate that there is an awareness on the
part of the Inquiry,; your Inquiry, my Lord, of the need for
openness and thoroughness which you have clearly exhibited.
                                                     19



                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I d o n ’t          think I am   going to need
                        anybody to remind me of that, thank              you.

                             MR. SWAINSON:    I am sure.  It was felt, and I am instructed
                        to   say on behalf of the authorities concerned, that they would
                        feel by granting representation which I seek on their behalf
                        the need to guarantee those matters would be fully demonstrated
                        for the benefit of the population.
                    B
                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I would like to understand what you
                        are saying, Mr. Swainson.     Would you like to explain what you
                        mean?

                             MR. SWAINSON:   My Lord, there has been a considerable
                        amount of local and national press publicity about the community
                        in Liverpool as a whole, and this has been referred to very
                        widely in the context of this disaster.  There is a considerable
                        degree of sensitivity within Merseyside, not to say suspicion
                        within Mersevside.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Oi what   ■:
                             MR. SWAINSON:   About whether the community interests of
                    D   Merseyside will be fully, openly and properly represented.     The
                        purpose of the second part of my submission was to persuade you
                        to grant representation in the hope that in doing so you would
                        show what I know you clearly feel and your colleagues fe e l , that
                        Merseyside’s wider community interests would" be properly heard
                        and properly represented throughout the Inquiry.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I say this. Mr. Swainson.    I am
                        sure the whole country is aware of the sense of loss and grief in
                        Liverpool, and everybody respects that, but so far as the Inquiry
                        is concerned I am very anxious only those should be represented
                        who can make some contribution to the investigation of what
                         lappened, why it happened and what should be done in the future.
                        I at the moment cannot see what the representation of those
                        Councils is going to add.   I hope I have made it clear I am very
                        anxious to have fully deployed before me all the evidence and
                        views of football supporters and in particular Liverpool football
                        supporters. To that end I have granted representation to the
                        Football Supporters' Association, but I d o n ’t think I need to
                        have a representation from the local authorities to impress upon
                        me, or the public for that matter, the impartiality, openness and
                        concern for all who have been aggrieved in this case that I shall
                        show in this Inquiry.   I hope that my rejection of this
                        application is not seen in any way to be a lack of sensitivity to
                        Liverpool's loss.   It is much more a sensitivity to the need to
                        get on with this Inquiry and to pare it down to what is essential
                        in achieving its purpose.

                             So I respect the reasons which led to your application,             but
                        I am not persuaded that I should grant it.  Thank you.

                H            The St. John's Ambulance.       Is somebody here on behalf of St
                        John's Ambulance?


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    20



                             M R . WRIGHT:   Mv name isWrig ht . my L o r d . I am here on
                        behalf of the Brigade.    We have in fact, already written to you
                        with regard to evidence that we apply in phase 2, and you have
                        replied to us.    I am not making any representation for
                        representation....

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR         Was that a letter that was sent to me
                        personally by Dr. Ellis?
                    B
                             MR. WRIGHT:    That is it. sir.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have read that, and I have replied
                        to him.  Of course, we will be very happy to receive evidence
                        from the St. John's Ambulance on any aspect on which they can
                        help, but I don't at the moment see any need for representation.
                        do you?

                             MR. WRIGHT:   No, nor are we making one todav.  We are
                        reserving our position should the circumstances change, mv
                        Lord.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you very much.

                    D        I think I have exhausted the list of applications which I
                        was informed before we sat. but of course if there is anybody
                        slse here who wishes to make application, now is the time?

                              I am very grateful to you all for coming here, and I just
                        want to say this finally today, that if this Inquiry is to
                        achieve its purpose in good time I shall have to run a tight
                        ship.   That I intend to do. and I know I can count on those
                    E   participating to confine themselves to relevant matters and
                        avoid any waste of time.   We must achieve the purpose of
                        this Inquiry as soon as possible.

                              MR. KING:   Sir, might I just raise two matters which I have
                        been asked to put forward.   As you know, I am King, representing
                        the bereaved and injured.   Two matters.  First, as to venue.  I
                        have been asked to seek whether or not the Inquiry would be
                        prepared to hear representations either now or at a later stage
                        as to the venue of the Inquiry throughout the Inquiry.   Those I
                        represent as you know, sir, come from the Liverpool area.   They
                         lave instructions from a vast number of people, all from the
                        Liverpool area, and indeed there will be many witnesses who will
                        be solely from the Liverpool area.   Sheffield is not the easiest
                        of places, unfortunately, for Liverpudlians to get there.   In
                        saying this I don't detract from the national interest in this
                        Inquiry - it is obviously there - but Liverpool has a peculiar
                        interest in view of the nature of the disaster and identity of
                        those who died and were injured.   Many members of the public in
                        -iverpool I am sure would like to be in the public gallery and to
                        listen.   That again is nigh impossible for many of them at this
                        distance.

                H            My first application was going to be, with great diffidence,
                        if it had been open, to make representations that the Inquiry


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   21


                        should be held in Liverpool, but, sir,     you have clearly indicated
                        it will be held here to begin with.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   There are overwhelming reasons why it
                        should be held here.  This is where it happened.  The ground is
                        here which we may have to look at from time to time.  All the
                        services are here who were involved in it, and I think it has to
                        be here.  But I want you to know I have certainly given
                    B   consideration as to whether some part of the Inquiry might have
                        been held or might be held in Liverpool. I am not minded at the
                        moment to do that, but I am certainly open to hearing any
                        submission you may make about it later.

                             MR. KING:   I am obliged, sir.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Obviously there are enormous
                        considerations of expense and disruption in moving from one place
                        to another, and since the first part of .the-Inquiry here will be
                        the part that will be vitally concerned with what happened,
                        whereas the later part of the Inquiry is going to be more
                        concerned with what should happen in future, a move to Liverpool
                        at a later stage would not seem to be a particularly appropriate
                        thing.   I am certainly open to listening to any representations
                        made.   I do want to make it clear, if I have not done so already,
                    D   that I am acutely conscious of Liverpool's special interest in
                        this Inquiry, and will bear that in mind throughout.

                             MR. KING:   I am obliged, sir.  Quite separately, those
                        instructing me are already armed with a large number of witness
                        statements, and indeed people are coming forward all the time to
                        give witness statements.  They are anxious, if they may, to give
                        those statements directly to the Inquiry if that procedure is
                    E   open to them.  In other words, not to have to send it through any
                        agency such as, for example, the West Midlands Police, without
                        any reflection on the Police at all. with respect.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, we catered for this possibility
                        in the press release the other day which made it clear that
                        anyone who wished to provide information could do so through the
                        West Midlands Police, which as I have already said are conducting
                        an entirely independent Inquiry responsible to me. or through the
                        Secretary to the Inquiry.  Either course can be adopted.  But it
                        must be understood that with the vast number of statements which
                        are.going to be taken there has to be some central collation and
                        a comparing of what some witnesses say with what others say, and
                        so to keep all the information in separate compartments may not
                        necessarily be possible, or desirable.  Certainly, if somebody
                        wishes to present evidence directly to the Inquiry that input is
                        open.

                             MR. KING:    Sir, allied to that, and I know not if the
                        Tribunal can give any guidance, there is a certain anxiety that
                        the statements should only be used for the purposes of the
                        Inquiry and should not be used for any other purposes.

                H           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Such as?



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 22


                             MR. KING:   Sir, I know those witnesses who have come
                        forward have suggested that in any enquiries as to civil or
                        criminal liability they could be used in that context.  I know I
                        suspect the Inquiry has no direct power to direct in that
                        respect, but I know I have been asked to seek a guidance that the
                        purpose is for the Inquiry and the Inquiry alone, and not to be
                        used for any wider purposes.  Sir, I can say no more than that.

                    B        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.  Well, that point will be
                        considered.  Of course, as   I think is desirable, once statements
                        of witnesses who are being   called are available to the parties
                        and are to be available to   the press, to use a phrase which we
                        have all become accustomed   to, they tend to be in the oublic
                        domain.

                             MR. KING:   I can see that, sir.  I am really minded of the
                        statements before they are given in oral evidence.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have been asked to make clear, and
                        this obviously applies particularly to witnesses from Liverpool.
                        but all witnesses who are called to give evidence will be paid
                        their expenses, travelling and loss of earnings, and to that
                        extent at any rate those who have to travel will have their
                        inconvenience reduced to the minimum.  All witness expenses by
                    D   whoever the witness is called will be allowable as an expense out
                        of public funds.

                             We will rise now and sit again at 10.30 on Monday,     15th May.


                              (The Inquiry was adjourned to Monday    15th Mav.   1969.
                                                 at 10.30 a.m.)
                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
