                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                       P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                      Regent Street
                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                       South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
               PQLET30/SW/MR                                    Telephone               7gj%ff
Our Ref:
                                       Mr SYW M e r
This matter is being dealt with by                                   Telephone ext:




            Dear Mr Waghorn
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
           Apropos our telephone conversation last week concerning the Parliamentary
           Questions which were to be tabled by Mr David Alton MP, I have now been told by
           the Authority's insurers that a letter has been received from the Steering
           Committee asking consideration to be given to the Police Authority paying more
           than the "statutory" compensation provision. I think it is the statutory
           bereavement figure of £3,500 which is causing most concern.
           The Steering Committee quote in aid of their application the cases of Zebrugge
           and Kings Cross where, as I understand it, the defendants there were more
           generous. However, the Authority’s insurers, quite understandably, are not
           prepared to consider paying more generous compensation. If the Authority
           were to do so it would be in the knowledge that it would not be recovered from
           the other parties who you probably know are being pursued for contribution
           towards the money which is to be paid by the Authority (through its insurers)
           under the agreement reached with the Steering Committee.
           If any further money is to be paid by way of compensation it will have to come
           out of the Authority’s budget. Before I refer the matter to the Authority for
           consideration, can you tell me whether such payments would be grant-aided?
           Yours sincerely                1


                    IaJ J W
           S Walker
           Solicitor to the Authority




    r      Mr S Waghorn
           Home Office
           Queen Anne’s Gate
           LONDON SWIM 9AT


    L_                                                  _l
