                                                    U NOV 91
                                                     I I 2.


From:         Mrs G I Moody            c:   HMCIC
              F2 Division
              273 2621
              8 November 1991




Mr Goddard
F8 Division


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Mr Pickering copied to you the attached letter from Mr George
Howarth MP on this subject.    Although ostensibly on the
subject of the retirement of Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield - a matter which I have covered in the- a££ac]ied
draft - the meat of the letter seems tc^lie in the requel&3i\in
the last paragraph that the role of the Seu££_Lancashire
Police be properly investigated.    I would imaglrre--*ha±^_ttL&'
answer to this must lie ir. a reference to the Taylor enquiry,
but that was not commissioned by this division and I would
welcome material suitable for inclusion in the letter coverincr
these points.




                            MRS G I MOODY




GIM-042.GIM
Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home

Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.



As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of

police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in

private and is concerned only with whether the officer

concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

It would not therefore in any way contribute to public

knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do more

than receive and consider evidence already known as to the

propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.   Moreover the most

serious punishment which the disciplinary tribunal would have

been able to impose, had Mr Duckinfield been found guilty,

would have been dismissal or requirement to resign.      Mr

Duckinfield's resignation means that this end is already

achieved.



It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr

Duckinfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate

authority in police disciplinary cases,but I can and should

say that it needs too to be remembered that it is by no means

certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have £ound Mr

Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred


GIM-042.GIM
against him.   If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man

it would not be right to refuse him retirement on medical

grounds in order to hear charges which may or may not be

proved and whose most serious result could only be that he

leave the service he has already asked to leave voluntarily.

This, however, like the other matters raised in your letter,

is a matter for the South Lancashire Police Force and I

suggest that your concerns might best be discussed with the

Chief Constable of that force.



Having said this, I find it difficult to see what further

areas can usefully be explored when the Taylor enquiry...




GIM-042.GIM
