 HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)




      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APR'lL. 1989




                  Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                    At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

      Monday, 19th November, 1990.




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
                               ■r




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd..
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX
                             INDEX    TO T R A N S C R I P T


                                                               Page
    OPENING STATEMENT BY THECORONER                              1

    APPEARANCES                                                  2

    LEGAL SUBM ISSIONS                                           3

    STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                       '            15

    SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS                                   25

^   STATEMENT BY THE CORONER    TO THEJURY                     54

         S. BROWN Sworn

            By The Coroner                                     59

         M. LAYTON Sworn

            By The Coroner                                     63
            Cross-Examined     by   Mr.  Payne                 79
            Cross-Examined     by   Mr.  Isaacs                79
            Cross-Examined     by   Mr.  King                  80
            Cross-Examined     by   Mrs. McBrien               81

    LEGAL SUBMISSIONS                                          83
                                                           3




     MR.   CALLAGHAN:    Sir, you know the representation on
previous occasions and I should say it is my intention to stay
only for today and in the case of one or two witnesses.    I
will not take any major part in the Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:    I have got no particular objection to
you being here.   I thought you probably would not be here
continuously but I wanted to be sure about that.    Perhaps
the best thing would be if we started with you really and
if we started with appropriate legal submissions.     It may
be easiest if we start with Mr.. King and then we will move
across the table, so to speak.

     MR. KING:    Sir, my primary legal submission is
directed to your preliminary ruling on the last occasion
that this Inquest should be concerned only with events up
to about 3.15 pm.    As I understand your ruling, sir, it
was designed to ensure that this Inquest would only be
concerned with events leading to the crushing on the
terraces and the first arrival of an ambulance.

     As you know, sir, the families whom I represent are
very anxious that this Inquest should deal with what to
them is a very major issue, as to how their loved ones came
by their deaths, namely how the services and the rescue
services, and those attending with the emergency, coped
with it immediately after people were brought off the
terraces because death was not certified in many, if not
most, cases until after 4 pm.    Sir, I do not know if you
have had an opportunity to read these.     I did ask those
instructing me to send to you statements from each of the
families whom I represent setting out a number of
individual questions directed to their own Inquest but also
incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn of what happened between the time there
was a first sighting of any loved one being brought off the
terracing and the .pronouncement of death.    I do not know
if you had an opportunity to read them.

     THE CORONER:   I have briefly because these did not
arrive until Friday afternoon but I have looked at them.

     MR. KING:    What I would like to do is take you
through some individual examples in order to persuade you
that this is a question which ought to be gone into at this
particular Inquest.    I do not know whether that is a
format you want to follow or whether you want first to hear
some other representatives as to their attitude to my
submission.    I am happy to go into considerable detail
about it.

     THE CORONER:   There are several points which have
occurred to me and the first point I would like you to deal
with is this;  you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
dealt with three issues which Coroners deal with; who the
deceased was, when he/she died and where he/she died.    I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as you will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.

      I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.    At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the
pathological cause of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.    My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right - bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

      MR. KING:      Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.         All
that was done when       one looks at those Inquests was to
identify the time of a first sighting,that is to say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.        In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if I can just give       one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people       who are brought off at 1522 and it is
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
There has been no investigation directed to the alobal
organisation_of w hat happsnpd immediately after they were
brought off the torrsces._ certainly I have ueen through
the” inaj.vj.auaj. transcripts and there does not seem to be
any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
were called could not deal with those issues, sir.
                                                         s




     THE CORONER:   Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in respect of these individuals is not in fact the
pathological cause of death which we have been given but due
to a novus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?

     MR. KING:    Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir, and putting it bluntly, cards on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team being brought in, of proper       ;
medical equipment being available, of proper triage being
carried out, that those measures, had they been there, in
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.    They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me concrete evidence of that at this
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.

     Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) been held down over what happened
after they were brought off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dead and there has been no effort
made systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
the time for the rescue, what might have been, and what could
have made a difference.   A very simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given  at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a pulse and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never know whether or not that
individual was alive or dead at that stage.   It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces".   I cannot put it any more firmly than that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    You have put it very plainly and I
appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
a few moments but do you want to develop it further?
Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues.

     MR. KING:   Have you the individual statements which
were supplied?

     THE CORONER:   I do have those in front of m e . I would
not want to go through all of them but if you wish to pick
one or two as examples I am prepared to listen to you and
indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
                                                            o




     MR. KING:    Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which is the submissions to you of the Jones family,
Richard Jones, I do not know whether you have been given one
or two documents.    I have two documents in relation to Mr.
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one headed "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:      No. 11, did you say?

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.   -I beg your pardon, sir,   it is
No. 10.   Sir, if you look ---

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, may I just stop you for one
moment because something has occurred to me, and I have beer,
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press before we go
further?    The session this morning is being heard without
the Jury and the reason we have not got the Jury is because
we are dealing with legal points.    That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session but you should not actually
report what is being said.    You will no doubt be familiar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not report what we
are discussing.    If we had wanted the Jury to hear we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hear at thi:
stage.   You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, o:
course, that is a different matter but for the moment please
do not report the content of the legal matters we are
discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
you continue?

     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at any documen-
but it is just to.help you is one headed to myself, "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
Steel" dated 22nd October.

     MR.   KING:    Sir, this is dated 7th November.

     THE CORONER:      I have not got it I am afraid.   It is
not in front of me.

     MR. KING:   Iapologise for that and I will take you
through, if I may, through five points which are raised by
Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they make the basic point that th<
report into the death of their loved one,' Richard, was
certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must b*
entitled to, up to that time the evidence of death is not
clear as having already occurred.

     Point No- 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
by Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
it was evidence given on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
sir, it is a quotation from his evidence which you may
recall:

     "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
     is quite difficult in someone who has a low blood
     pressure as would have been here.   In fact it can be so
     difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
     electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
     stopped or not."

     Then there is the statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
certainly a statement in the large bundle of statements given
to the West Midlands Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
evidence to the Taylor Inquiry in which he says this:


                                  /"For an extremely long...




                       <&
                        )
      "for an ex tr e me ly long time we were without an/ form
      of me dical eq uip me nt of any description.       I still
      cannot un de rs ta n d wiy the local health authority's
      major med ic al d i s a s t e r team were not called upon.   I
      understand that all healt n authorities in this
      country have a m a j o r di sa st er policy.    It is
      impossible a c c u ra te ly to estimate the di ff ere nc e this
      would have made in saving life.           I do, however,
      believe that the Liverpool fans should have been
      given tne chance".

And the qu es tio n raised by Mr. and Mrs. Jones is this,
sir:  tnere was a ma j o r incident vehicle.   Why w a s it not
called?  Lack of eq uip me nt und oubtedly resulted in deaths.

     Sir, I pause there.  Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
were not there and of course they are not experts, but you
will see, sir, from the basis of that evidence they are
firmly of the belief th3t one cannot just ignore an
inquiry, an inquest, into that aspect.

      Sir, number 4 point made by Mr. and Mrs. Jones co;nes
from the statement made, again in the large bundle, sir,
from Dr. Glyn n Phillips, particul ar ly where he says that
after 3.15 p.m. he gave m o u t h to mout resuscitation to a
man for 15 minutes, and just as he w.->c giving up the heart
sprang to life, and aft er that the man started breathing
on his own.   We know that this does not prove this man
lived, or if he did he may have been brain damaged, but
the point we are trying to put across to the cor oner is
that after 3.15 p.m. not all the people who were later
certified dead were n e c e s s a r i l y dead.

     Sir, finally Mr. and Mrs. Jones direct your attention
to the long st at em en t whi ch I c~ sure you have seen, sir,
of Or. John Asnto n in wh ich tnere is a series of reasoned
critical c om men ts on the di so rg an is at io n of the medical
and the rescue attempts, honest and in good faith tnough
they were, after the people were brought off the terraces.

     Sir, that is Mr. and Mrs. Jones in tnose comments and
in the short letter, sir, w h i c h you have, wh ich you have
already referred me to, sir, they emphasise an issue as to
the failure to im pl em en t triage after the disaster
happened, again, c o n c e n t r a t i n g on what Dr. Gu mpert has
said as to the fact that without an el ec tr o- c ar di og ra m it
is not possible to know w.nether a heart :nas s t o p p p e d .

     Sir, can I m o v e on from Mr. and Mrs. Jones' comments
and just give you one or two more examples - I appreciate
that in many ways it is repetitious but it is making the
point - to number 14, sir, whi ch is in the case of William
Roy Pemberton.

     THE C030NER:      And   this one is addressed to you.
. '  HR. KING:   Sir, it is not often that instructions            to
Counsel are given in ad va nce to the Tribunal, and I
suspect, sir, that it is not a wise move in most cases.

      THE COivDNER:     You are prob abl y right.

         -MR. KING: Sir, it was an effort in tne relatively
 short time since we were befo re you to put before you the
 various .natters which t-^e families wisned to place before
 you and it was felt this was the easiest way to do so,
.s i r .

     Sir, if I can then turn to Mr. Pemberton, you will
see that he makes the following points:      tne report into
the death of his loved one Roy that life again in his case
was pronounced extinct at 16.00 hours lours, and again in
tne absence of medical ev id en ce to the contrary, the
family can only assume that tneir loved one was alive
until that hour, and sir, if you then go to paragraph 3 of
that document you will see tnere is a reference to t^e
statement of Mr. Saxton of tne St. Join's Ambulance
Service, because he refers to t:ie resuscitation of a young
man at 15.50 hours, i nd ic at ing in the heart-felt view of
Mr. Pemberton, as with all the other families, that deatfi
must have occurred after 3.15 p.m.

     Again he refers you, sir, in paragraph 4, to tne
statement of Dr. Byrne wiien he quotes tnat he was
approacned by a senior PoLice Of ficer and asked to start
certifying the dead as there may be some still alive, and
sir, again, the point has been made that as we only ’snow
for certain that death was at 4 o'clock, to ignore these
concerns as to the ad eq ua cy of the attentions and tne
rescue efforts after 3.15 is to not investigate what could
well have bf»en a major reason for why somebody died and
did not survive.

     The final point on Mr. Pemberton, sir, in paragraph
7, is the que sti on he asks:             why was it that the very
seriously ill and dying, and those who appeared to be
dead, were not taken to the hospital in the very first
available ambulance, and ne raises himself the issue as to
why the s e r i o u s a c c i d e n t response vehicle was not called
out to the stadium, as he un der sta nd s to be the case.




     __           v .ai uu-Lfie cace oc tne summary wnich
W3s produced at the Inquest prior to today, there was a
gap in time.  Tnere is a gap in time between 15.21, which
U3C rho fim/%     n_i.»   a        •  .. _            7
was tne time when Police C ons ta ble McGuinness rescued
 ictoria from a pile of those who unfortunately had
 s  en, and 15.28 when Mr. T u rn er was seen helping
 ictorla out onto the pitch.                        °
     Mr. Hicks has drawn to your attention, sir, that he
has drawn to the attention of this Inquest the evidence of
a gentleman, a Mr. Taylor, wh os e evidence is that he was
on the very terrace where Vi cto ri a was after she had been
"rescued" by P.C. McGuinness, and that for some six
minutes he did not, in fact, resuscitate because the poor
man did not know what to do, and one can understand that,
but as Mr. Hicks says, those six minutes could have been
vital to the survival of his loved one Victoria, had she
received the proper attention.

     Sir, that is just an exa mp le of matters which,        in Mr.
Hicks's submission to you, through me, ought to be
investigated.

      Sir, if one turns to Sarah Hicks at number 8, again
if one looks at the timings we know that at 6-minutes-
past-3 a Miss McCaffery sees Sarah, who clearly has
fallen, and we know at 21-minutes-past-3, helps the fallen
Sarah through onto the pitch.     Again, the time gap thare
between o- minutes-past-3 and 21-minutes-past-3.      We know
it was not until 20-past-4 that Dr. Bull examined Sarah
and certified ner death, and we know from the summary that
it is said that at some time between 15.38 and 15.50 an
u nidentified member of the me di ca l team stated in his  view
that Sarah was at that time beyond help.

      All tnose. times, sir, go beyond 3.15 and they again
illustrate the need in the submission of the families for
t-ne times after 3.15 to be thoroughly investigated.

     Sir, those are just four examples but, sir, if you
read the papers which I u n d e r s t a n d and I am sure you have
they express the flavour of all the other submissions
that, in fact, we cannot know that            a cut off point at this
stage is the right cut off point at 3.15 and it is
premature, sir, so to do, in tny submission to you.            That
is how I put it.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you very much indeed, Mr. King.
I think what we will now do is to give the rest of you an
opportunity to make points.         I think we ought to start
with Mrs, McBrien.     I think you would probably support
what has been said, but is there anything in addition to
vhat Mr. King has said that you feel you would like to
tell me.     Mrs. McBrien can I say if you are more
comfo rt abl e sitting down - indeed, that goes for alL of
you - if you are more c o m f o r t a b l e sitting down, sit down.
I don't mind - it does not make any difference.            I know
some of your legal colleagues sitting around you are used
to standing so they will tend to rise, but you do what is
comfortable.     Mrs. McBrien, is there an/thing you want to
aJd r.o what Mr. King has told me?

      MRS. McBRIEN:      No, I go aL ong   with everything     that
Mr.   King has said,    thank you.
                                                                                          11




        THE CORONER:       If I st a rt at that end a nd w o r k my way
d o w n the row, is t ha t s a t i s f a c t o r y to you, g e n t l e m e n and
l ad ie s? It is e a s i e r for, me .

      MISS HAMPTON:          I h a v e no s u b m i s s i o n s ,   t h a n k you.
      THE CORONER:         Mr.    Hale?

     MR. HALE:      I am sure that at an appropriate time you
will instruct tne Ju r y and presumably also instruct tne
advocates as to how far you are prepared to go.         As we all
know there were well over 3,000 witnesses.         Obviously you
can't call them all.         You will have to exercise some sort
of selection and you will have to restrict the areas into
wnich you are p re p ar ed to enquire further and further, on
top of the enqui rie s m a d e by tne Taylor Report.    I may be
over si mplifying m a t t e r s a little, but I think it is very
well known by e ve r y o n e concer ned that the Police, for
example, have a d m i t t e d negligence.  There is no secret
about that at all.        The re have been civil proceedings,
other people nave been joined in them, so it therefore
seems to me to be a wa s t e of your time and a waste of
everyone's time if we are just going to go over and over
again points te nding m e re ly to prove that things could
have been done better, and ought to have been done better,
even aliowing for h i n d sight, so I am sure you will bear
th3t in mind.

     There are areas, however, which were not explored                               by
the Taylor Inquiry and my learned friend Mr. King has
mentioned one.  T h e r e is also the area of ....

      THE CORONER:         W n i c h one in particular have you got
.in mind?
                                            0
     MR. HALE:        A bl anket was pulled down over the rescue
services, but tnere was. also a lack of inquiry into tie
pre-match c o n d uc t of the fans and tnat I know - I have
seen the list of w i t n e s s e s - that is something that is
going to be gone into, but I hope we are not going to
waste a lot of time on negligence alone, because one item
of negligence is the same as a thousand items of
negligence, and you will no doubt instruct the Jury on a
verdict of m i s a dv en tu re .

     What we are looking for, I am sure, is something
going beyond that, and I would hope that people ace not
going to waste their time, but to concen tra te on looking
for r e c k l e s s n e s s , so me t h i n g that would enable you to
instruct, the Jur/ to find a verdict other than
misadventure, and I w o u l d merely me ntion that.

     There     is one ot h er aspect and that is entirely a
matter for     my learned friend Mr. King, but I s e e that ne
represents     43 families wh ose ci rcu mst an ces may not all be
the same.      There was a problem at the Ta yl o r Inquiry wnen
&
r                                                                   12




the Police were rep re s en te d by one representative and it
subsequently tran spi re d that it could well have been
better if th?re had been separate representation over
certain aspects.   Happily, tnose aspects have not
materialised and no real harm was done.

      I would like to see an end to this Inquest when it is
over and I would not want somebody coming back again and
asking for it to be re-opened and started all over again
becau.se of lack of r ep r e s e n t a t i o n separately by some
people W'lo may be all eg ed to have played a part in tne
deatns.




       /Tnat is a m a t t e r whi ch my learned friend
That is a matter which my learned friend will. I am sure, fully
understand.  I merely mention it now so it is not said that it i<=
mentioned with hindsight afterwards.. There may. indeed   be a
great deal of difference between the responsibility or iack of
responsibility on the part of some of those who died, and
separate representation would in normal circumstances be requirec
because it may be that one family would make an allegation
against another.  Again, I give as an example, and I am not
saying that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
someone who died had come at the very last minute with a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to th«
front, pushing and crushing, and had caused some deaths, then
that would be a matter where he or his relatives might well
require to be separately represented.

     THE CORONER:   Yes. Mr. Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of representation is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you were applying your mind, and (b) for the legal
representatives who obviously have to weigh whatever conflict of
interest there may be between their clients.  So that is really,
not a matter for me, and it is not probably even a matter for
you.  It is a matter for Mr. King and his instructing solicitors
and, of course, primarily for the parties themselves.

     Perhaps I should say one other thing.   You have centioned a
couple of verdicts and matters like that.   I am not getting into
an argument at this stage as to what verdict if any the Jury
would bring in, or even what directions, if any, I am going to
give them, because the objective of this Inquest as far as it has
one is to hear the evidence and to enable the Jury to reach a
verdict on the evidence.   I have the advantage of having seen
loads of statements.  I do acknowledge that, but experience has
taught me in much simpler Inquests than this that it is not
infrequent that what you think is going to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the evidence when it actually comes,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any word you
care to use, is different to what I had anticipated from just
looking at the statement.   So I have made it as far as I am
able a rule not to predetermine the answer but to wait until I
have heard the evidence.  I say this not as a criticism of you
but just as a clarification for everybody.   I do intend to
listen to what is said, which is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously. I have read statements and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial thing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best.   I can't do more than that.  2
am sorry, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, with regard to the submissions by Mr.
King, the position of the Chief Constable is that he is neutral.
I have 'got no submissions to make about what Mr. King is asking
you to do, but I wish it to be heard that the position cf the
Chief Constable is that he wants to do everything he can tc
assist you in the conduct of this Inquest, and certainly dees r.c
wish to do anything to put in the way of Mr. King any obstructic
into any enquiry that he wants to make on behalf of the relative
of the people who died.   Sir, that is the position.
                                                                  8




     "for an e x t r e m e l y long time we were without acw form
     of medical e qu i p m e n t of any description.    I still
     cannot un d er st an d wny the locaL health authority's
     major medical d i s a s t e r team were not called upon.    I
     understand that ail he alt n authorities in this
     country have a ma jo r disa ste r policy.       It is
     impossible a c c u r a t e l y to estimate the difference this
     would have m a d e in saving life.        I do, however,
     believe that the Liverp ool fans should have been
     given tne chance".

And the question raised by Mr. and Mrs. Jones is this,
sir:  tnere w a s a m a j o r incident vehicle.  Why w a s it not
called?  Lack of eq ui p me nt undoub ted ly resulted in deaths.

     Sir, I pause there.   Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
were not there and of co urs e they are not experts, but you
will see, sir, from the basis of that evidence they are
firmly of the belief th3t one cannot just ignore an
inquiry, an inquest, into that aspect.

      Sir, number 4 point made by Mr. and Mrs. Jones cones
from tne statement made, again in the large bundle, sir,
fro:n Dr. Glynn Phillips, p ar ti cul ar ly where he says that
after 3.15 p.m. he ga ve m o u t h to mout resuscitation to a
man for 15 minutes, and just as he w.iC giving up the heart
sprang to life, and af t e r that tne man started breathing
on his own.   We know that this does not prove this man
lived, or if he did he may have been brain damaged, but
the point we are trying to put across to the cor oner is
that after 3.15 p.m. not all the people who were later
certified dead were n e c e s s a r i l y dead.

     Sir, finally Mr. and Mrs. Jones direct your attention
to the long s tat eme nt wh ic h I err. sure you have seen, sir,
of Dr. John Asnton in w h i c h tnere is a series of reasoned
critical comments on the di so rg an i s a t i o n of the medical
and the rescue a tte mpt s, hone st and in good faith tnough
they were, after the people were brought off the terraces.

     Sir, that is Mr. and Mrs. Jones in t.nose comments and
in the short letter, sic, w h i c h you have, wh ich you have
already referred me to, sir, they emphasise an issue as to
the failure to i mpl em ent triage after the disa st er
happened, again, c o n c e n t r a t i n g on what Dr. Gumpect has
said as to the fact that without an e le ct ro -ca rd iog ram it
is not possible to kn o w w n e th er a heart has stoppped.

     Sir, can I mov e on from Mr. and Mrs. Jones' comments
and just give you one or two mo re examples - I appreciate
that in many ways it is repet iti ous but it is making the
point - to number 14, sir, w hi ch is in the case of WilLiam
Roy Pemberton.

     THE C030NER:     And   this one is addressed    to you.
                                                                      9




      HR. KING:   Sir, it is not often that instructions          to
 Counsel are given in a d v an ce to the Tribunal, and I
 suspect, sir, that it is not a wise move in most cases.

       THE CORONER:     You are probably right.

      MR. KING:   Sir, it was an effort in tne relatively
 short time since we were before you to put before you the
 various matters which tne families wisned to place before
 you and it was felt this was the easiest way to do so,
 sir.

       Sir, if I can then turn to Mr. Pemberton, you will
 see that he makes the fo llo wi ng points:   trie report into
 the death of his loved one Roy that life again in his case
 was pronounced extinct at 16.00 hours iours, and again in
 tne absence of medical ev id en ce to the contrary, the
 fa.uily can only assume that tneir loved one was alive
 until that hour, and sir, if you then go to paragraph 3 of
 that document you will see tnere is a reference to tne
 statement of Mr. Saxton of tne St. Join's Ambulance
 Service, because he refers to tne resuscitation of a young
 man at 15.50 hours, in di ca ti ng in the heart-felt view of
 Mr. Pemberton, as with all the other families, tnat deatn
 must have occurred afte r 3.15 p.m.

      Again he refers you, sir, in paragraph 4, to tne
 statement of Dr. Byrne wn en he quotes tnat he was
 approacned by a senior Polic e Officer and asked to start
 certifyi ng the dead as there may be some still alive, and
 sir, again, the point has been made that as we only know
 for certain that death was at 4 o'clock, to ignore these
 concerns as to the a d e q u a c y of the attentions and tne
 rescue efforts after 3.15 is to not investigate what could
      *iave      a roajor reason for why somebody died and
 did not survive.

    .          point on Mr. Pemberton, sir, in paragraph
/, is the question he asks:   why was it that the very
seriously ill and dying, and those who appeared to be
dead, were not taken to the hospital in the very first
available ambulance, and ne raises himself the issue as to
why the serious accident re sponse vehicle was not called
out to tne stadium, as he unders tan ds to be the case.

          J i r * if I c a [> then deal with perhaps one example of
 minjtia?, of detail, if one turns to the cases of th<=
 Hicks sisters, of Victo ri a and Sarah Hicks, sir, wnich is
 at numbers 7 and 3 in your list, sir, you will notice th=
 case of Victoria, tnat o n. tn e face of tne summary wnich
 was produced at the Inquest prior to today, there was a
 ™            t^ S * ,T nere is a gap in time between 15.21, which
,was tne time when Police C ons ta ble McGuinness rescued
 f 1 ,.     13 from a pile of those who unfortunately had
   &    en, and 15.23 when Mr. Turne r was seen helping
   i c t o n a out onto the pitch.                          °
                                                                           10




     Mr. Hicks has drawn to your attention, sir, that he
has drawn to the attention of this Inquest the evidence of
a gentleman, a Mr. Taylor, whose evidence is that he was
on tie very terrace where Victoria was after she had been
"rescued" by P.C. McGuinness, and that for some six
minutes he did not, in fact, re suscitate because the poor
man did not know what to do, and one can understand that,
but as Mr. Hicks says, those six minutes could have been
vital to the survival of his loved one Victoria, had she
received tne proper attention.

      Sir, that is just an example of matters which,               in Mr.
Hicks's submission to you, through me, ought to be
inves t i g a t e d .

          Sir, if one turns to Sarah Hicks at number 8, again
if one looks at the timings we know that at S - m i n u t e s -
p a s t - 3 a Miss McCaffery sees Sarah, who clearly has
fallen, and we know at 2 1 - m i n u t e s - p a s t - 3 , helps the fallen
Sarah through onto the pitch.         Again, the time gap there
between o-mi.iutes-past-3 and 21-minutes-past-3.                  We know
it was not until 20-p.3St-4 that Dr. Bull examined Sarah
and certi fie d ner death, and we know from the summary that
it is said that at some time between 15.38 and 15.50 an
unidentified member of the medical team stated in his view
that Sarah was at that time beyond help.

     All those, times, sir, go beyond 3.15 and they again
illustrate the need in the submission of the families for
tne times af ter 3.15 to be thoroughly investigated.

     Sir, those are just four examples but, sir, if you
read tne papers which I underst an d and I am sure you have
they express the flavour of all the other submissions
that, in fact, we cannot know that a cut off point   at this
stage is the right cut off point at 3.15 and it is
premature, sir, so to do, in my submission to you.    That
is how I put it.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr. King.
I think what we will now do is to give the rest of you an
opportunity to make points.   I think we ought to start
with Mrs. McBrien.   I think you would probably support
what has been said, but is there anything in addition to
vhat Mr. King has said that you feel you would like to
tell me.   Mrs. Mc3rien can I say if you are more
co mfortable sitting down - indeed, that goes for all of
you - if you are more com fortable sitting down, sit down.
I don't mind - it does not make any difference.    I know
some of your legal colleagues sitting around you are used
to standing so they will tend to rise, but you do what is
comfortable.   Mrs. McSrien, is there an/thing you want to
aJd to what Mr. King has told me?

      MRS. McBRIEN:        No,   I go along with everything         that
Mr.   King has said,      thank you.
  / fHt, COSOi'Jc.R:  If I start at that snd and work my way
down the row, is tnat sa tisfactory to you, gentlemen and
ladies?  It is ea sie r for.me.

     MISS HANPTON:      I have no submissions,   thank you.

     THE CORONER:     Mr.   Hale?

     MR. HALE:     I am sure that at an appropriate time you
will instruct tne Ju r y and presumably also instruct tne
advocates as to how far you are prepared to go.         As we all
know there were well over 3,000 witnesses.         Obviously you
can't call them all.        You will have to exercise some sort
of selection and you will have to restrict the areas into
wnich you are prepared to enquire further and further, on
top of tie enquiries ma de by tne Taylor Report.        I may be
over simplifying m a t te rs a little, but I think it is very
well known by ever yon e concer ned that the Police, for
example, have a dm i t t e d negligence.   There is no secret
about that at all.       T he re have been civil proceedings,
other people nave been joined in them, so it therefore
seems to me to be a w a s t e of your time and a waste of
everyone's time if we are just going to go over and over
again points tending mer e ly to prove that things could
have been done better, and ought to have been done bettor,
even allowing for hindsight, so I am sure you will bear
that in mind.

     There are areas, however, which were not explored         by
the Taylor Inquiry and my learned friend Mr. King has
mentioned one.  T he re is also the area of ....

      THE CORONER:    W n i c h one in particular have you   ;ot
.in mind?
                                         0

     MR. HALE:      A blanket was pulled down over the rescue
services, but tnere was. also a lack of inquiry into tie
pre-match co nduct of the fans and tnat I know - I have
seen tne list of w i t n e s s e s - that is something that is
going to be gone into, but I hope we are not going to
waste a lot of time on negl ige nc e alone, because one item
of negligence is the same as a thousand items of
negligence, and you will no doubt instruct the Jury on a
verdict of m is ad ven tur e.

     What we are looking for, I am sure, is something
going beyond that, and I would nope that people are not
going to waste their time, but to concentrate on looking
for recklessness, s o m et hi ng that would enable you to
instruct, the Jur/ to find a verdict other than
misadventure, and I wo ul d merely m ent io n that.

     There   is one other aspect and that is entirely a
matter for   my learned friend Mr. King, but I see that ne
represents   43 families whose ci rc um sta nce s may not all be
the same.    There was a problem at the Taylor Inquiry wnen
                                                               12
c




the Police were r ep re sen ted by one representative and it
subsequently transpired that it could well have been
better if there had been separate representation over
ce rtain aspects.  Happily, tnose aspects have not
materialised and no real harm was done.

     I would like to see an end to this Inquest when it is
over and I would not want somebody coming back again and
asking for it to be re-opened and started all over again
because of lack of re pr es ent ati on separately by s o m e
people woo may be alleged to have played a part in tne
deatns.




       /Tnat is a mat te r which my learned friend
That is a matter which my learned friend will. I am sure, fuily
understand.  I merely mention it now so it is not said that it is
mentioned with hindsight afterwards.   There may, indeed, be a
great deal of difference between the responsibility or lack of
responsibility on the part of some of those who died, and
separate representation would in normal circumstances be requirec
because it may be that one family would make an allegation
against another. Again, I give as an example, and I am not
saying that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
someone who died had come at the very last minute with a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to the
front, pushing and crushing, arid had caused some deaths, then
that would be a matter where he or his relatives might well
require to be separately represented.

     THE CORONER: ' Yes, Mr. Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of representation is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you were applying your mind, and (b) for the legal
representatives who obviously have to weigh whatever conflict of
interest there may be between their clients.  So that is really,
not a matter for me, and it is not probably even a matter for
you.  It is a matter for Mr. King and his instructing solicitors
and, of course, primarily for the parties themselves.

     Perhaps I should say one other thing.      You have centioned a
couple of verdicts and matters like that.      I am not getting into
an argument at this stage as to what verdict if any the Jury
would bring in, or even what directions, if any, I am going tc
give them, because the objective of this Inquest as f 2 r as it has
one is to hear the evidence and to enable the Jury to reach a
verdict on the evidence.  I have the advantage of having seen
loads of statements.  I do acknowledge that, but experience has
taught me in much simpler Inquests than this that it is not
infrequent that what you think is going to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the evidence when it actually comes,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any wore you
care to use, is different to what I had anticipated from just
looking at the statement.   So I have made it as far as I am
able a rule not to predetermine the answer but to wait until I
have heard the evidence.   I say this not as a criticism of you
but just as a clarification for everybody.      I do intend to
listen to what is said, which is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously. I have read statements and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial thing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best.   I c a n ’t do more than that.   i
am sorry, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, with regard to the submissions by Mr.
King, the position of the Chief Constable is that he is neutral.
I have "got no submissions to make about what M r . King is asking
you to do, but I wish it to be heard that the position cf the
Chief Constable is that he wants to do everything he c z n tc
assist you in the conduct of this Inquest, and certainly dees r.c
wish to do anything to put in the way of Mr. King any obstruct 10
into any enquiry that he wants to make on behalf of the relative
of the people who died.   Sir, that is the position.
                                                             14




     As a comment on what Mr. King has said, strictly it appears
to us that he is saying that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus actus, i.e. something which
intervened after the crushing and before the deaths, which causec
or contributed to the deaths of at least some of the people, and
the response of the Chief Constable to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can quite see that is something which
people would wish to see investigated on the question of how it
came about.  I only make that comment in an endeavour to be
helpful, but the position of the Chief Constable is that he has
ho submissions one way or the other.

     May I just say while I am on ray feet with regard to what Mr.
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Police have admitted negligence.   It is well known and has
been well publicised that what has happened is that the Police
have agreed to make payments to those people who were injured anc
to the dependents of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made.   Also there has been a ciyil actior
in respect of apportionment of liability in respect of those
matters.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed.   I accept
entirely what you say and in a sense I accept what Mr. Manning
says as well.  It is not really relevant to my proceedings
whether or not negligence has been admitted or not admitted.   It
is neither here nor there.  So I did not comment on it, but I
appreciate what you have said.

     MR. ISAACS:    I think, sir, in fact, that is Mr. Hale.      Mr.
Manning sits to ray left.

      THE CORONER:    I beg your pardon.   Forgive me, please, both
of y o u .

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I have no submissions.  It is entirely a
matter for you having regard to the breadth or depth which you
consider appropriate for this particular Inquest.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have exactly similar comments as far
as my client is concerned.

     MISS SINCLAIR:      I have no submissions on this matter, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I add to that.  The matter is entirely for
you.  You are the best person, having read all the evidence, to
make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had. as
you have already pointed out, sir, a fairly detailed
investigation into the earlier Inquests.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, this is not an application of which I
have had previous notice, and which in the circumstances of the
application is some surprise to me. All I think I should, sir,
is this is not the time and place for some sort of Public Inquiry
into the activities of the Ambulance Service and the E m e r g e n c y
Services, and it is not appropriate to b r i n g such a m atter into
the arena as a sort of side wind.   Beyond that, sir, it is
obviously a matter for you.

     MISS ADDELMANN:   Sir, I have no observations or submissions
about the point, and I can do no better than echo those remarks
made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I too endorse those remarks.  None of us,
other than my learned friend. Mr. King, has seen the original
statements, and so are being invited to comment upon a course in
the dark because we have not seen the nature of an example of the
material he now seeks to rely upon.  I recognise it is a matter
for you, and if you decide I d6n't take a stance one way or the
other.

     THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point? Is there
anybody else wants to say anything on this issue? Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Sir, only to emphasise that it is not a side
wind which I am embarking on.  I am seeking to address causes,
contributory causes to the deaths, and I am concentrating on
that, and it is in that context I have invited the Court to look
beyond 3.15, and certainly we are dealing with it from the point
of view of possibilities of novus actus, yes, I accept that.

     THE CORONER:   I have listened hopefully with attention, anc
perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on.
I know you have not had the advantage of seeing the letter, but
it is only fair to say Mr. King in his summary of the points as
far as I can see summarised the points which his clients were
making entirely fairly.  There is nothing extra in the letter, sc
to speak, except connecting words, basically.  That is for your
reassurance, if I can put it like that.

     Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "go” on the
15th April. 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in thinking
how to set about dealing with the Inquests was to as far as
possible treat the Inquests as if they were completely
standard, if I can put it like that - it is a horrible word -
but completely normal Inquests.   The fact that it was national
news, that it was 95 young people, that it created a terrible
amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in some ways is unique
because of the numbers, but each individual death I dealt with
families are in exactly the same situation, and I tried to
think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
opposed to an incident in a football stadium.   I have thought
back on many occasions to say a road traffic incident where
somebody might have suffered a serious head injury.   That
person may well have been at the road side for X number of
minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
attend.   They may then have been taken by an ambulance to a
hospital.   They may have gone into the resuscitation room.
They may have been worked on by the doctors. They may have gone
into hospital and they may have then died two, three days, may
be longer after the incident.   Or alternatively, you could have
                         /
                        /here by chance the road traffic incident occurs 'on
                         a doctor happens to be. He walks up to the
                       'ks and says. "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
                       rson is dead".   Or you could have a situation where
                      has this road traffic incident and is taken into
                    fod is certified dead on arrival.

                   /one of those instances would I as a matter of routine
                  /denee of what happened after the incident ;itself was
                 ed. and indeed, the pathologists in the example which i
                /ed would have given as cause of death serious head injury
               /stance, for multiple injuries with fracture of the skull. 01
               hing of pat nature.    It seems to me that the fact that the
              on may survive an injury for a number of minutes or hours or
               days, isnot the question which I as Coroner have to
           ^ider.     M^task is to establish who the person was - I am
          f r y to repat this - where he died, when he died and how he
         /fed. It is from my understanding of the pathological evidence,
        .he overwheling pathological evidence is and was that the people
       iied as a reilt of crushing or traumatic asphyxia.       Different
      /words were usd. but the sense was always the same.       The
     / underlying pbblem which these poor men and women were subjected
    /f to was an iroility to breathe.
    1■               I not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
              That d<5
/
         respire forJ,period of time or even have a heart beat
         thereafter.fit the damage was done, and indeed, both Dr.
         Gumpert, Drplater, Prof. Usher, who dealt with this question ir
         an overall Jlnt of view, all in fact said, as I understand theii
         evidence. efCtly the same.

              One                           which you have made is that
         because                                                           r
                                                                        With
      the- greate;
      "reasonabl                           as a pEBBPsa^ra^gg^ ghich I
      would take          if you think about it for a moraen     I am sure
     you would ^ee    with me, ifa body were to be found in a
     macerated &te one would call a doctor who would
     certify de$,    but it would be a little bit illogical to
     assume thafthat particular body was actually alive
     until that>oint.

          The i$ue of death certification and the timing cf it is
     important. >ecause one wants to have if possible certainty.  Tha*
        the f i r e thing. Secondly, the conventional way of
    establish!^ a person is definite dead is that a medical man say:
    so, but to draw the conclusion that until a medical man has said
    so a Person is alive is in my view an impossible proposition to
    maintain




                             /I do understand the anxiety....
                                                                                            17




       I do u nd er st and the anxiety whic h a lot of the families
 have about this issue, but as I have al re ad y said the
 overwhelming m e d ic a l evidence, the pat ho log ica l evidence,
 and that is the c r u ci al one I am in terested in, is the
 damag e that caused the death was done due to the crushing.

     Now I picked the arrival of the first ambulance not
because there is any th i ng magical about that but because
when we look at the videos we can actually see that and it
is a<sc<mvenient m a r k e r ! that is all.    If the first
ambulance had arrived at 3.30 I would         have picked that time.
It is simply intended as         a marker, but, and this is an
important point, I co n s id er ed the me dical evidence.    The
medical evidence was that once - I am not quoting verbatim -
      f Vta   canea   rt P   t.vVio ►   atf e       lie         cq^      a r»/4   4       f Vna




      Now I felt that the evidence wh ic h I had heard and in
the light of what I had read that GlgBlgfig’trffS't^tI'mthe
lates t ,


assume six minutes past, a                                i^fcyjnipufcgfe»&0 :*stka-t>.
tha t is          u  f   c                 e    s    t    ^   o    n    a    t     p
ttiaaSSBPBjiMaie ^
other wordsf^Vhat I am trying to say is
                                                                             *




     I have already indicated that at the - I will call them
the interim inquests if I may just for the sake of a name -


  “at sense"I ^ V o k e ‘ my own rule straight away because I said
I wanted to treat this matter as if it were a completely
standard normal road traffic incident, if you like.          I
didn't, I gave a grea t deal of infor mat io n for various
reasons which I don't need to go into now.

      As an aside I ca n assure you that w i th i n the limits of
our ability the sum ma ri es and the evide nc e wh ic h was given
was an accurate re f l e c t i o n of what people said and if there
was a gap, for instance, as has been su gge st ed in some cases
which is unexplained, t ^ b ^ - ^ ^ ^ p ^ a s n ^ ^ b e c a u s e r t h e r e ^ s
^^qe^Jtiidden .evidence wh Ten w e n a ve put under the curtain,
mft because "w'e'didn' t know of it or coul dn' t find it or it
doesn't exist.     T he truth of the matter, of course, is that
people weren't being wa tched individually con ti nu ou sl y by
                                                                            18




somebody else     r e co r di ng what was happening.       It is en tirely
fortuitous as     to w h e t h e r or not there is a witness or
witnesses who     h a p p e n s (a) to h a v e been with a person, (b)
who remembers     who h e is and (c) has some idea of the timing.

     Some of you w h o were there wil l remember that in some
cases we had a gr eat deal of evide nc e w ith regard to what
had happened po st-crush, shall I say, and in others we had
next to nothing b e c a u s e it is very sad particularly for
those families w he re we ha ve got so little to share wit h
them, but we are living in the real world and in some cases
there was o v e rw he lm in g - for instance, there were dozens of
photographs as yo u k n o w - some of the people were all over
the newspapers and in others we could not find any.           It
can't be helped, it is just one of those things.

          Bearing in mi n d that ^ a ^ ^ f l d « a t yythis.stage to d e a l t
tftjatefoffthe #auestion sof^hoy. and I do intend to deal with it
reasonably c o m p r e h e n s i v e l y , I have to remember two things:
that my powers are limited.                  I don 't have an open ended
authority to ca rr y out an investigation.                  The Rules and the
Act, indeed, are qu i t e clea r as to the limits of what the
coronal inquiry should be.                  I admit that the word "how" is
a little bit f le xib le and assu min g we call all those
witnesses on that pr e l i m i n a r y list wh i c h I have ci rculated I
hope you will ag re e that I have been reasonably flexible
with that word, but nev ert he les s I do have to draw a line.
Indeed, this was d o n e in ot h er inquests.               If you think back
to the Zeebrugge inquest, for instance.                   The learned Cor one r
there drew a line.            He was jud ici al ly reviewed on where he
drew it and in that p a r t ic ul a r cas e the Divisional Court or
the Court of Appeal, I can 't remember now, clearly said that
a line has to be dr a w n and in the Zeebr ugg e case they agreed
it was right.          I ara do in g my best.          I am trying to d r a w a
line as well.

      If you think of the other ma j o r d i sas ter s where
inquests have a l r e a d y taken place, you will find that lines
were drawn there as well and I think you will find that the
line with regard to the qu es t i o n wh ich we are now thinking
about was very, v e r y m uc h tighter than what we have alr eady
done.

     In answer to y our submission, I still consider that as
a general p r o p o si ti on we are going to accept - I am g o i n g to
take these inquests and d e a l wit h the que st i on of how on the
basis of what h a p p e n e d to about 3.15 or thereabouts.       I
have explained it to you so I ara not going to repeat it and
I base it mainly u p o n the p at ho log ic al med ic al evidence.

     Having said that, I think it is pro bab ly right to say
because we will be c a l l i n g w it ne sse s it may be that g a m es8of
          4v.whichvwo^..ry^you^ayv^ber.;4 ea.ltr;with -to -a minor*




                                ©
                                                                                           19




        I have also got to say, it is only right, that whattoff^
                       |                 > *n£asn±miwi*4s} Mr. King, i£BES88iold«
                     alafcf t i q u l 'v i/n H n t* u rniu * ± t t f ^ ™ * n m e m ^ f a s j
un d er st an d it, ^re^outside^mji^uthori-ty^atid®®??!#^.                               I also
seem to recollect, alth oug h Lord Jus ti ce Taylor s Inquiry
isn't - as I have al re ady said to you at the business
meeting, I don't really want to spend too much time on it -
but I do recollect that the emerg enc y services w ere very
well represented at that Inquiry and, indeed, a lot of
discussion, from my reading of the transcripts, did deal
with the issues of .the me dical response.

          Wh et her or not that was satisfactory, whether Lord
J u s t i c e Taylor should have d o n e more, whether some bod y else
should look into that when we have finished that is no thing
to do with me.          However, as far as I am concerned, my
intention is to stick with what I gave you as my initial
pre li mi na ry intention.

       I have, of course, al re ad y looked through the d ocu me nts
which you sent me and insofar as in one or two instances
wi tn ess es are mentioned, if I think, and, indeed, I have
thought that one or two of these in fact I think three at
the moment, you have got a point.             It would perhaps be
adv an tag eo us to call those persons and w e are m a ki ng
ap pr op ri at e arrangements.   Pl eas e don't think that I have
said, "Good grief, fifty pages, I am not dealing w i t h that,"
I ha ve already spent quite a b it of time thinking abo ut it
and I will hopefully have a n o th e r look.        If I w e r e - whi ch
is h i g h l y unlikely - in any pa r ti cu l ar instance to feel we
ought to go a little bit further down that line b e c a u s e
there is a specific point to be made in any par ti cul ar
instance, then I will if I think it necessary, tell you.
However, I think it is unlik el y from wha t I have se e n and
what I have read and for the reasons w h i c h I have gi ven you.




                MR. KING:          Sir,    thank you for that...
     MR. KING:   Thank you for that.   Can I raise a
separate matter, sir, which is not connected with the issue
of cut off but is connected with the issue of 50 pages
which you have referred to?

     THE CORONER:      I was not saying that as a criticism.

     MR. KING:   Not at all, sir.   One only has to state
the number of families whom I represent to know that.
Sir, a number of the families have raised specific
questions relating to the summaries which were put before
you in their individual Inquests.   I just give one
example, sir; in the case of No. 13, Jonathan Owens, you
will note they have a particular concern as to the timing
when their son came to the ground and a particular concern
to the fact that the summary suggests he joined the crowd
at twenty to three when, in fact, they point out to you
that the positive video evidence shows they were standing,
not having joined the crowd at all, round about ten to or
eight minutes to three.   I put that as an example.

     Are you willing, sir, to go through those individual
questions - not now - and indicate at some stage, perhaps
even in writing to us, whether or not you would be prepared
to reopen those individual Inquests to deal with those -
may be small points in the whole but to the individual
families - important points of factual errors which seem, to,
have crept in by reference to positive evidence whicn can
now be laid before you?

     THE CORONER:   My recollection of the papers is that
they affected very few or where I feel it is justified.    I
think those two things go together.   As I say, I have not
had sufficient time to study it in detail but if I were to
think there was a genuine error and that that error was
actually relevant - the incident which you have given me
indicates with respect to the family it is an anxiety to
them - but the crucial point is not whether he was standing
in a crowd or whether he was standing aside but where was
he or at least at what time was he still outside the
ground?   One has to ask the question, does it actually get
us any further forward?

     MR. KING:   May I just interpose to say that the
example I gave was directed as much to the timings outside
the ground in fact.

     THE CORONER:   If we have made a mistake, and we will
be checking that...

     MR. KING:      I am obliged.
     THE CORONER:   When points have been made of actual
error we have been trying to check.    If we agree with
them, as Mr. Fraser and some of the others will remember
we have made from time to time a<£ hoc amendments when
points of error were pointed out to us.    I am not averse
to that, not in principle anyway, and if it helps someboc
by clarifying something then I will be pleased to do so b
I would not want necessarily to spend endless time on
clarifying minutiae which, in the final analysis, do not
matter so far as the Jury are concerned.    I am sure you
accept that.

     MR. KING:   I understand that, sir, but I am sure whe;
families are supplied with an "agreed" summary and they set
matters which are of great concern to them which appear to
be incorrect then obviously they are desirous that that
should be rectified as quickly as possible.

     THE CORONER:      I take it none of you have any adverse
comments on that?

     MR. KING:   What I am going to suggest is that those
instructing me extract from those documents which do
confuse two issues, those which are directed specifically
to individual questions and they can be then sent to you in
a more orderly manner which enables us the more quickly to
obtain help from you.

     THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful indeed
because then we would really know what we are looking at
and what we have got to concentrate on.

     MR. KING:      Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Are there any other comments from
anybody?

     MR.   ISAACS: . Yes, sir.   I just wondered how we are
going to   deal with these matters.   I know that you started
with Mr.   King and I thought probably what you would do is
run down   the line so to speak.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we will do that.      Have you got
any submissions to make?

     MISS HAMPTON:   I have no submissions raised by Mr.
King, though he has raised one particular matter which
concerns the City Council with regard to the agreed summary
of facts.   They have been through the proposed summary
prepared for today's hearing and there are one or two
matters, they have instructed me on, which concerns them,
sir.
     THE CORONER:   I think I will be able to short circuit
this submission.  You will recollect, ladies and gentlemen,
at the business meeting a suggestion was made that we
should try and extract various paragraphs out of Lord
Justice Taylor’s Report as an agreed statement.   I was not
particularly enamoured of the view and for some reason
which at the moment I cannot account for I forgot to
mention at the meeting that we were actually in the process
of preparing what we thought was an actual non-
controversial, entirely neutral, account of various
activities which we hoped it.would be possible to put to
the Jury so that they had an underlying base on which one
could build the edifice, so to speak.

     In the events which have happened, we have heard from
most of you, if not all, but whilst quite a lot of you have
actually come back and said that you are reasonably happy
with the summary there have been quite a number of you who
have had substantial points of criticism to make with
regard to the content.   Unfortunately some of these points
- and I do not think I am criticising anybody and I am not
going to name any names either - were not made until Friday
or even later.   When I say Friday, I mean Friday late
afternoon.   I have come to the conclusion that we are not
going to use these summaries at all.   We will build, if
that is the right word, what we need as we go along.

     I mention that now, and I will mention it when the
Jury are here, but what we are going to do is that we have
got some two dozen slides which we are going to show.
They are shots of the ground from the air and so on in
order to give the Jury some idea of what we are talking
about and then we will just build the evidence on it as far
as is necessary for the purposes of the Inquest.   I think
that probably deals with your point..  I know that many of
you thought it was a jolly good idea but in the event it
has not worked out.   I thought it was a jolly good idea as
well which is why I intended to do it but I would rather
not.   Some of the points which were made, I could see what
was being said and some were very good, but I would rather
not have anything which people were not entirely happy on.
Some of you might feel you have been pushed because you
have been asked to agree to something.   If you are not
happy with the evidence, that is another matter altogether.
I take no responsibility for what the witnesses say.    We
have to accept the evidence that is given.   Are there any
Other submissions you want to make, Miss Hampton?

    MISS HAMPTON:    No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale, what about you?
The first, of course, is Rule '22 of the Coroners Rules of
1984, dealing w i t h s e l f - i n c r i m i n a t i o n , sub-Rule 1 - and
tnis is the m a t t e r that I referred to:

      "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to a n s w e r
      any q ues tio n tending to incriminate nitnself."

And then Section 14 of the Civil Evidence Act, wnich in iny
submission is to the same effect but I refer to it for the
sake of completeness.    That is the Civil Evidence Act of
1968, sub-section 1:
                             •
     "The right of a person in any legal proceedings,
     other than criminal proceedings, to refuse to a nswer
     any question or produce any document or thing if to
     do so would tend to expose that person to proceedings
     for an offe nc e or for the recovery of a penalty, (a;
     shall apply only as regards criminal offences under
     the law of any part of the United Kingdom, and the
     penalties provided for by such law and (b) shall
     include a like right to refuse to answer any quest ion
     or produce any d ocument or thing if to do so would
     tend to expo se the husband or wife of that person to
     proceedings for any such criminal offence or for the
     recovery of any such penalties."

I mention sub-sect io n (b) only because it is there not
because, of course, it is in any way relevant to this
case.

     So, sir, that is the position.           Mr. Duckinfield, as
with any witness before you and before the Jury, has that
privilege not to answer any question which may tend to
incriminate him.        So, sir, what does that mean?     Could I
then ask you to turn to the bundle?           My submission is that
there are two cases, one in the Court of Appeal one in the
House of Lords w h i c h followed, in which the House of Lords
confirmed the d e c i s i o n of the Court of Appeal, which gives
you a great d eal of gui da nce as to »/ lat constitutes a
risk, a tendency, of incrimination.           The first one is that
in the Court of Appeal, the case of Re Westinghouse
Eloctric Co rpo r a t i o n Uran iu m Contract Litigation HDL
Docket No. 235 (No. T T * reported in the third volume of
the All England Reports of 1977 at page 717, and I would
ask you at this stage, sir, to find that, w h i c h is at
folder 6.

      Sir, the fact, of that case are wholly different to
trie facts of this, but of course it is the statement of
principle, the ratio of the case to which I wish to refer.
May I first of all read that part of the preamble to the
headnote:

      "Evidence - Privilege - Incrimination of witness or
      spouse - B elief that evidence would expose witness to
      proceedings for offence or recovery of penalty -
      Reasonable ground for belief - Sufficient to show
      real and ap pre ci abl e risk that proceedings would be
      taken or increase of an existing risk of proceeding;
      • • •



and then it goes on to d ea l with discovery of documents,
production of d o c ume nt s and I don't weary you with that
now, si;*.

     Sir, I d o n ’t think it will be helpful to you or to
those who are listening to this submission to deal with
the facts of that cas , oth^r than to say that it was
action involving an Ame r i c a n corporation against RTZ, Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation Limited, and there was an
application for disco ver y of documents which Rio Tinto
Zinc did not wish to produce because they said that to
produce those documents would give rise to the possibility
that they may well face prosecution or a penalty within
European C ommunity law, but I now deal with what was held,
and this, sir, is at page 718, and these are the
statements of gen era l principle wnich in my submission
apply to the giving of evidence in any Court, and
tnerefore before you, sir.

     THE COKONER:   May    I just stop you - the page numbers
are missing off mine.

     MR. ISAACS:     It is the second page - the next page
after the first.    I do apologise, sir.
                                                                     /
     "Held - A witness was protected from incriminating
     himself by the prod uc tio n of documents ...."

- and, it therefore   follows,   by the giving of any answer
to any question -

     "... if he could satisfy the court that there was
     reasonable ground to believe that production of the
     documents would fur nis h evidence against him which
     would be used in proceedings for a penalty ...."

- and again, that was, of course, relevant to that case,
but it applies to pr oce e d i n g s for a criminal offence, and
indeed it could be said, having regard to the wide ambit
of tne Coroners Rules, for example proceedings in relation
to dis ci plinary matters, w a i c h of co urse you, sir, know
Hr. Duckinfield along w i t h others still faces.

     "Reasonable ground for the belief might appear from
     t h e .ci rcu m s t a n c e s of the case or from matters put
     forward by the witness himself, but the witness was
     required to show only that tnere was a real and
     appreciable risk, or an increase of an existing risk,
     that p roceedings would be taken against him for an
     existing penalty offence, and not that proceedings
     were likely to be or would probably be taken."
                                                          29




You will see, sir, as we go through the reports, that one of the
points made by those who objected to the claim to the privilege
was that. "Well, the European Commission already know about this
and so you are not going to make your position any worse". We
shall see, sir, I hope, how both the Court of Appeal and the
House of Lords dealt with that proposition, because that might b
a point that is taken here.

     Sir. knowing that you don't have page numbers could I ask
you to turn to the next page over, page 721, the right-hand side
of the first judgment which was that of the Master of the Rolls.
Lord Denning.  It is the right-hand side of the page, and he
deals with the common law as to self-incrimination.  I ask you t<
look first of all at between D-E:

         "Today we are not dealing with a party to a cause, we
         are dealing with a witness.   At common law, when a
         witness is being examined in the witness box or is
         subpoenaed to produce documents to the court then,
         quite understandably, he may have something he
         wishes to keep secret to himself so that his
         neighbours or his competitors should not get to
         know of it;  something which he might reasonably
         believe he ought not to be compelled to disclose.
         Not, at any rate, if it exposes him to risk of
         some ill befalling him.   The common law does in
         some circumstances cast its protection over him.
         It adopts the maxim nemo tenetur seipsum prodere.
         No ;one is bound to furnish evidence against
         himself. It says:   'If a witness claims the
         protection of the court, on the ground that the
         answer would tend to incriminate himself and there
         appears reasonable ground to believe that it would
         do so, he is not compellable to answer".

Then th^re is some reference by the Master of the Rolls to a
certain number of cases which I shall not weary you with, because
they are all dealt with in the judgment itself and the statements      ;
of principle in the judgment.                                          ;

     Could you go down to H on that same page:

          "But if it appears to the judge that, by being          ^ [
          compelled to   answer, a witness may" (I stress the "may' \
          sir) "may be   furnishing evidence against himself, whici- ?
          could" (I stress the "could” sir) "be used against him     j
          in criminal proceedings or in proceedings for a            *
          penalty, then his objection should be upheld.              i

          There is the further point:    once it appears that a
          witness is ?t risk, then ’great latitude should be
                                                                       j
          allowed to him in judging for himself of the effect     of   i
          any particular question':   see R. v. Boyes” .
                                                            30




I would ask you to pay particular attention to the next few
line^. sir:

          "It may only be one link in he chain, or only
          corroborative of existing material, but still he is
          bound to answer if he believes on reasonable grounc
          that it could be used against him.  It is not neces
          for him to show that proceedings are likely to be t
          against him, or could probably be taken against him
          It may be improbable that they will be taken but
          nevertheless, if there is some risk of their being
          taken, a real and appreciable risk as distinct from
          remote or insubstantial risk, then he should not be
          made to answer or to disclose the documents".

I stop.--'there for my purposes in relation to this authority, a
least in the judgment of Lord Denning.

     Could I then ask you to turn over to the next page.  We j
move to the judgment of Lord Justice Roskill, which is pages
and 725, and I ask you to look at page 725, the right-hand si<
of the page at D.

           "It has long been a rule of English law, as Lord
           Denning MR has pointed out, that a person cannot ...
           be required to answer questions or produce documents
          which may lead to his being, if I may be forgiven a
           colloquialism, 'convicted out of his own m outh’.
           is a long line of authorities dealing with this topi
          'of which the earliest cited to us was R . v . Boyes. a
           decision of the Court of the Queen’s Bench subsequen
           expressly approved by this court in Re Reynolds, ex
           parte Reynolds. Those two cases, and there are othe
           to the same effect, show clearly that a mere asserti
           of a claim for privilege on the ground of an alleged
           risk of self-incrimination is not enough to enable t
           privilege to be successfully claimed.  Nor, of cours
           will the court uphold such a claim for privilege whe
           it is made in bad faith."

May I stop there for a moment, sir.  An example of that would
this, and there are reported cases to this effect, where a man
has for example, given a statement to the Police.  He goes int-
the witness box as a prosecution witness.  May be because he h.
been given immunity he says, "I do not wish to answer these
questions because the answers may incriminate me", when in fac'
he does not wish to protect himself but what he is trying to d<
is to protect another by not giving that evidence, for example
previous employer or a friend.  In those circumstances he woul<
not be acting in good faith but in bad faith and the privilege
would not be upheld.

At F:

          "The first question which a court must ask itself is
          whether the facts proved in evidence disclose the
          commission of an offence, in some cases a criminal


                        ( ^   )
                                                          31




          offence.  The first question here is whether those
          facts disclose that there is a liability on Rio Tinto
          for what counsel for Rio Tinto called ’a penalty
          offence'.....

          What, then is the degree of risk of penalty proceeding
          following? It seems to me that once a party to legal
          proceedings who is resisting production of documents
          can show facts which establish the existence of a
          penalty offence (or in other cases the commission of a
          criminal offence) the courts should be slow to deprive
          that party of his privilege against self-incrimination
          which the common law now for some three centuries, and
          s 14 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 today, accords him
          In the absence of bad faith, to say that there is no
          risk of proceedings may in all but the plainest cases
          involve a court claiming for itself a degree of
          prescient foresight to which it would not be wise to
          pretend for it its forecast were wrong and if
          proceedings and penalties were to follow, damage will
          or at least may be done by an erroneous decision of th<
          court which it would not be easy thereafter to undo or
          redress.”

I ask you to turn over the page again to what would be 726. the
left-hand side of the page at D. Again, after a review of the
authorities. Lord Justice Roskill says:

          "It cannot, I think, be right in these cases for
          the court to attempt a quantitative assessment of
          the probability one way or the other of the risk
          of proceedings ultimately being taken, and then
          to seek to draw the line one way where the
          probabilities in the view of the court are
          thought to be more or less evenly balanced and
          the other where the balance is more disparate.
          It is not for the court to resolve problems of
          this kind by calculating odds.  I think that the
          right question to ask is that posed by Shaw L J ; can
          exposure to the risk of penalties (or in other cases t<
          the risk of prosecution for a criminal offence) be
          regarded as so far beyond the bounds of reason as to b
          no more than a fanciful possibility?”

In fact, later on Lord Justice Shaw said exactly that.

     Could I ask you to turn from that case to part 7 of the
folder you have been handed, because the case ended up in the
House of Lords, where as I say the Court of Appeal’s view was
upheld, as were the dicta of the Master of the Rolls and the
learned Lord Justices.  It is interesting to note when the House
of Lords dealt with the case what was said in relation to this
question of the information already being in the possession of,
let us call them in the context of this case, the prosecuting
authorities.  I anticipate you are lacking in numbers again.   If
I could ask you to turn over the first page and go to the second
This would be page 437 on the right-hand side, sir, dealing with
                                                         32




that part of the case as to what was held by their Lordships,     i
would draw your attention to (ii) starting with "The RTZ
companies".


          "(ii)   The RTZ companies were entitled to claim the
          privilege from the production of documents given by s
          14(1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding that the
          commission had knowledge of the cartel and had not
          taken any action in respect of it, for if the documents
          were produced under the letters rogatory the RTZ
          companies would be exposed to a greater risk of
          proceedings being brought against them by the
          commission for recovery of a fine than they were
          exposed to at present, since production of the
          documents might authenticate and support the existing
          information in the hands of the commission and afford
          conclusive proof of a breach by the RTZ companies of
          the prohibition against cartels, and might cause the
          commission to decide to take action against the RTZ
          companies".

So, sir, we have there the House of Lords dealing with the point
that may be raised in this case as to the decision that has been
taken by the Director in this case, but who knows what will
happen in the future.

     Could you then turn four pages on to what would be page 445
between B-C, still the speech of Lord Wilberforce.  He says at C

          "I base that conclusion in part on evidence which was
          before and considered by the High Court and the Court
          of Appeal and in part on the proposition that the
          tendency to expose to a penalty would be increased if
          the documents in question were to be validated and
          connected with the RTZ companies by sworn evidence,
          as opposed to being, as they are now, pieces of paper
          found in a file".

Sir, it won't have escaped you the difference between, albeit th<
evidence that was given before Lord Justice Taylor was all taken
down, it was not evidence that was given on oath, but of course
the evidence before you would be given on oath.

     Then, sir, could you turn another six pages, pages 456 and
457.  "To give any evidence".  This is the speech of Viscount
Dilhorne. between G-H, and you appreciate, sir, I am only pickin:
those parts which are germane to this matter:

          "Secondly, it was argued that the discovery of the
          document would not in the circumstances tend to expose
          the RTZ companies to such proceedings". (That is for a
          penalty)  "It was said that as the commission had
          knowledge from the 'Friends of the Earth' documents fo
          a considerable time of the existence of the cartel and
          had taken no action, there was no real risk of such
          proceedings if the documents in the possession of the


                         <2   )
                                                            33




          RTZ companies were disclosed".


Then he deals with the arguments and reference to certain
authority.

     If you could move to page 457, the right-hand side, between
C-D, and he refers to what was said by Lord Denning in the Court
of Appeal to which I have just referred you, he says:

          "With these observations I respectfully agree.     It u as
          suggested that the reasoning in the Triplex case had
          reduced the burden which formerly lay on a person
          claiming privilege but I do not think that that is the
          case.  In his judgment du Parq LJ reviewed the earlier
          cases and based his conclusions on them.     Lord Denning
          MR contrasted a real and appreciable risk with a remote
          or insubstantial one, and once it appears that the risl
          is not fanciful, then it follows that it is real.     If
          it is real, then there must be a reasonable ground to
          apprehend danger, and. if there is, g r ea t.latitude is
          to be allowed to the witness and to a person required
          to produce documents.

          If the RTZ companies are compelled to produce the
          documents which they were asked to produce, I
          cannot reach the conclusion that it would be
          fanciful to suppose that that would expose them to
          no greater risk than at present of proceedings for
          the recovery of a penalty being brought against
          them.  The documents might well authenticate and
          support the information now in the hands of the
          commission".

So what the learned Law Lord is saying, sir, in my submission,
that even though the Commission nad evidence before it which the>
had decided to take no action on, the production of these
documents, the production of additional information, may well be
sufficient to cause them to take a different view.

     There is just one further part I would ask vou to look at.
and that is in the speech of Lord Diplock.  Page 465 on the
right-hand side of a page which begins, "The privilege claimed b:
the RTZ companies".  Could you go to the right-hand side, sir. a*
B:

          "I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to
          dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents
          relating to the cartel were produced at the trial in
          the Virginia proceedings and came, as they then would,
          into the public domain, the resulting publicity in tni:
          sensitive political field might result in pressure on
          the commission to take against the RTZ companies
          speedier and severer action than they might otherwise
          have d o n e " .

Sir, having regard to both past and recent events, some events s
                                                              34




       SS t0 ?e °nly a matter of days ago in relation    1-

                                  ilr-JS*                thePreSSU'
particular°caseiP^°C k ' haV* *                               ^

                             /So, sir, that is the law
                                                                             37




 misunderstood the situa tio n so far as the Director's
 decision was concerned.           At that stage they indicated that
 Mr. Duckenfield w o u l d then b e prepared to make a statement,
 or might be p r e p a r e d to m ak e a statement, for the purposes
 of the d isc iplinary proceedings.          They received by letter
 of the 6th September, 1990, this reply:

      "You are c o r r e c t when you say that the DPP has d e c i d e d
      that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute y o u r
      client for any cr iminal offence arising out of the
      Hillsborough tragedy.            It is also correct to say that
      the d i s ci pli nar y issues how have to be considered by
      South Yorksh ir e Police in consultation with the P ol ic e
      Complaints Authority.            I believe you are also awa re
      there are out sta nd ing civil actions being brought by
      various p arties with an interest in the matter and that
      there are ni n e t y - f i v e Coroner's inquests to be
      reconvened.

      I ara aware that at the interview on the 3rd of July,
      1990, your c l ien t intimated that once the DPP had made
      his dec isi on in respect of the criminal issues he w o u l d
      consider be i n g inter vie wed in respect of any
      disciplinary matters.               If that is still his wish then
      I am ready to c o n d uc t that interview, but it must be
      understood that the d i s c ipl in ary matters are very
      closely related to the cr iminal issues so any i n t e r v i e w
      would h a v e to be condu cte d under a Police and Cr im ina l
      Evidence Act c a u t i o n and the transcript of the
      questions and answers wou ld have to be sent to the DPP
      for further c o n s i d e r a t i o n of the criminal matters.

      That is the po sit ion in respect of any new or
      additional e v i d e n c e w h i c h comes to light, for example,
      that wh ic h may ari se out of the civil actions or the
      Coroner's inquests.            It is not for me to advise you or
      your client as to h ow you, or he, should proceed, but
      it seems to me that you should b e aware of the
      foregoing informa tio n."

        Sir, one cou ld n ot have a c l e a re r statement, in my
submission, of it b e i n g said that anything that is said by
any witness in these proceedings, but my concern is Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, w h o after all is the only p o l i c e
off ice r in this m a t t e r who was suspended and remains
suspended as a result of this tragedy, that anything that is
said by him will, as a m a tte r of course, be sent to the
D i rec tor and, w h o knows, it m ay be that the Director on
receiving such i n f o r m a t i o n will r ec onsider his decision.

     In my sub m i s s i o n it c a n n o t be said that the risk   to
Chief S uperintendent D u c k e n f i e l d is a fanciful one as    to the
likelihood of p r o c e e d i n g s taking place.     Indeed, one   knows
that only a m a t t e r of day s ago, and I ask you to look         at
                                                                               40




something I m e n t i o n e d earlier, and this is at section 3 of
the bundle:

      "Mr. D u ck en fie ld, as with some other Officers, s t i l l
      has h a n g i n g o v e r his head the d i s c i p l i n a r y proceedings
      pursuant to the making of com pla in ts un der R e g u l a t i o n 7
      of the P o l i c e Disciplinary Regul at ion s of 1985.”

T h o u g h docum en ts h a v e been served on him pursuant to
Regu la tio n 7 d e a l i n g w it h those matters.




                  Of course, anything h e says..
                                                         42




     offence had been committed and that for other
     verdicts (except an open verdict) they had to be
     satisfied on the balance of probabilities.
     Furthermore, when directing a jury on
     manslaughter comprising unlawful killing alleged
     to have occurred because of neglect on the part
     of police, the coroner was required to direct the
     jury on four matters..."

I pause there.    My submission is this, against the
background of the submission I have already made, namely
that any question which Mr. *Duckenfield was asked would
have the tendency to incriminate that in relation to those
four matters that the Divisional Court referred to, if any
question is asked of Mr. Duckenfield which touches upon any
of these four matters, or of any of the four ingredients of
the first matter to which the Divisional Court refers,
there will be a tendency to incriminate him in the very
nature of the question itself because these are questions
which would be directed to the possible commission of a
criminal offence.    Those matters are these:

     "...firstly that they had to be satisfied, on the
     evidence, of four ingredients, namely (a) that
     the police were under a duty to have regard to
     the health and welfare of the deceased..."

So any question to Mr. Duckenfield as to his duty in
relation to the spectators at Hillsborough, or those who
tragically died, would require an answer which would have a
tendency to incriminate.  It continues:

     "...(b) that in the circumstances there was a
     failure to do what should have been done for the
     health and welfare of the deceased..."

So any question asked of Mr. Duckenfield as to what he did
or did not do that day which touched upon the health and
welfare of the deceased would be a question which would
require an answer which would tend to incriminate him.   It
goes on:

     "...(c) that the failure amounted to a
     substantial cause of death..."

So any question asked of him - of course this is only a
privilege of self-incrimination - as to causation between
what he did and any death or deaths, or the deaths of those
who died in general terms, would be a question which would
tend to incriminate, that is, the answer would tend to
incriminate and:




                        &
on that particular question Mr. Duckenfield or perhaps
myself saying, "Sir, I object to answering that question.
I rely on privilege".   The risk of prejudice so far as the
Jury is then concerned is overwhelming both in so far as
Mr. Duckenfield is concerned and indeed the position so far
as the South Yorkshire Police themselves as a body are
concerned (and here I intrude a little on to Mr. Payne's
territory).

     One can perhaps, no matter how carefully you are
directing, see the difficulty that would be in the mind of
the Jury if to every question the position of privilege is
claimed.  They would be bound to think, "What has this man
got to hide?" You, sir, know and my learned colleagues and
I know, that such a privilege is said not to be taken
against a man but lay people and lawyers are quite
different and there comes a time when they say to
themselves, "There is something funny here. We are not
being told the whole truth and whatever".   My concern.is
that even in the asking of a question that may be
disallowed by you there will be sufficient in the question
to prejudice the Jury against either Mr. Duckenfield or
others.

     I come back to the point I made earlier about the line
being drawn.   Everything at the moment is above the line.
I am concerned there should be nothing below the line which
may prejudice Mr. Duckenfield.    May I go back to the
analogy you drew as to the straightforward case of the
reckless driver and the fatality?

     I anticipate that it would be your practice - let us
say no PACE interview had taken place - that the driver had
relied upon his right not to answer any questions, as has
taken place in this case so far Mr. Duckenfield was
concerned, and you would not in those circumstances with
the driver facing the possibility of prosecution say to the
driver, "You must answer these questions as to what you did
and what you thought" etc.  You would not expect the driver
to answer those questions in those circumstances.   Mr.
Duckenfield is in exactly the same position.

     It may be said that Mr. Duckenfield is such an
important participant in the events of that day that
without him what is the point of going on at all but in my
submission that would be misconceived because the privilege
is only against self-incrimination.  There are many, many
people, both police officers and civilians who can give
evidence as to the facts and the factual decisions that Mr.
Duckenfield took on that day and so the Jury will not in
any way be deprived of the opportunity of hearing about
what happened.  They would just be deprived of not being
told by Mr. Duckenfield.
                                                         4S




     I come back again to the point that I made at the
outset.   Whilst this is a high, profile Inquest, it is
important not to disregard the rights of any individual who
has interests of his own and important interests which are
affected by the law.

      I finally say this - and I know I have been on my feet
for quite some time and I do not want to weary you
further - that if it be felt necessary by you, and both you
and I know, sir, that there are no PACE statements or
interviews by Mr. Duckenfield, that the Jury must hear
something about what Mr. Duckenfield said about the day
then, sir, upon instructions - and it is only on this basis
that I put this - I have no complaint with what Mr.
Duckenfield said to the Taylor Inquiry going before the
Jury.   I say that because that is all above the line as
opposed to anything new below the line.

     That has already been considered by the Director and
my concern is that there is something else.  It may be
said, "We can ask him the same questions and if the
Director has already considered those matters, well then,
frankly what has he got to worry about?" Sir, the asking
of the question (a) is unlikely to be in the same terms and
(b) the answer is unlikely to be in the same terms and it
does not have to be an answer which is an admission of any
offence.   It only has to be, on the authorities, a step
possibly towards this, and again, sir, you have the dicta
where that is made abundantly clear.

     I fear, and I know you are mindful of this, sir, that
this is really the last opportunity for the families (and
one can understand their concern and I do not criticise
them at all) through my learned friend, Mr. King, or Mr.
Hytner who may well be brought in, as Mr. King mentioned on
the last occasion to, cross-examine Mr. Duckenfield or
other witnesses, to produce extra evidence to get that
which they have, which we see, been pressing for.  It is in
those circumstances that seeking to protect Mr.
Duckenfield's interests, to be fair to him whilst being
fair to others, and being mindful of the restricted area of
Inquests as this is not a Public Inquiry, this is not the
Spanish Inquisition, this is not the Star Chamber, not only
should be the questions which he is to be asked that he
should not be obliged to give evidence at all. Those are
my submissions, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Can I just make two small points before
I call anybody else? Perhaps it was my fault, I do not
recollect, but if I instanced an RTA where the driver was
reckless then I made a mistake because if a driver had been
reckless he would have been charged with causing death by
                                                           46




reckless driving and under Section 16 of the Coroner’s Act
I would have had to adjourn it sine d i e . The point I was
trying to make was that under normal circumstances it was
the ordinary driver.

     MR. ISAACS:   Let us say, it is probably my fault,
careless driving or driving without due care.

     THE CORONER:   It makes no difference to the argument
but I just wanted to be clear that we were talking about
the same thing.
                    4


     MR. ISAACS:    It is important-   The seriousness of the
crime is neither .here nor there.   It is a privilege, as you
and I know, against self-incrimination in any offence.    I
am obliged to you, sir.

     THE CORONER:     It is 1236 and in twenty minutes we
will be rising because at two o'clock we are starting with
the Jury.    Can you indicate whether any of you feel you
wish to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made?
What you are saying is that there is clear authority that a
person does not have to answer questions which tend to
incriminate him, to use the text of the rule, and you cited
the rule plus several cases.    Do any of you feel you want
to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made? As I
understand it, what you are saying is that there is clear
authority for saying that a person does not have to answer
a question which may tend to incriminate him and you cited
the rule plus several cases.    It is exceedingly difficult
to formulate questions where people are in danger of
prosecution which are meaningful and in the circumstances
what is the point of getting the mem or the witness to come
into the b o x at all? You are not suggesting that a PACE
statement, i£ there is one, or anybody else should be
excluded?

     MR. ISAACS:   No, sir, not at all.

     THE CORONER:   Have I summarised very, very briefly
the heart of your submission?

     MR. ISAACS:   Indeed you have, sir.  To call him in
those circumstances would only serve to disadvantage him as
well as others in addition to the prejudice which would be
caused.  You have summarised it absolutely correctly.

     THE CORONER:   The fourth point you have made is that
the damage of refusing to answer the questions is out of
proportion to the benefit of having him here as a witness?

     MR. ISAACS:   There is no benefit in having him here
because any question he is asked is bound to have the
tendency to incriminate him on the basis of the principles
I have put before you.

     THE CORONER:   I look to Mr. King, first of all,
because he is the most likely person to address me on    the
issues.  Are you likely to address me on this?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I would wish to.   There are two
matters.  One I would wish to hear if anybody else has
anything to say in support and, secondly, in the light of
what has just fallen from my learned fr ie n d ’s lips as to
the use of the transcript I Would like to take certain
instructions from those whom I represent.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, it seems to me that it
would be wise, before I give a ruling on your submission,
to allow other people to have their say so that I can hear
different points of view and secondly, it gives me a chance
to think about it as well.  If you do not think it rude,
what I intend to do is not proceed with the point at this
stage because we cannot deal with the submissions on what
is quite an important point actually in twenty minutes and
we will deal with it either at four this afternoon, subject
to your agreement, when the Jury go or if it is more
convenient to you we can deal with it at four tomorrow or
any other day.




                /Mr. Duckenfield is not going.
                                                                48




Hr. Duckenfield is not going to be called in the immediate
future, so in that sense it is not urgent that we have got
to have a ruling this morning.

     J1R. ISAACS:    Sir, save for this, that I am afraid -
and you may have g l e a n e d tftis from some of tne newspapers,
I think - that I will not have the privilege of being
before you on most da y s during this Inquest.

       THE CORONER:     I had not appreciated that.

      MR. ISAACS:    You had not, sir, but no, I am afraid
that is the position.        Without going into any details I am
afraid that the cost of representation would be so great,
and there is no s uff icient fu.ids for him at the present
time.   The Police A u t h o r i t y have unfortunately failed to
agree that he or oth<2 rs in a similar position should have
their representation paid for, so I am afraid that he will
not be represented d u r i n g the course of this inquest, sir,
other than on the days when, if you do decide that he
should be called, he is actually giving evidence.

     THE CORONER:   And presumably on the days when any
statement - in fact, I think there is one,  it is not very
long but I think there is one - were to be dea lt with?

     MR. ISAACS:      T h a t may or may not be the case, sir,
but one can un de rst an d tne difficulties.    May I say this,
in relation to what you said just a moment ago, and this
perhaps is a little spe ci al pleading?      You said a moment
ago you did not want to be rude - I think I can speak on
behalf of all my learn ed friends, it is a long time since
we have been before a tribunal wiich is so court eou s and
we are very grateful to you for that.        We are n ot perhaps
used to being treated so well.

       TH E CORONER:   W i l l you be here this afternoon?

       MR.   ISAACS:   I shall be here this afternoon,   sir,
yes.

       TH E CORONER:    In that case shall we deal with it
this afternoon?      Is that agreeable to all of you?   I know
it makes it a longer d ay but I did say at our business
mee ti ng that the lawyers nave to put up w i t h the strain.
I don*t like to sub jec t my jury to too heavy pressure,
because it is not fair on them, but we have just got to
put up with it, so to speak.      Is that agreeable to
everybody?     Good.

     Is there any ot h e r --- perhaps you could outline the
nature of your submissions, so I know what we have got in
sfore, so to speak.

       MR. MANNING:   The first thing I am going to do, if I
may,   is to pay tribute to the way in which my learned
                                                               49




friend Mr. Isaacs has put the matter before you, and the
second thing I ara not going to do is to repeat it* It
does not get stronger or better by repetition.

     You k n o w that I represent Superintendent Hurray,  ile
has made a statement under the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act.     I expect that in one form or another that
will be brought before this hearing at some stage, and
having done that I find myself adopting, and -.11 the more
so, the views that have been canvassed before you.

     At'the end of tnis hearing the verdict will be one
for the Jury and as learned as we hope we may be in the
ways in which a Coroner's Inquest is to proceed, the fact
of the matter is that the probability is that most of the
people w 10 will be on the Jury have never been on any
jury, and I shall certainly be surprised if they have ever
been on a Coroner's Jury.   With t<ie best directions in the
world, the fact of the matter, as we know from juries and
experience, is that some people can take one what seems to
be minor and inconsequential, point and make that the
deciding and turning factor upon which everything else
falls.

       It is impossible, in the words that have been read to
you by my learned friend, for it to be conceivable that a
Jury will no t in its mind's eye say, "What on earth is
3 oing on here under this rule against self­
incrimination?", and "Why are we not being allowed to see
the person?", and therefore there is damage beyond maasure
in even go in g to that stage which suggests that a person
should be c a lle d into a witness box, give their name and
address, and somebody, whether it is you or w h e th er it is
the witness or the lawyer for that witness, referring to
the Rule, and w.iether then the Jury is asked to retire,
tne fact of the matt er is they have got the whiff of
something and wn e n they have got that scent the brain
begins to run wild and we can have no control over what
part that is likely to play in the ultimate d ec ision
m ak ing process.

      Therefore, in adopting tne legal submissions and in
not seeking to put them before you over and over again, I
have to say that considering what questions may be raised,
and c o n s i d e r i n g those criteria which have been put before
you as to th* sorts of questions which clearly h a v e to be
in the mind, and have to be enquired into, if those are
tne ques tio ns w h i c n normally would be asked and there is
the Rule and the law, and that is what we, and you, sir,
are here to uphold, the law, if the law says that a person
s’
 .iould not be put in that position, categorically should
not, then it seems to me, with respect, that you should
therefore m a k e a ruling that you are not going to have tne
witness put into it, and you can make whatever explanation
you want, b e c a u s e you can simply read the law to the Jury
 and, make them clear that they should dismiss that from
 their minds.

      THE CO k OUE;:: Mr. King, I will skip you, if I may -
 not out of discourtesy.

     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I do not adopt the submissions
made by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, and indeed, I have
no other submissions to make at this stage.

     - THE COrlONER:            You do not?
        HISS SINCLAIR:             I do not.

      H R . CAICHPOLE:   Sir, can I say,, on behalf of tne
Officers of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that we
came nere prepared and expecting to see every witness
called to give evidence, subject to the normal rules, and
indeed, as I hope has been made clear, we are anxious to
help throughout.     I would like, however, to reserve my
position in the light of any ruling you may make.      If the
senior Police Officers are not going to be giving evidence
at this inquiry naturally that is something I would like
to have the opportunity of discussing with my clients.       I
cannot predict what the outcome will be of that, and if
n ecessary I will make an application at a later stage.     At
present I have no observations actually on the
applications made by my learned friends.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I would personally be vecy
pleased if Mr. Duckenfield would appear in this Court so
that I can put questions to him directly. As he was £ne
main participant in the disaster I was looking forward to
meeting Mr. Duckenfield so that I would be able to meet
him face to face. That is all.
                                               0



       MR. CALLAGHAN:              Sir, I have no observations to make.

tha          ADDLEMAN:    Sir, as you are aware I represent
   . °lice Federation and the ruling that you are about to
tn            y-     have a 8eneralised application and apply
h w S 55      witnesses whom I represent. Sir, in short, at
         S8®,, would wish to say that in principle I also
echo and adopt tnose submissions whicn have been made by
my    learned friend, Mr. Isaacs. Clearly individual
       •SnSiareJ801ng to have to be made by certain
individuals, dependent uponyour ruling.

      What I would say, sir, in particular, is that in ray
respectful submission it would indeed be preferable for
such individuals not to give evidence at all if that
indeed was your decision, rather than running tne risk of
W n g the seeds of prejudice in the Jury's minds i^ the
 ay w m c h has been described by my learned friend Mr.
 w q u L l i y . ay f r i e n d H r -          «   I ~y   ..y   -S. ™
                                                            51




   , For my part I would submit that it must be right that
there is very little indeed which could be asked of such a
witness, the answer to which would not have a tendency to
incriminate.  Sir, I won't repeat all the submissions
which have been made by ray learned friend but I would
specifically wish to reinforce those particular ones.

       MR. RUSSdLL:    Sir, as you will recall I represent
Superintendent G r ee nw ood and I would endorse ^hat has been
said principally by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs.      Sir,
it may be that you w o u l d prefer me to add my two penny
rfortrh to those a rguments at 4 o'clock.

     THE CORONER:     It depends now long you will be.    Yes,
I think tnat might be w i s e r because I don't want to rush
you.  Is anybody at this end going to want to ....

     MISS HAMPTON:    I have no submissions.

     MR. HALE:   I will say that in principle I would
support Mr. Isaacs because his arguments are so very
soundly based and based on precedent. Whether I avail
myself of them will be a different matter. Mr. Marshall
may wish to give evidence but that, of course, will be his
choice.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, the position of the Chief Constable
is that he supports the position taken by individual
Officers, and accordingly, therefore, supports the
submissions made by Mr. Isaacs.

     THE CORONER:   Very well.  We will leave this
submission tnen, at this stage, in order to particularly
enable Mr. King to consider it and to put anything he
wants to me.

     May I just ask whether you will have any other legal
submissions which are burning and which need to be made
today? Please don*t think that I wish to stifle you in
any sense of the word.  I am just trying to assess
timings.  No? Good.

     We in this room - you know he*- to get in - as far as
tne legal representatives are concerned there is quite a
large room - it is called the safe and I think it has got
steel doors - the key to it is under the control of the
local authority and arrangements have been made for it to
be open between 9 and 10 and A and 5, so that if you wish
- and I stress if you wish - you can deposit any of your
papers - this goes for you as well, of course, Mrs.
McQrien - in that room, but you cannot assume that the
local authority will take responsibility for them. The
rooia~will be under the charge of one chap with a key and
he will open and shut it, but you have to accept the risk,
so to speak.   You don't have to use it. It is a facility
which we have tried to pr wide.
                                                                    52




      , Secondly, those of you who were here for Lord J u s ti ce
T a y l o r ’s Inquiry, we have been provided with the big rooms
on the other side of the mai n staircase - one is called
the Mandela Room, tne other I have forgotten the name of.
The Mandela Room has been laid out with a big screen like
t h i s f so if tnere is an overflow or somebody wants to know
what is going on but does not want to be in the Court,
they can go and w a t c h and near.          As I understand it, if we
use, for example, a video, you will see tne video but you
will not be able to see the Court, because we have only
got one camera.           In the normal course of events you will
be' able to see and near what* is going on in Court but. in
certain c i r c u m s t a n c e s you may have a slightly limited
recording, because of the facilities - we have had to d r a w
the line s o m e w h e r e .

     The other room has been laid out and is intended
really main ly for the families, if they want to withdraw
and sit and be quiet.     That is one half of it and in the
other half we have built small partitions, cubicles, so if
any of you wish to speak to your clients you have got a
measure of privacy but they are not soundproof, so you
have to jud ge how go o d they are and whether you want to
use them.   They are there for your use if you wish.

     At the ba;k of the hall I think there is a list of
restaurants, w h i c h has not been put up by me, so if you
want to go and look and see what is what and where you can
go - and no doubt there are dozens of otners as well - we
are rignt in the c e n t r e of town so it should not be too
difficult to eat and have refreshments.

     We have had q u i t e a long session. I hope you will
forgive me, but I w a nte d to get on with it.  We are going
to rise.  Is there an yt hin g - yes, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:        I just wanted to say something
relating to the o t h er, mat te r earlier in the day.    I was
wondering if the time limits could be extended, in the
individual inquests, the time limit of 3.15 for the day in
question c o u l d be ext en d e d for individual inquests but not
apply to the generic inquest?

     THE CORONER:          The answer to that is that I took Mr.
King's submission to incorporate that point and I have
said what I want a nd am not going to change my mind on it.
I am going to stick to what I have said, 3.15 or
thereabouts, so I am not extending it b u t w e d i d say that
if there are any s pec i f i c errors whi ch you were going to
bring to my at t e n t i o n in the summaries, that I would
consider it, and that would apply to you as well, of
course, as far as yo u r boy is concerned.

      MRS. M c B R I E N :   Thank you
                                                              55




town so there are plenty of facilities, including a restaurant
upstairs.  So we are going to say to you, fend for yourselves;
and my Jury Officers will sort out the financial reimbursement.
There are rules and limits, but they will have told you that.   i.
they have not, ask, so that you know how much you can spend
without being out of pocket.  It is adequate, you will find.

        One advantage of giving you sandwiches, was that we had vou
nicely segregated from everybody else, and we w o n ’t have that if
we allow you to run free, but after all, you go home in the
evenings as well; don't you, so I c a n ’t see any good reason why
you should not do whatever you wish, but please remember the rul«
is no discussion with anybody about the case.     It is very
difficult, but you must follow it, particularly in a building
like this where you can see there are quite a lot of people here
I have met quite a lot of these people and I still don't
recognise most of them, and so it is very easy if you start
talking to strangers you may find you are talking to people who
you in no circumstances you should have opened your mouth to.      S<
d o n ’t talk to anybody.  So will you please do that for me?

     If you find I am going on for too long, because we w o n ’t be
rising quite as frequently as we did at the Medico Legal Centre
because it is slightly different now, but if you think I am goin;
on too long you are near enough now to attract my attention and
to say, "Can we stop and have a cup of coffee", or something, an<
of course, if any of you need to stop because you are not feelinj
well or because you were indisposed in some way then obviously
you must let me know.  It is exceedingly important that vou are
all here, because if we are not we have to stop.  We have no
control over our lives completely, but unless there is a really
compelling reason why you cannot be here please be here.    It doe.
not actually inconvenience me, because if I am not here I am
doing something else, but it inconveniences everybody else,
because we would have to adjourn it until we are back again, so
to speak, as a group.

     I think that is all I need to say on domestic matters^   May
I ask, were any of you in Court this morning, because somebody
suggested that you were? None of you were in Court? That is
good, because we did not want you in Court.   That is right, none
of you, members of the Jury, were in Court in the morning? That
is important, because if we have legal submissions and I ask you
to go out you must stay out.   It may be when it is all over and
we have finished I will explain to you why we do that, but I
don't think I will do   it now because we have    not got much time,
and it can wait, I am sure.

     I am not going to tell you the potential verdicts which you
will have to consider because we are going to hear the evidence,
and when we have heard the evidence I am going to sum it up,
hopefully, and I will   direct you with regard   to the law and
anything else I need to tell you, and then you will retire and
take“your time and so o n .

     I do want to draw one or two rules to your attention,
because it is exceedingly Important that you should understand i
                                                             56




now and that everybody else should understand it. This is not
actually a rule but it is a general point.    We are doing
Inquests.   There are 95 of them but we are doing them together.
This is not a trial. Nobody is accused of anything in my Court.
It is not a Public Inquiry, so we don't roam beyond my brief,    i
is not adversarial in the sense that the parties can introduce
their own witnesses and put them up to me to listen to and then
make a judgment.   I introduce the witnesses.   That is not to say
that if parties want to draw my attention to a particular witnes
or witnesses whom they would like me to consider, they can do
that and have done because a lot of water has flowed under the
bridge since we last met, but in the final analysis it is my
decision whom we call, rightly or wrongly, and it is an
inquisition.

     The next thing to understand, and this is very, very
important, is that this is an inquisition not on behalf of the
relatives, not on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police, not on
behalf of the club, not on behalf of Eastwoods, not on behalf of
the supporters generally.   It is an Inquiry by me, and if you
like because I am called Her Majesty's Coroner you may take it i'
is on behalf of the State or Her Majesty the Queen. So it is
important to understand that, and I have to keep on reminding
myself of this as well, because otherwise we get misled into
thinking we are doing this for others, and of course you realise
and I am conscious and so are you and everyone else, of the
families, so it is important that the evidence which we call
should seek to be intelligible and relevant and answers as far a:
one can some of the things which concern and worry them.   It is
very important to know that this is not done because they are
bereaved people.   It is because somebody has died and the Act
says that when that happens the Coroner should hold an
inquisition either on his own or with a jury.   Well, we are with
a jury, of course.

     I have already indicated to you the overall limitations of
an Inquest, so i am not going to repeat that, but there is
another very important corollary to this, and that is Rule 22.
am going to read this rule to you because you have got to
understand it, because it may be relevant at some point.   It
won't be relevant today, but I want to get it right at this
stage. What it says is:

          "(1) No witness at an Inquest shall be obliged to
          answer any question tending to incriminate himself.

          (2) Where it appears to the Coroner that the witness
          has been asked such a question the Coroner shall infori
          the witness that he may refuse to answer".

Now, this is a fundamental principle of Coronal Inquisitions, an<
it may well be a fundamental principle in a load of other courts
but I am not interested in what happens elsewhere.   I am
interested here.  An important thing to understand is that if
somebody exercises their right it is a right.   It is not that
they may or may not.  They have a right jnot to answer questions
which may incriminate them. You must not draw inferences from
                                                         57




the exercise of their rights.
   ✓
     That does not mean to say that you may not hear evidence
from other people which may tend to incriminate them.  That is
not the point, but you cannot expect somebody to stand up and
say, "I did it".  It happens in TV series, but it does not happer
generally speaking in real life, but it is part and parcel of the
overall structure of Coronal jurisdiction, and it is designed (a)
to protect the individual or individuals who may be involved, anc
(b) to ensure that if it were to be that some other proceedings
were to take place in some other court we have not muddied the
water.




                         /So there is actually a dual
                                                                                 59




         ' MRS. McBRIEN:    Sir, and members of the Jury, I am
   J o a n McBrien and I ap pear on behalf of our family in this
   matter.

           MR. CALLAGHAN:     Andrew Callaghan,          solicitor, on
   b e hal f of the Ambul anc e Service.

       MISS ADDELMANN:   My name is Andrea A ddelmann of
  Counsel.   I am instructed by Russell, Jones and Walker
  and I represent the Police Federation.

         MR. RUSSELL:   I am Christopher Russell.   I am a
  barrister.     I am instructed by solicitors called Barlow,
  Lyde and Gil ber t and I represent the interests of
  Su pe rintendent Greenwood.

          THE CORONER:        You might ask, having told you all
  about this in qui sit or ial system and how 1 do it all:
  what are they do i n g here?         The answer is that the rules
  which I have a l r e ady referred to permit interested
  parties to be present, obviously.             T h e rules p ermit them
  to. a s k questi on s w h i c h is why Mrs. M cBrien is there, and
  the rules al s o p rovide that people ca n be represented by
  their legal representatives and that is why they are
  here.

           Of course, if it is correct and opportune they will
  ask questions of the witnesses and w it hin the limits
  w h i c h I have o u t l i n e d to you they will be per m i t t e d to do
  so.

        N o w w i t h o u t a n y further ado, all I will     say is that
  these inquests are c onc e r n e d wit h a d i s a s t e r w h i c h
  ha ppened at a football stadium known as H i l lsb oro ug h
  Football Stadium, on the 15th of April, 1990.                     Y o u will
  learn as we go alo ng more details about it.

       Now I think the first thing is w e will call Steven
  Brown.

                          S T EVE N BROWN Sworn

                            By T H E C O R O N E R :

. Can you give me your full name? - A. I am Police
  Constable S t eve n Brown of the West Midlands Police.

. Is it right, Mr. Brown, that you have with you some
  overhead p hotographs of various scenes? - A. Yes, sir.

. T h e s e are p h o t o gr ap hs mainly of the stadium and its
  surrounds? - A. Yes.
                                                               60


                                        S.   BROWN




        THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you have
   got good eyesight, the model is over there:

Q. These photographs, most of them were taken after the
   incident?   In fact all of them were taken after the
   incident? - A. Most of them, yes, sir.

Q. Can you put them up one at a time and we will number
   them.   Let's put the first one up.   We are going to
   give these all "C" numbers in our usual way.   This is
   C.249.   That is what? - A. Aerial photograph of the
   ground, sir.

0. Can you put the next one up?   This will be C.250. - A.
   This is a photograph of the south stand and the Spion
   Kop.

Q. Can you point on the model?   OK.   Next one.   What is
   this? - A. This is a photograph, sir, of the north stand.
   (C.251)

Q. It is taken across the Leppings Lane terraces, is that
   right? - A. That is correct, sir.

        THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in
 . football parlance, apparently, the stand is a place where
   you sit and the terrace is the place where you stand:

Q. Yes, next please.    What is that?   (C.252) - A. It is a
   photograph, sir of the vest terrace and west stand.

Q. (C.2S3) - A. This is a photograph of the perimeter gates
   at Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Q. Some of the perimeter gates.   In fact it is a photograph
   in two bits, in effect? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Can you put the second one up as well?   (C.254).   The
   next one please.   This is another aerial view.   That
   gives a better impression of the Leppings Lane end? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. (C.2SS).   Next please.   This is very similar to one you
   have already seen, but what are we intending to see on
   this one? - A. Sir, this shows the turnstiles 1 to 16.

Q. Turnstiles 1 to 16?   (C.256).   This is what? - A. This
   shows the turnstiles A to G.

Q. (-G-*257). Can you see the A to G on there?   There are
   the big "Bs" and then underneath it there are the
   letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, G.    Next. - A. This shows
   the courtyard area beyond the perimeter gates and also
                                                                       61




                                              S. B R O W N


     tl\e metal perimeter wall and turnstiles which have the
     letters A, C, B, from left to right.

Q. Can you point to the A, C and B? - A. A here, sir.              C
   and B.

Q. That is how the turnstiles were numbered.   That was
   C.2S8.    What is this? - A. Sir, this is gate B.

Q. (C.259)

          THE CORONER:   Are you sure, Mr. Jones?            What is
     turnstiles 1 to.16?

          DCC JONES:   C.256.   Two photographs, sir, C.255
     and C.256.  Turnstiles A to G, C.257.   Courtyard and
     metal wall C.258 and C.259 is gate B.   We have missing
     turnstiles A, C and B.

          THE CORONER:    No, we had that.

Q. Can you put that back?    That is turnstiles...   What is
   that? - A. That is turnstiles A, C and B, sir,also the
   courtyard and the metal wall.

Q. I see, these are bracketed.   Now put gate B up again,
   please.   That is one of the exit gates.  (C.259).   What
   is that? - A. That shows gate C to the left of the wall.

Q.   Can you point    at it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    (C.260). - A. Sir, this photograph shows the gate locks
     and the observation panel in the gate.

Q. The observation panel is that little square thing? - A.
   Yes.

Q.    (C.261). - A. Sir, this shows a view of the concourse
     beyond the turnstiles and a hole in the wall which leads
     round to the north-west terrace.

Q. (C.262). - A. This shows the tunnel leading to enclosures
   3 and 4 and also shows the standing sign and the letters
   B and A above the tunnel.

Q. This is behind the turnstiles... - A. Leading from the
   concourse into the enclosures.

Q.   Down towards the terracing.       (C.263) - A. This
     photograph shows th<>. standing   sign on a pillar at the far
     &4ght of the photograph.

Q.   Can you again    point to it up there please? If you had
     followed that you would have finished up in enclosure 1.
                                                              62



                                            S.   BROWN


     (C,264). - A. This shows a double gate at the end of the
     concourse end of the tunnel.

Q.    (C.265). - A. This shows the gates at the terrace end of
     the tunnel and the radial fence which separates the two
     enclosures.

Q.   End on, of course, the radial fence? - A. Yes.

Q.    (C.266). This photograph was obviously taken very soon
     after the incident.   What is it? - A. This shows the
     gates at the rear of the enclosures giving access to all
     of the enclosures in the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. Can you point where they are?   I can see them because I
   know where they are.   (C.267).   Just point to the
   tunnel exit.   Yes. - A. This photograph shows the
   barriers in enclosures 3 and 4.

Q. (C.268) Could you point out which is enclosure 3 and
   which is enclosure 4? - A. This is enclosure 3 and
   enclosure 4.

Q. It is just an overview. - A. This photograph shows the
   perimeter fences separating the terraces from the pitch.

Q. (C.269).    The people on that photograph had nothing to
   do with it.    It just happens that they were there. - A.
   This shows the top of those fences where the wire bends
   inwards towards the enclosures.

Q. (C.270). - This shows the radial fences separating the
   enclosures in the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. (C.271). - A. This shows the police control box and the
   electric clock and display board above it.

Q.   Just show us where    the   clock is. - A. This is the
     electric clock.

Q. Switched off? - A. Switched off, and the display board
   here.

Q.   The police control    box is that building with the word
     "Skips" written on it, or that structure? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. (C.272). - A. Finally, sir, this is an internal view of
   the police control box.

Q. That will be Ci273.

      —   THE CORONER:    Any questions of this 0fficer7
                                             S.   BROWN


     HRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, have you a photograph of the
area past gate C, the no man's land area, where people
were not supposed to go but they went for safety reasons,
I think?   Have you any photographs where they could have
gone in that passageway?

     THE CORONER:   I know what Mrs, McBrien is after.
We will have a look and see whether we have got a
photograph of that area.   It is in fact on the aerial
shots if you look.   We will see whether we have got one
which might show that area for you.

      MRS. McBRIEN:      Thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Officer.   PC Brown will
be back probably tomorrow morning with the videos.

     Next Michael Layton if he is here.    You are sworn
actually, Mr. Layton so you don't need to be sworn again.

     Ladies and gentlemen, witnesses who have already
been sworn I can see no advantage in re-swearing.  Are
you happy with that or did you wish to hear him sworn?
I cannot see any point in it.

                    MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                       By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Sir,       Michael   Layton, Detective
Inspector, collar number       9364 of   the West Midlands
Police.

Now you have prepared a summary on video          and photographic
evidence? - A. That is correct, sir.

Would you please give it       to me?   It will be perfectly in
order for you to read it       to me because I don't expect you
                ’ Ai Y e S ’ 8 i r * S i r » A l l o w i n g the y
Hillsborough disaster, a video and photographic section
was formed as part of the main inquiry team to look at
ail aspects of visual evidence available from various
sources.

M L SUf ^ n be JWeen the 19th of A Pr U » 1989 an<* the 9th of
May, 1990, I was re s p o n s i b l e on a full-time basis for the
supervision of this p a r t i c u l a r team of officers.

            fu"c Jlon was the collation and examination of
such material initially for the judicial inquiry and
latterly for the Coroner s inquests.

Vi^eo recordings, both prior to the event, during and
iltimately showing the aftermath were obtained from a
                                          M.   LAYTON


  4
number of agencies.   This material which varied both in
content, quality of picture and evidential value was
viewed by members of the team, copied and scheduled.
Each film and photograph were given a unique reference
number.   The schedules prepared were in themselves a
precis of the events shown on film.

Ultimately, sir, a composite film was prepared in
conjunction with the Treasury S o l i c i t o r s Department,
which was shown at Lord Justice Taylor*s Inquiry.           This
film was designed to show what was felt to be the most
important scenes and sequence of events.

Sir, that film was given the reference number MRE.2.

Is that the one that I... - A. That is the composite
film, sir.

The compilation? - A..The compilation, sir, yes.

I think it is right - you have said it but I just want
you to confirm it - this wasn*t prepared solely by the
West Midlands, it was done in conjunction with the
Treasury Solicitors? - A. That is absolutely correct,
sir.

They had somebody there who was looking? - A. Physically
present, yes, sir.

Likewise photographic material was obtained from various
sources which was examined and scheduled in the same
manner.   Continuity in respect of all this material is
not necessarily complete since the person handing over
the material to the police is not necessarily the person
originating that material.




             In an effort to analyse
                                                                      65




                                                            M LAYTOfJ

    In an effort to analyse the contents of the visual evidence
    for the purposes of the Inquest some of the material has
B   been grouped into a number of key areas.  As such the
    sequence of events as referred to here in this statement do
    not run in strictly chronological form, rather it deals
    with a number of specific points.

       First of all, sir, having regard to the movements of
    people at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I can make
    the following observations with regard to the visual
    evidence.   On a video film reference TB2 which was filmed
C   on the South Yorkshire Police CCTV system using an operator
    set database, in other words, this shows the date and time
    on which the film was recorded, this camera has pan
    facilities.

       It should be noted that videos RJH1 and RJH2 have no
    such time clock and these relate to Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club's own video system.  In order to try to
    establish the times of events shown on these tapes a
D   comparison was made from events that occurred on the RJH2
    tape which are also shown on the video referenced TB2 taken
    from almost identical positions and which show almost
    identical f o o ta g e .

       To b e specific at 14:47:38 hours on the tape referenced
    TB2 a youth is seen to jump from the roof of Turnstiles A
    to G into the concourse area.     This same scene cam be seen
    on the tape referenced R J H 2 . On the tape referenced TB2
£   again at 14:52:30 hours a youth is seen standing against a
    wall near to Gate C wit h his ar m raised and an identical
    scene is shown on the tape reference RJH2.     The timings of
    other events as they appear on RJH2 can then be calculated
    using what is called a real time counter on a video player
    from either side of these fixed points.

       THE CORONER:   Just pause for a minute.    (To the J u r y )
    Have you understood what he is saying?
F
    Q. What you are saying is that two of these tapes did not
    have a time clock on them? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. An operator one?    -   A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. Then you try to match scenes which were identical and
       once you ha d got a time for that scene' you could
       calculate backwards and forwards? - A.      Yes, that
G      is right, sir, using a real time counter.

    Q. “Please carry on?   -  A. By using this method of
        calculation it is estimated that the tape, referenced
                                                                      66




                                                           M LAYTON

   RJH2, wou l d have been, switched on at about 12:56
   hours.   The same will apply for all the tapes given
   the reference RJH because I understand they were all
   switched on at the same time by PC 1421 Guest of the
   South Yorkshire Police who I believe has since
   retired.

       On a video tape referenced TB2 at 12:00:48 hours,
   supporters are shown arriving in a slow trickle and
   entering the ground at the Leppings Lane end.   At
   13:40 hours on the same video a steady flow of
   supporters are- seen entering the ground and at
   13:56:33 hours on the same tape the volume of
   supporters has increased.   At 14:35:30 hours there is
   a very dense crowd in the courtyard and the perimeter
   gate area.  A view of the courtyard is also shown on
   the BBC tape which has been given the reference
   number Map 9. This is a digital reference of 0602
   and the estimated time of that is at 14:35 hours.

Q. Can you just pause there for a moment?   -   A.       Yes.

   THE CORONER:  Members of the Jury, are yo u happy with
that? 1 just wanted to be sure that we know what we are
talking about.

Q. I want to turn to the digital reference now?      -     A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. The advantage of having the digital reference is that
   you can find the frame, the scene on the tape, but it
   does not tell you anything about times, is that
   right?
A. At a period of time which in fact I have covered at
   the bottom of this page but it does not show an
   actual t i m e .

Q. Carry on?   ~ A.   Again on Map 9, digital reference
   0842 a crowd is gathered in the Leppings Lane end and
   the courtyard is full. At a digital reference of
   0906 Superintendent Marshall is shown amongst the
   crowd. At a digital reference of 1034 youths are
   shown climbing over a metal ribbed gate on to the
   roof of Turnstile 16.   Between a digital reference of
   1212 and 1239 Superintendent Marshall is shown
   outside the gates in Leppings Lane, the whole area of
   which is heavily congested.   With regard to the tape
   reference Ma p 9, as I have said, there is an operator
   set digital database on the film.   In the initial
   -stages only an estimated time can be worked out on
   the basis that the BBC cameraman, Ian Young, states
                                                         67




                                                 M LAYTOM

that filming took place outside the ground at the
Leppings Lane end between 14i35 hours and 14:50 hours
and indeed there are also apparent breaks in the
filming.  In respect of subsequent filling inside the
ground it is accurately timed and time based between
15:03:30 and 15:16:58.


    On a video tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated
time of 14:46 hours a number of youths are seen to
climb on to the roofs of Turnstiles A to G from
outside prior -to dropping into the stadium.  On a
video tape TB2 at 14:55:21, supporters are shown in
the concourse area moving towards the tunnel.   A
number of these changed direction towards a gap in
the wall which gives access to the north side of the
ground.

    On video tape RJH2 which gives an estimated time
of 15:05 hours, the turnstile area and outside
courtyards are clear of incoming supporters.   An
Officer in a flat cap and two Police Constables are
seen to run from outside Gate C along the perimeter
drive towards the south stand.  Seconds afterwards a
Police Constable runs through Gate C towards the west
stand closely followed from all the Officers in the
turnstile area.

    Sir, in respect of vehicle movement at 14:08:20
hours on a video tape reference T81, a South
Yorkshire Police video,'traffic flowed quite freely
and continued to do so until 14:33:08 where it can be
seen that no traffic is able to flow due to
pedestrian congestion in Leppings Lane. At 14:33:27
on the tape TB1 a bus and two cars are seen moving
slowly through the.crowd in the roadway.

     At 14:35:56 hours on TB2 another bus moves
through th e crowd and at 14:36:24 a car. A t 14:41:15
a coach moves through the crowd and at 14:45:01 what
looks like a white roofed vehicle is seen arriving in
Leppings Lane immediately behind a bus from the
direction of Penistone Road. At 14:45:03 this bus
passes another one coming in the opposite direction
but the white roofed vehicle remains stationary in
the crowd.   Sir, from research of the written
evidence I believe in fact this vehicle was a Police
Landrover being driven by PC 1863 Buxton of the South
Yorkshire Police.

       THE CORONER:   He will be called in due course.
                                                               68




                                                         H LAYTON


Q- Please continue.  - A. No further vehicles apart
   from this one are seen until at 14:55:35 hours a bus
   and a car are seen and a further vehicle at 14:57:25
   hours.  These latter two vehicles come to a halt in
   Leppings Lane and remain stationary.  In the tape
   RJH2 the vehicle believed to be the Police Landrover
   drove through the courtyard area passed Gate C on the
   perimeter drive at an estimated time of 15:06:49
   hours.

        In relation to the perimeter gate which
   separates the turnstile area from Leppings Lane I can
   make the following observation with regard to the
   visual evidence.  At 14:35:22 hours on a video tape
   referenced TB2 the perimeter gates are open giving
   access to turnstiles and the area near to Gate C..

Q. Can you point to which perimeter gates we are talking
   about on the screen? Can you find the overhead and
   put that up too? - A. Yes.       At 14:40:26 hours on
   the same video all the perimeter gates appear closed.
   At 14:52: 57 on TB2 people can be seen to be climbing
   over the closed perimeter gates. At 14:53:40 hours
   this second gate from the left as you look at the
   screen opens and supporters enter the turnstile area
   in front of Turnstiles A t o G.

Q. I realise this is not the video you are referring to
   as this is a still bu t is that the gate we are -
   talking about can you remember? - A.     Yes, looking
   at it from the opposite direction the video camera is
   there.

Q. From the inside out and so it is the one that is on
   the right on this photograph? - A.    That is right,
   sir, yes.

Q. You heard the question from Mrs. McBrien about the
   sterile area, is that the area where the van is
   parked?  - A.   I believe it is slightly further in
   than where the van is parked.

Q. Further in towards the ground are you saying?        - A.
   (to the Court O f f i c e r ) If you could just perhaps
   indicate Gate C for me I believe that 'the sterile
   area was more or less to the far side of that gate.

       MR. HALE:     It is clear on the model, sir.
                                                   M LAYTON

     THE CORONER:   Could you please continue? I am
sorry to have interrupted you.  - A. At 14:53:44
hours the left hand perimeter gates are o p e n . At
14:55:17 hours the right hand perimeter gates can be
seen open.  At 14:56:32 hours the area in front of A
to G up to the perimeter gates appear clearer and
Police Officers can be seen holding the crowd back to
the roadside of the perimeter gates.  At 15:02:11
hours there is a close up view of the perimeter gate
area which shows that they are open and relatively
clear with supporters entering the ground.

       Four photographs taken by Michael Warburton Lee
 of the South Yorkshire Police show some damage to a
 retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates
^s^yoir^Kidir^romnthe groundside towards Leppings
 Lane.   These photographs are referenced as DPP190.
 There is no acetate available at the moment for you
 to view.

     In respect of visual evidence relating to
mounted Officers at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground the video tapes that cover this area are South
Yorkshire Police CCTV and on tape referenced TB2,
also Sheffield Wednesday Football C l u b ’s CC T V on a
tape referenced RJH2 and a BBC TV outside broadcast
on a tape referenced Map 9.

     A t a digital reference of 0602, estimated time
14:35 on video Map 9, two mounted Officers can be
seen directly in front of Turnstiles A to G near to
Gate P.

Pause again.  Have we got the acetate plan of the
ground and if so put it up please? Carry on reading
but start again with "mounted Officers"?  - A.    At a
digital reference of 0602, estimated time 14:35 on
video Map 9, two mounted Officers can be seen
directly in front of Turnstiles A to G near to Gate
B. At 14:35:22 hours on video reference TB2 two
mounted Officers can be seen apparently talking to
supporters in front of Turnstiles A to G.

      Between digital references 0839 to 0847 on a
video Map 9, nine mounted Officers can be seen in the
courtyard area from the outer perimeter gates to the
 Turnstiles A to G.  At 14:38:08 on video reference
 TB2 a mounted Officer can be seen attempting to ease
 the crowd back from Turnstiles and Gate C.  At an
~estimated time of 14:48:23 on video reference RJH2 a
mounted Officer can be seen blocking the entry of
                                                              70




                                                      M LAYTON

supporters through Gate C. This can also be seen at
14:48:26 hours on vide reference TB2.

     At 14:49 hours on video referenced TB2 a m o u n t e d
officer can be seen outside Gate C controlling the
crowd.  At 14:51:50 hours four mounted Officers can
be seen outside Gate C.  At 14:53 hours four moun t e d
Officers can be seen controlling the crowd in the
area of Gate C.  At 14:53:32 hours two mounted
Officers can be seen supervising the flow of
supporters through Gate C.

     In order to try and analyse the visual evidence
available in respect of the opening of the concertina
gates referred to as A, B and C, it is necessary to
refer to three video tapes. Video tapes referenced
RJH2 and RJHl are black and white video,, of poor
quality and w i t h no sound.  RJH2 refers to a fixed
site camera whi c h overlooks the rear of Turnstiles A
to G and the concourse area.     RJHl is also part of
the system and covers the area of Gate A and the
concourse area.     The particular reference to the
concertina Gate C, sir, it is apparent from visual
evidence on the day in question it was regularly
being used as an entrance and exit point for a numb e r
of reasons i.e. the ejection of supports and the
movement of Police personnel.

     Being more specific on a tape referenced TB2
timed at 14:39:31 hours a boy is carried through G a t e
C by Police Officers.  The gate appears to be closed
at 14:40:45 hours.  On a video tape referenced RJH2
with an estimated time of 14:48:04 hours Gate C was
opened to eject a support.




                          /At this stage
                                                                   71




    At. this stage a lar^e n.jnber of supporters rushed
,   ‘hrough the gate into the concourse area.

    On the same tape, at an estimated time of 14:43:31
    hours G a t e C is closed.  Oh the sane tape at an
    estimated time of 14:52:00 hours Gate C is again
    !>i«o*nedf and a large number of supporters entered
    through it int?> th» ground.    At 14:57:40 hours, as
    shown on the tape referenced TB2, Gate C is closed.

    On a vidifO tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated time of
    I4:!i9:12 nours Gate C is again onanod, with supporters
    enteriMg the ground.           In respect of Gate A on a video
    tape r e f e r e n c e d T62 it is apparently open at 14:58:09
    hours w i t n su.jport*rs entering via it.       At a time
    estimated at 14:58 the same cene is s'town on the video
    tape re f e r e n c e d t'JHl.  On video tape referenced TB2 at
    14:58:23 a line of Police are shown supervising the
    supporters tn*ough Gate A.

    There is no c l e a r evidence, sir, -of openings in
    relation to Gate B.        The video tape from the ca.nera
    that covers tnis araa is one of two that were found to
    be m i s s i n g when they were originally taken possession
    of.

    Sir, I feel it is important to point out in respect of
    all the e s t i m a t e d timings, given that where seconds are
    indicated there are alwiys likely to be slight
    variations a nd tnese are dependent o n the i n d i v i d u a l ’s
    in te rpretation of a particular sequence of film.

    T le events that oc cu r r e d inside the ground leading up
    to kic k- of f and until the football m a t c h was stopped,
    were r e c o r d e d by B B C television and a main recording,
    together w i t h ind ividual recordings from separate
    camera angles, was sup llied to the Inquirv, as
    previously re fe r r e d to.

    Having v ie .er« the main recording, referenced M ap 1,
    which is a B8 C tape, and in particular the movements of
    supporters in En cl osures 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
    end, I am a b l e to m a k e the following observations.   At
    14:3<J:4S th3re is a strong sur^e of people along the
    •ividing fence between Enclosures 3 and 4.         At 14:40:09
    a youth in a re<! top is seen standing on top of a
    barrier in E n c l o s u r e 3. At the same time a beach bail
    is bei :g push- d arou ?d by the crowd in the same
    enclosure.

  At 14 :40:10 h o u r s there is a further surge of people in
  Enclosure 4 al o n g the -ividing fence with Enclosure 3.
  At 14:40:34 hours a youth in a blue top is seen on top
“ Of a b a r r i e r in E n cl os ure 3, near to tfte dividing fence
  of Enclosure- 4.        At 14:45:41 hours a youth in a white
  top is seen d a n c i n g on a barrier in Enclosure 3.
                                                              72




     At 14:46:29 hours Jo i n Motson, a BBC commentator, makes
     a remark about the emptiness of Enclosure C>. At
     '14:47:33 hour.- a youth in a brown too is seen standing
     on a barrier in Enclosure 3 and the youth in the white
     top, as previou-ly ref er r e d to, is pulled off at
     14:47:46 iiours.

     At 14:49:53 hours a hole develops in the crowd in
     Enclosure 3 and people appear to be looking down at *:ie
     floor.   Three me n who had fallen over are seen to get
     up.   At 14:50:26 hours there is considerable crowd
     moveme.it in Enclosure 3 but still no apparent problems
     at tne >'ront of the enclosure.   At 14:55:49 hours a
     string sur.e from tne direction of the tunnel, into
     Enclosures 3 and 4, takas place.    In respect of
     Enclosure 3 the' s-jr^e is along the dividing fence, and
     in tne case of Enclosure 4 the surge is down and to the
     rit;ht as you look at the screen.

           At 15:07:09 hours   ....

0.          TH.-: COiiONE?!: You are talking about the vidao, of
      cou.-se.    Can you just turn round, and when you say to
      the ri^ht, I think on the plan it would be towaros the
      In-ft, would that be right, in Enclosure 4? - A. As you
      look at it, sir, it would be to the ri«ht.     It is to
      vie left on tne .«lan, yes, but to the right as you look
     .on tne screen.

0. Yes, that is right.     The cameras are looking at it from
   lie otier end. - A. At 15:07:09 hours supporters are
   sh jwn being pulled up from ths rear of Enclosures 3 and
   4 into the seated area above.     At 15:07:15 nours a
   l*jr^e s :r :e takes place in Enclosure 3, from the left .
   of centre to *.ne right front as viewed on tne screen,
   and the video tape r ef erenced TB1, w hi ch is again South
   Yorks hi re Police CCTV, at 14:59:&4 hours, Gate 4 can be
   seen open, and at 14:59:20 hours Gate 3 can be seen
   open.

      At 14:59:51 hours G ate 1 was opened to allow supporters
      from t.ie track area into tie enclosure.

      Fron s phot og ra ph taken by South Yorkshire Police at a
      time snown at 15:03 Gate 3 can be seen open.
      Pnotograph ref er en c d PR1/10A specifically refers.  At
      a time snown as 15:04 hours Gate 4 can still be seen
      open and p no tograph referenced PR1/22A specifically
      refers, again taken by South Yorkshire.Police.

      I have been u nable to establish, sir, any visual
      evidence to suggest that these perimeter gates were
      closed after these particular times.    It should be
      licTtad that tie times shown on these photographs was set
      by tiva individual camera operator by reference to his
      own :atch.    They were not synchronised, nor were they
                                                                     73




   veri fie:i. In other words, tho photograph referenced
   PR1/1A shows a time of 15:01, whilst a clock on the
   photograph in tne grou -d shows 15:00 so there is a
   ..*;*intion, sir.

Q. So that could mean that either he is a minute fast or
   \ :i e clock is a m i n u t e slow, or ioth of t tern could be
   wrong? - A. That is ri?,ht, sir.         Having viewed the main
   >*ideo recording referenced flap 1 I am able to qive tne
   following information in relntion to events on the
   pitch.

0. V i m re^ard to the liBC filns, the Map Is and 9s, I
   th*nk tie computer set the times, is that right? - A.
   That is rf^ht, sir, exccnt for tho outside.    We are
   sjtisfied that t.-ie ti as inside would have been
   correct.

Q. T h . timi ngs we are now getting to, on Map 1, those
   would be accu*ate as far as you can tell? - A. Yes,
   si*.     At 14:51:0-' the Liverpool team was announced,
   foll.^ed at 14:51:47 by the Nottingham Forest teaa.
   Th se a.inou .c-.ments caused obvious excitement amongst
   lie s u p p or te rs . Tne Liverpool team came onto the pitch
   at 14:54:0.J hour;., followed by the Nottingham Forest
   team at 14:55:22.        The two teams were joined on tie
   pitch at 14:57:25 hours by the referee and linesmen.
   Tie toss-up took -lace at a time shown as 14:57:48
   h-iur- and it should be noted at this point, sir, that
   t '.e * ‘tabase actually stopped counting for a short
   perio .. I d o n ’t know wiat the explanation for that is
   but it restarted aga in at 14:58:43 iiours, and the match
   kicke     off at 14:5'^:30.

   At l'>:00:32 a corner kick to Nottingham Forest was
   av-ir.:ed at the north west corner of the pitch.      At
   1 ! :00:41 hours a lart»e group of supporters are seen
   being led by Police .'rom tne direction of Enclosures 3
   a.id 4 towards toe Nort<i Stand*      At 15:00:43 hours
   •upporters are seen cli mb in g over tae perimeter fence
   from Enclosure 4 to th-.* p i t c h side.  At 15:00:50 hours
   t :e corner kick to Nott in gh am Forest was taken from the
   n o r t ' west corner. At 15:04:09 hours Gate 3 is open,
   supporters are shown climbing from Enclosure 3 into
   Enclosure 4 via tne div id in g fence, and people leaning
    in over tne peri'iter fence in an apparent effort to
   reach peo .le i<: tha enclosures.

   P !ay l o m i n u c d and at 15:04:52 hours a Peter Beardsley
   sh t hit the* cr os s b a r of the Nottingham'Forest goal.
   Shortly afterv.rds, at 15:05:24 nours, Superintendent
   Greenwood ran out         ch- pitch towards the referee and
   : t e match >;as stopped.

    On vidoo tape referenced flap 5, whi-h is again BBC TV
    coverage, but from a separate camera anr.le,
.Su *er ntend nt M u r ra y can be seen on the football
pitch, gesturing to Liverpool supporters at a time
refere.iccd 15:05:30 hours.

With regard to the rescue operation, visually on a Map
1 BBC tape at 15:07:09 iiours supporters can be seen
b:i    pulled from the rear of Enclosures 3 and 4 into
  ie seat?d area.  At 15:08:54 hours Police Officers can
bo seen at tie perimeter fence motioning towards people
in Enclosure 3 to move Jiack from the fence.  At
l':0 :5J hours is s«;en tha first sighting of a casualty
and this shows him being taken towards tie Spion Kop on
a.i ambul nc  stretchsr.

At 1 1 1*1:03 nours on M a r> 9 a South Yorkshire Police
Ins K.ctor is seen and heard to request a serial of
Police Officers.       At this point he is on the perimeter
ti*-:«ck near to E nclosure 2.   At 15:10:24 hours. Map 7,
whi a is also a S BC tape, shows Police Officers placing
a Lad.er against tne perimeter fence at the Leppings
La.i» end.    At 1.-: 12:10 hours on Map 1 Chief
Superintendent Ne^bit-is shown on the perimeter track
n*ar tj Enclosure 3.       At 15:12:50 hours on Map 7
.supporters are shown sitting and lying on the pitch at
t*ie Lepp ngs La:ie end of the ground receiving
attention.

Th   fi-st sighting of a casualty leaving the stadium is
«.iown at an estim at ed time of 15:15:40 hours and is
sh'wn on the tape r ef er enc d RJH2, when a casualty is
carried through G at e C by supporters to an ambulance.

At 1 :14:51 hours on M a p 1 Superintendent Greenwood can
be jeen on the pitch using his personal radio.

At l r :15:ll hours on Ma > 1 a casualty is seen being
carried from E nclosure 3 into the tunnel by a Police
Officer and a s >pport-=r.      At 15:15:33 hours on M a p 9 a
St. John's amb u l a n c e is seen arriving on the pitch and
b.-i-.g driven towards tha Leppings Lane terraces.

Is that 9j or flap 1? - A. Sorry* that is Map 1.        At
1 :l -:0 * hours on M a p 7 a group of supporters c an be
seen pulling down tne peri=ater fence at the front of
Enclosure 4.    At 1 <>:1;>:12 hours on M a p 1 a large number
of Police Officers move from the Kop end of the ground
t wards tne Lepp'ngs La le end.      On Ma p 7 at 15:19:24
s*ip -orters are snown at Gate 3 being carried out of t;ie
enclosure by Police Officar-.

On a video r e f e re nc ed TB2 at 15:19:58 hours
Superintend nt Gree.-wood is seen at the perimeter fence
of n e Leppings Lane terrace, apparently using a
Lou :hailer to c o m m u t i c a t e wit h supporters in Enclosure
3.  A second am b u l a n c e arrives at the Kop end, this
being a Soutn Y o r k s h i r e Metropolitan ambulance, which
                                                                 75



is snown at 15:20:41- hours on a video referenced Map 1.
Evid:nc       of the rescue operation, sir, continues for
some time and is snown on video and photo.»or-iphic
fo6 a ? , a .

Vid:o ev dsnca was also obtained from the FA Cup semi-
ti .;ils -ield at H i l l s b o r o u g h in 1981 and 198 With
regard to tne 198'. semi-.'inal, this match was filmed by
Yorkshire TV.         Tn ere is no database on the recording.
However, at a c o m m e. ta r/ time, 15:11 p.m., the
c o m m e n t ;tor remarks about supporters being on the pitch
beniiid tne goai at the Leppings Lan= end, and
supporters can be seen clirabing t.ie perimeter fence
onto the pitch.          Th^r e then follows views of supporters
sitting on <.:ie touchline behind the goal, marshalled by
tii: Police.

At haif-time the su pp ort er s on the pitch ran up th-?
:'itch towards the Sp ion Kop.      The Police cordon is
subxeque itly placed a r o u n d the pitch and there are no
t'ur, ’,er points of interest.

Witn regar    t? th^ s e m i - f i n a l held on 9th April 1988,
* iere is video =vi:Jence available from the South
Yorcshire Police CCTV referenced TB5/2 and TB5/3, and
■-•Iso BBC television r e f e r e n c e d JG1 and JG2.  The video
tapes are a va i l a b l e and show extensive coverage of the
bui -'-up and m a t c h coverage.        As a comparison exercise,
a composite video tape was prepare ' which shows crowd
.-c. :es at the Lep;>ings Lane end outside the ground
batw-e* 14:00 and 15:02 hours on bofi 9th April, 1983
and 15th A>ril, 1989.         This, sir, has been v;iven the
rererenc    number SDB1.

From this v;dso it can be seen that at 14:00 hours in
1988 -.he pe.'i-ieter gates nearest tne River Don are
clo«?   creating: a steri le a r e a along the side of the
tur .stiles A-G, towards Gate C, wneraas in 1989 tnase
gates are open and p e o pl e c an be seen moving freely in
t.iis area.   At 14:16 nours in 1988 there is a build up
of support -rs in front of turnstiles A-G, and back
along Leppings Lane.      In 1989 the build up is more
severe and t h -  area near to Gate C has become very
crowed.     In 1988 at 14:29 nours the roadway in
Lepp'ngs Lane remains re lat iv el y clear, although
crowM;-d, whereas at 14: 30 hours in 1989 the Leppings
Lane area ftas b ecome v er y congested, with supporters
spilling into the centr e of Leppings Lane and blocking
the road.

At 14:4G hours \ r . 1988, a lt h o u g h it is very crowded,
traffic is still able to pass and the perimeter gates                .
are still closed, w h e r e a s at 14:4S hours in 1989 th?
area in front of the turnstiles and Leppings Lane is
t T ^ l l y blocked.
                                                                     76




At 14:52 hours i    1^88 th:- area adjacent remains
sterile, wher ea s at 14:52 hours in 1989 the concertina
Gate C was o pened tu allow supporters into the ground.
At 15:01 nours in >oth 1988 and 1989 the crowd in
Leppings Lane is v e r s i m i l a r in size and under
control.

Sir, during th:- c o u r s e of the preliminary inquests I
:;ave evidence in res.ioct of locations at which it was
believed that t»i^ deceased were e i th er alive or dead or
 »oth in En cl osures 3 and 4.       Plans w ere produced in
respect of individual deceased.          Subseq ue nt ly composite
 •l'tns were p rep ar ed of some of t^ese locations, based
on ray evi den c , by Miss Da*»n Goodall, senior plan
c!.*3wer of the West hii '-lands .Police.     Because of t'le
p r - ;jle:ns asso ci at e^ witi tr/i g to put all locations of
 eceased on t iese two «lans, tney a ct ually only s;iow
the Ins* po sition established alive, and th= first
wiere b el ieved • eceased.

Sir, I pro-luce a composite plan referenced DP.G9 in
res _ct of :ie 1 • -ation of the positions of deceased .
alive, and a c o m p o s i t e plan refere cen 0*\G10 where they
were beiieved to be          eceased in the enclosures.   Sir,
thire are ove r eads available of these two plans.




  /Q. Yes.   - A. T n e r e   is one point
                                                            77

                                             M.   LAYTON


     Sir, there are overheads available of these two plans.   There
     is one point which I need to raise In respect of one of the
     plans, sir. Since the limited Inquests, Mrs. Traynor. mother
     of two of the deceased, has viewed visual evidence again. At
     the limited Inquest a plan was produced which showed
     Christopher in enclosure No. 3 at 14:45, and that location is
     reproduced on the plan DRG.9. Since that time Mrs. Traynor
     has found Christopher alive at 14:45 outside the ground. So
     in fact I would ask you to disregard the one location in
     relation to the deceased No. 60 as shown on that plan.

Q. What time was he shown on the plan? Would you repeat the
   time? - A. 14:52 outside the ground, sir, and 14:45 was the
   original identification by Mrs. Traynor inside the ground.

Q. So what you are saying is Mrs. Traynor has now reidentified
   him but alive at an earlier time than she originally thought?
   - A. In fact alive at a later time.  So in fact, the point I
   am making is on the plan DRG.9 we should disregard the
   location shown for that particular location.

Q. We will' deal with this again.

          THE CORONER:    This, Mr. King, is a typical example of
     the corrections one would wish to make with regard to the
     summaries.   I did not know what Inspector Layton has just tolt
     me, but it is clear it needs amendment, and obviously we woulc
     want to' get that right.

            THE WITNESS:   I can tell you the original plan which
     was produced at the limited Inquest was given the reference
     No. C.140.

       THE CORONER:   Before you put that up can we number that
     plan of the ground C.274.  The plan of the ground is C.274.
     Can you put the next one up:

O. Inspector Layton, which one is this? - A. If we go
   chronologically as far as the statement is concerned it shoulc
   be the other way round.  I don’t think it matters as such.

O. You mean the deceased first? - A. I am sorry, is this the
   first one, sir? This is the deceased alive.

O. I think we will have the people alive first. - A. This plan
   is DRG.9.

O.   That isC.275.   These are the people last seen alive as far a:
     you can establish based upon the evidence which yougave at
     the interim Inquests? - A. That isi correct, sir, and it is
     this plan which bears the identification which I have just
     referred to in respect of Christopher Traynor.

O.   I— don't suppose you know where he is? - A. It is to the top.
     just near to the top.    (Indicated on plan)

Q. Can we get Miss Goodhall to delete it? - A. We can do, sir.
                                            M . LAYTON




And we will then reproduce it as an amended version,  it gi%
you a visual impression of where the people were when last
seen alive on the visual evidence.  Put the other one up now
please. - A. This plan is DRG.10.

That will be C.276.

     THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, the purpose of this
is just to give you an impression where the people were to
save you looking at 95 individual plans:

That is right, is not it? - A. That is right.

It does not have 95 spots on it because we did not find
everybody on the visual evidence? - A. That is right, sir.
Finally, as I have already stated, the events outlined in thi:
statement are not actually in chronological order, and to
assist with this particular aspect a schedule has been
prepared which has been referenced SB.l, which seeks to place
some of the events into chronological order.  I produce that
schedule.

Have we got that on an overhead as well, perchance? - A. I
understand the quality is not....

It is too difficult to read.      C.277.

      MR. KING:      Would it be possible to have photocopies of
it?

     THE CORONER:       We will do that.   Tomorrow morning you
will have them.

      THE WITNESS:      Sir, that completes my evidence.

     THE CORONER:    What we are trying to do with that
schedule is to pick out some of the major events.   You have
given us an awful lot of detail which is useful, but that
picks out' some of the major events in chronological order as
to the outside of the ground and to the inside? - A. That is
right, sir, and where there is an "E", that is estimated time
sir.

     THE CORONER:   It is supposed to be an aide memoire so i
somebody says, "What time did that gate open?” , we can tell.
It is difficult to follow because there are so many numbers,
but basically he was telling us events which he and his team
found either on photographs or videos, and relating to variou
things.  When you see the schedule it will be shorter.   We
will have them available tomorrow morning.

      Any questions of Inspector Layton?
                                                           79

                                            M.   LAYTON


                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. You referred at a point about quarter-of-the-way through your
   evidence, to a photograph taken by a photographer called
   War burton Lee. I just did not get the reference. - a . The
   reference given is DPP.190

Q. What was that of? - A. It is in relation to damage to a
   retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates as you
   look from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you point? - A. It is the second set
     of perimeter gates as you look from the ground side towards
     Leppings Lane:

O. We will put the-overhead on. Show us which one it is?
   (Indicated) - A. That is right, sir, the second set of
   perimeter gates from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.
   Exactly where Mr. Brown is pointing.

0. That is C.254.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

0. Mr. Layton, could you help me with just a number of matters.
   How many   people in your team? - A.   It varied initially from a
   its height I think 12 to as a norm     an average of 6.

0. Let us put to one side for a moment the accumulation of the
   evidencie.  I am only concerned with the looking at the
   evidence, particularly of the video evidence, and you have
   told us something of your observations, and when 1 say ’’you”
   mean you and your team, of, for example, outside and then
   inside the ground of certain parts of different videos. Coul<
   you help   me with this against that    background.  Taking,for
   example,   what was seen on the videos inside the ground, for
   example, the BBC film that was being taken, in order to
   produce the observations which you have produced how long
   approximately would the film have been looked at for? I d o n ’
   want it S minutes, 10 minutes. How many hours? - A.
   Countless.   The process was never ending.  I think it would b
   fair to say every time you view a video you see something
   else, because there are so many images on the screen that it
   is not possible to take then all in at one viewing.   It was a
   continual process right up to the time of the limited
   Inquests.   Indeed. I have no doubt since then it has continue
   as well, albeit on a more limited scale.

Q. So could you help us, have you done any of the watching
   yourself? - A. I have done some of it, 'yes.

0. But are we talking about a video, for example, inside the
   ground where you tell us that certain things were taking
   pTace, being watched over 20 hours or 40 hours or 100 hours o
   more than that? - A. It would be impossible to put a figure o
   it. As I said at the beginning, the initial process after
   retrieving the original video tapes, was to copy them.
                                                               80

                                                M.   LAYTON


         Once they were copied the copies were viewed and a
         schedule, which is a precis of events shown on the film,
         was prepared.  From that schedule really the continual
         process then was. as part of our brief, to try to locate
         the deceased either outside; or inside the ground, and as
         part of that process we were continually viewing.
B
    Q. To see what events were occurring, any incidents that occurre
       and the like? - A. Primarily our brief was, having scheduled
       the tapes, to locate the deceased for the Inquests.  There
       were other specific areas which were dealt with as the inquir
       progressed, but because of our brief to locate deceased it wa
       a continuing process.

    Q. But as you were saying, as well as doing   that you would see -
       when I say "you” - you and your team would see different
       incidents taking place on virtually each and every occasion
       you were looking at the tape? - A. That is right. One scene
       on one video could show numerous people.

    Q. As opposed to, for example, someone who was looking at that
       scene as part and parcel of the events of the day which would
       be quite different? - A. I am not sure I follow you.

D   O.    Let me indicate exactly what I mean. We have on the one hand
         Police Officers for the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor’s
         Inquiry and for the purposes of this Inquest looking over and
         over and over again videos taken of for example a certain
         section of the ground, whether it be outside or inside, and
         seeing something different perhaps or something else in
         addition? - A. Yes.

    Q. On each viewing, and then we have an individual who may be
       looking at. the Leppings Lane end for a fraction of a second as
       part of the d a y ’s events? - A. Yes, I accept your point.
       There is a difference between our brief, which was to view the
       videos to either obtain evidence or to schedule them so as to
       become a sequence of events as to what to what took place,
       there is a difference between that and purely viewing it
       perhaps on a monitor.                                   .

    Q. And it required from your point of view repeated lookings at,
       if I can use an inelegant phrase, in order to get a complete
       picture? - A. Depending on what we were seeking to establish.
       Certainly in relation to the deceased, yes.

    Q. Thank you very much.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    O. Arising out of that last question, if one is looking for
       precise details, a particular individual, you need to look at
       a video over and over again? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.

    Q. If you are looking for a general impression, a build up of
       fans, emptiness of a pen, the fullness of a pen, the first
       time is sufficient for that, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.



H
                               A OO.
                                                             81.'.

                                            M . LAYTON




                   Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
      *
Q. I would like to go back to the point where the fans enter
   the ground at 2:48 p.m.Could you read that   part out, pi
   - A. Yes, if you can just bear with me a second, please,
   you want the whole section again?

Q.   The wording you used? - A. Page 10, I think, sir.  On a v
     tape reference RJH.2 at an estimated time of 14:48:04, Ga
     was opened to eject a supporter.  Is that the bit?

O. Yes. - A.    Do you want me to go further?

Q. Yes. just   a little. - A. At this stage a    largenumberof
   supporters rushed through the gate into the concourse are;

O. Yes, thank you.  It is the part that they rushed in, and :
   was established at the preliminary Inquest that the fans v
   actually allowed in at that time, as Police Officers there
   mistakenly thought that Gate C had been opened in response
   Superintendent Marshall's request.

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I will phrase your quest
     for you:

O. Mrs. McBrien is asking you whether this was the incident c
   the timing   as far as you can establish    from thevideo
   evidence,   where the gate was opened as    a    resultof anord€
   opposed to not? - A. No, that is not that particular openi
   of the gate, not the one you refer to.

O.       MRS. McBRIEN:    The transcript of Superintendent
     Marshall’s evidence at the Taylor Inquiry....

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry:

Q. Inspector Layton, read the whole section through again, or
   you like specify the openings, because it may assist you.

          THE CORONER:   I think you may have your timings wron

          MRS. McBRIEN:   We brought this point out at the
     Preliminary Inquest, and it was altered in the Preliminary
     Inquest.  It was altered to "allowed", "they were allowed"
     "They were allowed in".

          THE WITNESS:   The timing you are referring to is the
     occasion on which a person was ejected from the concourse
     area via Gate C and out. Certainly it Is apparent when yc
     view the video, and that is why I have differentiated with
     it were, the official opening when people walkedthrough,        [
     is certainly apparent on the video for thisearlier openin       j
     they did not go in in the same fashion.                         £

Q.       THE CORONER:    This was at 15:52, was not it?   So 14:
     was one opening? - A. That is right, sir.                       ;
                                                              81 A


                                              M.   LAYTON




O. What time was it closed then? - A. At 14:48:31.
      *
Q. How long was it open? It was only open for 2? seconds? -          a   .
   That is right, sir, yes.

Q. And then it was reopened at 14:52.      Is that right? - A. That
   is right, sir.

Q. And then it stayed open for how long? - A. At 14:57:40 the
   gate is shown closed.

Q. That is about 5 minutes? - A. Yes.      We are talking about two
   distinct openings there.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  I was firmly under the impression that
     fans were encouraged through that gate at that particular
     time.

          THE CORONER:   We will be hearing evidence.     Inspector
     Layton has told you what he has seen on the visual evidence.
     He can’t say any more than that.  It may be - it may be;     I
     say no more - that some of the other witnesses might be able
     to give you some more help on this.  I d o n ’t think Inspector
     Layton can.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you very much.

          THE CORONER:   When you say, Mrs. McBrien, there was a
     correction made at the interim Inquest, are you talking about
     the interim Inquest relating to your son?

          MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

          THE CORONER:   I will have a look at it.  I will check it
     and see what is actually said, but not now because I have not
     got it here. Any other questions arising out of Inspector
     Layton’s evidence?

          Tomorrow we will give you a copy of the abbreviated
     schedule, and I think everybody will find it is a lot easier
     once we have that to look at:

Q. Inspector Layton, as always I am exceedingly grateful to you.
   Thank you for your help.    The only thing I would ask you is i:
   you could arrange to have that plan redrawn with the
   amendments, and also let me have a short statement regarding
   this matter, and we will either deal with it by way of
   documentary evidence or I will have to bring you back,
   depending on what I think.    It is a point that has got to be
   corrected. - A . . I think P.C. Brown should be able to assist,
   sir.

     —     THE CORONER:      Ladies and gentlemen, we are aiming
      timewise to start at 10, rise about quarter-to-1, 1 o'clock.
      Obviously we c a n ’t be absolutely sure.  We know that from
      experience already.     Start again about 2. It depends what
.time we rise for lunch.   Then aim to finish about 4, and a
 there will be a little bit of flexibility.   You may think
 ife not too bad, but you will find it is quite sufficient i
you said and listen to evidence for five hours.    Inspector
Layton’s evidence is interesting but jolly difficult to
 follow, not because he is difficult but because of the num
and maps and goodness knows what.    A lot of the other evid
which you will hear will be easier to follow because they
be ordinary people.    I don't mean he is an extraordinary
person - he may be - but it will be just people telling us
about things.

     Now, it is quarter-to-4. I d o n ’t think we will start
with anything further tonight as far as you are concerned.
I also have some more legal submissions to deal with we di<
not quite finish.  So I am going to rise.    You can leave.
Please be here on time so we can get cracking at 10 tomorrc
morning. What we will do tomorrow in the morning is we wi3
look at the videos, this compilation tape, which is about t
hours.  So we will watch for an hour and then stop and have
coffee and watch the other half.  Then we have two short
videos. One has two screens.   It compares 1988 with 1989 c
best one can, and then I have had another short compilatior
made of 1981 and 1988, I think, which shows the events. We
thought if we did the words today you would follow the vide
that much better tomorrow. Is that satisfactory to you? I
the afternoon we are starting with some real live witnesses

     Can we rise for five minutes or so.

                     (Short Adjournment)
                                                           83




                 (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Isaacs?

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, before my learned friend Mr. King
makes such submissions he wishes to make in relation to the
submission that I made this morning, may I just take this
opportunity to draw to your attention the city late edition
of The Star.   If I hand my copy in - you, sir, have not had
the benefit of going out to the local news vendors.   If I
could be handed another copy.

     First of all I would ask you to read it.  First of all
against the background of the submission that I made this
morning my argument is this that nothing could be more
designed to add fuel to the submission I made than what,
sir, you will now read.

     THE CORONER:      Well, Mr. Isaacs, I have to agree with
you   that it was an unwise - if the quotation is correct and,
of course, I can't say whether it is or whether it isn't, I
think it was an unwise comment, bearing in mind that we are
sub judice here and it is a matter for this court, or my
jury, if you like, to take decisions on what will happen.

     MR.  ISAACS:  Sir, that is another aspect of the matter
which perhaps I can refer to in a moment and which I know
others will refer to and that is.the question aa to whether
The Star, rightly or wrongly, have been party to an attempt
to influence the jury to bring in a certain verdict.    That
is certainly one aspect of the matter.

     The aspect I would seek to address you upon in relation
to the contents of this article is/this, that clearly,
however you see these inquests, and, of course, you are in
control, those who represent...   I p ut it another way.  The
families quite clearly see these inquests as a n evidence
gathering exercise in order to produce fresh evidence which
will, they hope, enable them to persuade or enable the
Director to take the view that criminal charges should be
preferred.

     In my submission, so far as Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield is concerned he should not be put in a position
- should not even be put into the witness b o x where he could
be put in a position where, by asking him questions which
would then be disallowed, then be disallowed, then be
disallowed in the manner that I referred to this morning, so
as to increase the possibility, probability, what you will,
of the jury returning a verdict of unlawful killing.

     In my submission, sir, this article and the contents of
it do add a great deal of fuel to the submission I made and
                                                               84




    the. dangers inherent in calling Mr. Duckenfield to give
    evidence.

         THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Mr. King, I will listen tc
    you now.

         MR. KING:   I understood, sir, that those acting on
    behalf of Officer Greenwood still had submissions to make t
    you, sir.

I        THE CORONER:   You are quite right.   Thank you for
    reminding me.

         MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, happily in supporting my learned
    friend Mr. Isaacs I need not rehearse his very articulate
    submission and exposition of the rule.   I adopt his
    exposition of the rule without gloss.

     As far as Superintendent Greenwood is concerned, there
are four areas from which further action might come, from
which he requires protection against any conceivable self­
incrimination which might flow from his giving evidence.

     If I can list them briefly, it is further action by the
Director.   Second, a judicial review of the Director*s
decision.   Third, a private prosecution.   Fourth,
disciplinary proceedings.

     Sir, the depth and the strength of the feelings of the
families of the bereaved was perhaps spoken in words louder
and better than I can select when my learned friend Mr.
Isaacs outlined what was the nub of his.submission, and you
will remember the reaction that that took*   We now have on
the front page of the newspaper what is a transparent use,
or intended use, of these inquests before you.

     As far as disciplinary proceedings are concerned, I
prefer to dwell on that to the exclusion of the others
because my learned friend Mr. Isaacs has mentioned the
position of the Director.    It is, of course, sanction which
could lead to the dismissal of long-standing officers,
including Superintendent Greenwood, whom I represent.    Sir,
you may well be familiar with some of the publicity that
surrounded the application to the Police Authority for funds
for not only Superintendent Greenwood but the other senior
officers concerned and that has been prompted by the fear of
there being no funds for such proceedings as the
disciplinary proceedings.    It is not merely an empty
threat.  These proceedings are on foot and what happens to
them will, to an extent, be coloured by what happens within
these four walls over the coming weeks.

     Sir, it is important perhaps also to envisage the wide
scope of the offences and they are offences under the Police
                                                                85




      Discipline Regulations 1985, that constitute those
      disciplinary proceedings.   Perhaps I could invite you
      briefly to consider the nature of the complaints that have
      been made against Superintendent Greenwood because in my
      submission they show that the wider the scope of the offence
      the more difficult it is to conceive questions the answers
      to which will not tend to incriminate Superintendent
      Greenwood or anyone else in a similar position.

           The allegations of complaint come from two
      complainants, both of whom I note from the contents of
      letters and other documents put before you this morning, are
      represented by my learned friend Mr. King.   Mr. Jones -
      Leslie Jones - the father of Richard Jones, makes four
      allegations which constitute his complaint against
      Superintendent Greenwood and I say at the outset these are
      allegations which are, and will be, refuted by
      Superintendent Greenwood:

■j;       **A. You failed to carry out your assigned duty by '
           placing yourself in a position by the players1 tunnel.
;         Using your radio and your eyes you should have been
           aware of the dangerous situation and controlled your
           officers accordingly*

 I        B. You failed to give instructions   to your officers to
,         monitor the pens for over-crowding   in relation to the
(l        crowd safety at your briefings.

)         C. You were totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.
^         That is, you made no attempt to organise the police
r;        officers in a way which would have helped to bring
|         about a successful rescue operation*

 I        D. Y ou Tailed to send officers to the rear of pens 3
l         and 4 to relieve pressure when you were in control of
           the area.   This was when you knew that gate C was
          being opened to allow supporters in."

         Sir, Mr. Trevor Hicks, who also instructs my learned
    friend Mr. King, is the other complainant.   He makes three,
    perhaps broader, allegations in his complaint:

          "1. You failed to prevent a dangerous build-up of
      j   supporters outside the gates.

    !     2. You failed to control the movement of supporters
          subsequent to the opening of gate C..

          3. You failed to respond to the developing tragedy and •
    ,     were slow to effect a rescue operation."

         I say again the totality of each of those allegations
    is refuted, but they do serve to show the wide nature of the
                                                        86




position of Superintendent Greenwood and the way in which
his position will have to be protected should he give
evidence.   I just invite you to consider the prejudicial
effect that the constant challenging of questions asked and
the jury being told that the officer need not answer them,
if matters are dealt with on a question at a time basis.

     Alternatively, if there is dispute about whether the
answer to a particular question might tend to incriminate
Superintendent Greenwood when such argument, if there is to
be such argument, takes place in the absence of the jury,
the effect and the impression that that will have upon the
members of the jury.

     In those circumstances I invite you to adopt the course
that has been suggested by Mr. Isaacs, that these officers,
certainly Superintendent Greenwood, should not be asked to
give evidence at all because of the prejudicial effect of
having to deal with each question on its merits and in
circumstances where it is difficult to conceive any question
which wiil not produce that response.




                  MR. KING:    Sir, the families...
                                                                     87




    <THE CORONER:     Yes, Mr. King.

    MR. KING:    The families would have liked each of the
senior Officers to have come to give evidence here
voluntarily.    That is what they would have liked. They would
have wished that the truth of the events which led to these
deaths could have come from their lips voluntarily so that
the Jury could hear it.    The families are mindful of the law
as much as anybody else and I have advised them what the law
is.   They kn ow and appreciate that it is within the right of
any of those senior Officers that if any question is asked
tending to incriminate that he can refuse to give it. To
this extent they are in a dilemma because what they want, and -
have always wanted, is for this Jury to hear the whole of the
facts.   Zt would be a very unreal world which this Jury would
be living in if they did not hear in some way from the
principal players in these events, b y which I mean the senior
Officers.

    One cou ld make trite examples. The one going through my
mind was hearing Julius Caesar but we did not hear from
Brutus and the whole of the Senate.  That is not meant to be
trivial because these are vital witnesses.

    A few weeks ago, sir, Z submitted to you matters relating
to the Taylor Inquiry Report and the transcripts. You kno w
if agreement were possible the families would wish that the
whole of the Taylor R e p o r t a n d t h e _ w h o l e o f the transcripts
should be before the Jury.        Indeed, they would wish they
would go there without agreement but again th e y accept
advice, as they must, that that is not possible without
agreement.  If my learned friend on behalf of Mr.?Duckenfield
is saying to this Inquiry he will agree and consent to the
whole of the transcript of Mr. Duckenfield's evidence b e i n g
read out aloud to the Jury so that they can hear it and
assess it then that in fact from the families* point of view,
much as they wou l d like Mr. Duckenfield in the witness b o x to
be cross-examined, will b e far better in the effort they
generally have, not I n making noises to the outside world, in
bringing the facts to the attention of this Jury.

    Sir, if that is the position, then much as they would
like Mr. Duckenfield here, and much as I would say to you
that he ought to come into the witness box and be heard to
say, MI will not answer", if there is that alternative
genuinely being p u t forward, then I would say on behalf of
the families I represent that that is a course which is, in
fact, preferable as the lesser of two evils from their point
of view.  I say that not in any way reflecting on the right
of Mr. Duckenfield to take the stance he has but from the
point of vie w to prejudice of all the matters being before
the Jury.
                                                           88




   ' I do not know, sir, what the position is with regard to
the other Officers, that is to say Mr. Murray, Mr. Greenwood
and Mr. Marshall.   I do not know whether I have the agreement
of those who represent those Officers to the transcripts of
their evidence being read aloud to the Jury.   If I do have
that, sir, then my position will  be different than if I d o
not and it might be helpful from my point of view if an
indication could be given in that respect.

   THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale is not here and so he cannot
respond.  Do you wish to respond or take instructions on
that?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, for my part I would like to take
instructions and perhaps I could do so overnight.

   MR. KING:   In those circumstances, sir, perhaps it might
be better if I postpone my final words until I hear what
those instructions are.

   THE CORONER:     Iwould prefer to conclude this now.  You
have heard what   Mr. Isaacs says.If he says  no and Mr.
Isaacs says yes, perhaps I may think again but assume for the
moment that everyone will fall in line behind Mr. Isaacs.

   MR. KING:    If everybody falls in line behind Mr. Isaacs,
as I say, sir, much as I would prefer a different course - it
almost sounds; like a b&rgain but it is not meant to be - if
that is the means b y which the families cam get facts before
the Jury it is the means they would adopt.

   MR. ISAACS:   I wish to make one thing very clear, sir, so-,
that there is no misunderstanding.   The offer that I make is
this; that the transcript of Mr. Duckenfielu*» evidence bo t h
in chief as it were and in cross-examination before Lord
Justice Taylor can be read to this Jury as being a report of
that evidence he gave on that occasion.   So far as my learned
friend is concerned he understood axe correctly a n d I just
want to ensure, sir, that you understood me correctly as
well.

   THE CORONER:     What you are trying to say is that you are
not putting it forward as evidence of the truth of it but
purely of wh a t was said?

   MR. ISAACS:     That is what was said because that is
exactly the point you were making this morning, as it were,
with a Criminal Justice Act statement when, of course, the
witness wou l d be asked, "Is that the statement you have
made?" On this occasion he would not be asked this but it
would be said on his behalf or by you, sir, by agreement,
"TKTs was the evidence that he gave before Lord Justice
Taylor".
                                                         89




   MR. KING:   I understand the point my learned friend is
saying on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield as to the quality of that
evidence but it is certainly evidence which can go before a
Jury otherwise we would have no function, sir.      I am not sure
now if I understand the distinction being m a d e .

   THE CORONER:    This is the problem.   Mr. Payne.

   MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I was rising to make the point w hi c h was
mentioned by Mr. Isaacs simply as a matter of clarification.
If this Inquest is to proceed, as has been suggested, then it
should be on the basis that the evidence, and we are only
speaking for the -moment about Mr. Duckenfield, that he should
hot in fact give evidence but there should b e read out at the
Inquest what he said at the Taylor Inquiry, not as his
evidence before you but as a report of what in fact he said
on that previous occasion.   That is what Mr. Isaacs said to
you just now and I was rising to ensure that that was what
was being agreed.

   THE CORONER:    I have not agreed to anything yet, Mr.
Payne.

   MR. KING:    So far so good.   The next question was t h e
purpose for which the Jury could use that evidence and
certainly, sir, as I understand it, it should b e capable of -
being used as evidence.of that which is stated in it, in
other words not as evidence'to"you,'sir, but as evidence of-
what was said on previous occasions. Otherwise it wo u l d have
no value.   I am not sure if m y learned friend is trying to
say,. "It can go before the Jury but the Jury must be t o l d
that they cannot p u t any truth on that which is being
asserted".

   MR. PAYNE:   I think Mr. King can be helped b y the fact
that the ordinary rules of evidence as w e tend to know th e m
do not apply in these proceedings and certainly for our part
we can see no objection to the Jury being informed that what
was read out was a true report of what was said before the
Taylor Inquiry and the Jury could take it into account in
that context.

   THE CORONER:   Can I just put this to you because I think
I cam understand the problem but you will appreciate that if
you say to the Jury, "here is a statement which has now been
read.  It may or may not be true because we have not ask ed
Mr. Duckenfield but it is true that he said that because it
is a report of what he said.  You, ladies and gentlemen, must
decide whether you believe it or whether you do not".  Are
you in effect inviting me to view that statement in that
foTm? Have I understood you correctly?
                                                             90




   to. PAYNE:   Yes, I think that is right.  What is being
said is that the statement can be read out as a true account
of what was said at the Taylor Inquiry and the Jury can take
it into account and make what use of it they wish.

   MR. KING:         On that basis I am content as long as my
learned friend realises the import of what is being said,        it
is not simply a record.        It is being put to the Jury as
mat e r i a l .which they can assess and use and, if necessary and
they think fit, accept as truth.

   THE CORONER:   I take it what you are saying is that
because this statement is in the public domain, so to speak,
because it has already been given - whether it has been given
on Oath or not is neither here nor there - it is there for
anybody who wishes to get the transcripts out.  That is
really what you are saying, is it not?

   MR. ISAACS:    That is certainly right and in making that
concession I did it so not because I felt there was any
weakness in the submission I originally made to you but in an
attempt to be helpful to meet the demands of you, sir, and
the Jury and perhaps the legitimate demands of m y learned
friend's clients.   If I could put it this way, if the offer
which is made is unacceptable then it can b e withdrawn and I
rest on the submission that I have made which is still a
strong one, in my submission, but I h o p e to try and assist
the Court by saying that, here at least is an account which
has been given by Mr. Duckenfield, in the circumstances it
was given, first of all, in chief and then under, cross-
examination for a number of days. That to some degree will
assist the Jury in determining in this particular-instance in
this Inquest where the truth lies, that is, how the deceased
met their deaths.

   MR. KING:    On that basis I am content and would be
content in respect of any other senior Officer who allows hi s
transcript to go forward in that way.
                                    •\
   MR. MANNING:   I hav e been able to use the intervening
period to talk to Superintendent Murray who instructs me on
the same basis as that put forward by m y learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, tha t
so fax as his evidence to the Taylor inquiry is concerned it
may be used in exactly the same way.    It was evidence that
was received.   He answered questions in chief and in cross-
examination in detail.    There it is.  It will b e received a n d
read in that way and on the same basis under the same caveat.

   THE CORONER:   May I put in my view for what it is worth?
I had listened with considerable interest to your submission
and I have to agree with you because this is a regular
occurrence in Inquests that whenever you get the situation
                                                             91




where a person is potentially liable to be charged with some
criminal offence, be it careless driving or even speeding, it
does not matter what, it is next to impossible to construct a
question which is not incriminatory.    That has been my
experience and in a sense I am encouraged that that seems to
be your experience as well.    I thought it was just my failure
in constructing questions.    So far as that goes, I agree it
is exceedingly difficult to formulate questions which
actually advance the matter if a person is in a situation
where an answer m a y incriminate him.

     Secondly, because I realise that that is so, my practice
has always been to call the driver, or the person whose
conduct is being called in question, to ask h i m things like,
"What is your name?" (which is not I think incriminatory) and
then to pause.  If questions are asked and if %hey are
incriminatory that is pointed out straight away and my
experience generally speaking is that the matter draws to a
close very quickly because people realise there is no point
in proceeding.  It does have the advantage that the witness
who is a player in whatever it is one is enquiring into is
there, is seen to be there and is also given the opportunity
of saying something if he wishes to say something whereas if
you do not call h i m you do not give the witness that
opportunity.

     How, of course, you might say to me, "I a m telling you
that we do not w a n t that opportunity, thank you very much".

   MR. ISAACS:   That is exactly what I am telling you for
the purposes of this submission.

   THE CORONER:    The fact that somebody does n o t give
evidence is also prejudicial.        In a sense the pro bl em has
been made more difficult from the decision point of view
because of the exchange that has just taken place as to what
is to happen with regard to the transcripts of Lor d Justice
Taylor's Report a n d Mr. K i n g , who has the primary interest of
a good number of t h e bereaved', feels that this might be a
better bet than having somebody say, "I am not answering
questions" and you obviously feel that as well.

     I am a little bit concerned about it, in fact, because
quite a bit of the evidence of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, and w e think about him simply because you took
the lead in this matter but it applies to others as well I am
sure, there is quite a lot of his evidence which is not
germane to an Inquest.   It will be ever so interesting but it
is not germane to an Inquest.   I could allow it if you, as
his representative, say, "I do not mind, let us read it all
and have done with it".   I am a little bit concerned about
that aspect of the matter.
   HR. ISAACS:    There are two ways of looking at it, with
respect.   First of all, it can be edited by agreement and
indeed on your direction because you will have read his
evidence that he gave some time ago now to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry.   Alternatively it can go before the Jury
and yo u can give directions as to those parts which are
germane to the Jury's task in this particular Inquiry.    I
should point out, sir, that the offer I made was made on the
basis that he was not called.   I think my learned friend
understood that and it was not in the way of holding a gun to
your head at all.   It was a view to being helpful.

   THE CORONER:    Mr. Isaacs, may I ask you this because it
seems to me that it might be possible to achieve the best of
all worlds in this situation bearing in mind the point which
you have made and the acceptance of the issue? It is my
reluctance in a sense to make a ruling that we were not
calling him because I am a little bit reluctant, despite the
very persuasiveness of a lot of what, you said to me, but it
seems to me that your client would not be in any particular
danger of prejudice if the solicitors, Mr. King in
particular, were to agree that if we were to put Mr.
Duckenfield in the witness box having either read his
transcript either i a toto or edited b y agreement, that he
would agree not to pursue questions which clearly were
incriminatory because that would then give the advantage of
having Mr. Duckenfield here and yet without having the thing
which I perceive to be your main fear is that he will h a v e to
answer hundreds of questions all of which he will answer b y
saying, "I am not answering that question because it is
prejudicial".   What do you feel about that?

    MR. ISAACS:   What will happen is this, let us .say it is
m y learned friend and he vill ask a question whic h he
believes does not have the tendency to incriminate.     Either
yourself or Mr. Duckenfield or myself will say, "We take the
view that it is".   The Jury will go out.  There will be some
legal argument.   There will be some reference perhaps to •some
parts of the evidence he. has given.  That matter having been
resolved the Jury will come back in.   The next question will
b e asked and exactly the same thing will happen.   I cam
foresee unfortunately that one will hav e a morning, a day,
two days or three days and after every question that is asked
the Jury will go out, there will be legal argument and so it
will go on.




                       /With respect,   sir
                                                                       93




Witn respect, sir, that cannot be right, and however muc h
you, sir, would like to see him here, unfortunately the
very nature of the dif fic ult y that he is in, and I stress
against tie oick^round that he does not accept that he has
committed any wrong-doing, but that others may take a
different view, that in those circumstances, and I say
this advisedly, the compromise that seems to have been
accepted is one w hi ch should commend itself to you, and
overcome what I a pp reciate to be your natural reluctance
not to call, even to say, “What is your name?*', a chief
player.   Sir, that is the only way that I can put it, but
I do hope tnat perhaps ^oth myself and Nr. King can manage
in the event to pe rsuade you to take the course which is
now being put forward, ?>oth of us no do ubt for different
reasons but, having said tnat, reasons that are to each
o:.her reasonably cogent.

        TH., CORONER:        Did you want, to say anything more, Mr.
King?

        MR. KING:       Uo

     T H H COiUUJEK:         Did you want to say anything,      Mrs.
McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I thinlc it wou ld be useful to use the
transcripts from the T ayl or Inquiry but w e all k n o w that
the Taylor Inquiry was never to blame anybody, it was a
different sort of inquiry to this one, but it wo ul d be
better than nothing, I think.      Rather than have nothing at
all I would be happy w i t h that.

     T H E COiJONEi?: v ou are going al o n g w i t h w h a t   is being
proposed as the best?

     HRS. UcBRIEN:     Yes, but I really wo uld prefer Mr.
Duckenfield to a ppear    in person so that Icould put
questions to him, not     in an inc riminatory way, just to
speak to him.

     T H K COilONER:     I think I ought to say that I know
Lord Justice T a y l o r said that he was not going to blame
anybody.    In fact, it      is only fair to say that an inquest
is in exactly tae same situation.        We are not here to
blame people we are hore to enquire into how a decease?:
person died and, in fact, the rules I ha v e already
referred to e xpressly say that you must -not give a verdict
which in any «ay blames somebody, and I would follow that
ruling exceedingly strictly,, I can a ss ure you of that.        I
appreciate that you may want to ask the questions as
gently as possible but that is not, in fact, the issue.
The issue is not wne tne r you are a sk ing a qu estion nicely
or nastily, but wnat is the content of the question, and
does it tend to increase the risk even by a little bit
tnat a person might be prosecuted.        Tha t is the point.   It
                                                                         94




 is - iJt now you ask t ;e question, w.iich I an sure you ~ill
 do in a ladylike manner, but that is not really the issue.

      MSS. McB.’IEN:       I think that he would be able to give
 u .
   jfar more i ’.ifo.'snation about that day than anybody else
 as :e was *..ie prime actor.

         Til:- CO:IOrtErt:          Yes, but Mrs. HcBrien, I thin'< it is
only fair to sav, as I have already indicated, it is, in
fact, practic llv impossible to fraa^ a question, to put
*. 'e question where a person is in the position of Chief
S u p e r i n t e n d n t Q u c k e n f i e l o , which is not incriminating.
It may .iot he incriminating but it is almost impossible to
frame it and the point is that ho does not have to answer
that question.             \<net ter it is incriminatory or not, you
c~nnot dr;jv a co nclusion from it.                      If I ask a driver,
"Were you doing 40 miles an nour in a 30 miles an hour
area?", h: can say, "This is an incriminatory question, I
an .ot ;;5swe:*ing it".                  You cannot <*raw the conclusion that
h wris doing 40 miles an hour from that.                        He might have
been but ne might not.                     He might just not want to answer
the que *tion and there is no way of finding out, not in
this Court, and that is t le difficulty in this situation.
It is a d i f fi cu lt^ wnich is almost insoluble I think.

      fsflS. Mc B k IEN: If I forced some questions and handed
 tain to you for you to look at ...?

      V!*E C0.{i)f<ER:      You could do it but it won*t mak e any
differenc . '*ou wo u l d be a ver%* clever lady if you could
thi-ik of a q u e s t i o n which actually gave you an answer.

       MRS. McSRJEi’:       I would not be recriminatory.

       .HE CO.IONEtU      Thank you, Mrs. McBrien.

        You will have guessad that ay inclination h ad been to
turn you r request dow n from what I nave said, but on tae
0 5. s2 r hand I h a v e to take into account what Hr. K ing has
said, and I have heard, of course, what Mrs. McBri en has
said and I have to take that into account as well, though
it is clear, I aio sure, to you that my experience is
similar to yours, tnat it is exceedingly difficult to
‘:Ctu>lly formulate tne questions in a meaningful sort of
w y.

          I know you w o n ' t be here tomorrow .but I am still
 :;o*ng to         cfer a -’ecision for a day or two.     We are not in
 a hjrr. irj t 12 sfn.ss that he is coming tomorrow.              It will
 be, I an afraid, several weeks before ue actually get to
—fciie crucia' .situ tion but I will think about it quite harr-
   o:ause obvi ous ly if it is acceptable to everybody t."en
 tnat may w o 11 be tV; most convenient w?y irrespective of
 my .’orm-.l         •••c*-:ce. I appreciate it is a l i t t l e bit
 i - c - m v e ■ ie.it for you but I don't think I can do anytning
  '■>out it.   I do think it is something that I rieed to
C..V sidor.

       Miv. MANNING:      Per :ans just to follow from that, you
 n : ste that you will r.ive the decision w *en you feel
a ile t- do so.     Can I ask a backwards way round assurance,
it as not my intention to come tomorrow .-norning i'ecause
t>ii v d i o s are sonethi g with which I am familiar.     Could
I :>e assured by you that you would not ~ive that
adju'i L :ntio : at 1-.’ o'clock tomorrow morn'ng, it would be A
o'cl ck?

      T 1. C O . ' O U Z i \ : You c ? r . be assured of that and, in
f ct, if it •.♦111 .ielp you I                  say that I won't =>ive a
d cisioii at all aid that I will let your instructing
sol   •nors of tse Of: cers involved ':now w len I am ready
t make a.; a m j u u - m e n t , so that your instructing
sol   .curs and otners can be iere.

      MR. ISAACS:          I am ver. grateful, sir, because I was
j;:~t oin^ 10 ask if you could give us            otice then
c rtai ly s ome arrangement would be made to ensure tnat
your ’.cision on this matter will be heard by somebody
representing t i r . Du-ikenfield.      I also ask tnis, that I
ass.jme :nerefore that you -ill near no furtier submis si ons
o. tjis p nr t : c u l - r matter without somebody being in
attendance.      I assume t ’   .ere will be no m ore in any e v e n t


      T'i:* CO .(ONER:       Th= only submission, if you like, that
I would like t o n e a r , and I don't think this will
prejudice y o u r client, will be from the r epr esentatives of
  .e o . ’er. p e o p l e wno are in t;ie. same boat* shall we s a y ,
as t w n e t h c r or not they wo ul d go alo g with the
p ro:
    .iosuls w h i c h have been made.

       MR. ISAA S:    Clearl/ that cannot af fect Mr.
Duckenfield.    I was only concerned that you aay near - and
I t iou ht you woul- no*., but may hear submissions about my
 •ppli c*tion in ray absence or in tne absence of any o t h e r
representative of Hr. Duckenf iel*.

       i'E Cn.;v:.,£R:    No, that would not be my intention
boc :u e I q u i t e u =d rstand this is an exceedingly
im .:rtant m a t t e r for you and for tne other Officers.

      M?’
        .. ISAACS:   Effectively submissions on this point
 in -ow tie r   nr-ad as closed until you m a k e your
d cis ion?

      TH.. C»!ilOl*!£R:   Ye?,   that is ri.;ht.

     MR. ^AVIJE:          I won er if I might just mention that
t:are is a n o t n e r potential pnssanger in tlv» boat who has
  t been m e n t i o n e d so far and that is Assistant Chief
Co-Stable Ja:'.:son.        I just mention this so that you know
                                                                96




" that '••e nay he ad- ad to lie group whose submissions you
 w l l be c usid r ng i-. clue cour.-e, whan the decision is
 m r e :bout r.-.e position of fir. Duckenfield.

       TMi: COi'.ONER:   Can we ju t make sure that we know who
 . e ire * Iking about.      I ':now ilr. H.;le isn't »ece but the
 pte*.tia    peopl e w.. are talking about is Mr. Marshall, is
 that rignt?

        H.*.. P-'vY.E:  Yes, ths lis\ is Assistant Chief
 C   s a b l e J cks.-n, Superinten ient Cireenwood,
 Su •.r nt nd nt M u r r y, Superintendent, I believe, Marshall
 an'i, of course, Mr. Djckenfield.

      TIJ- C*J;.'0»i”R: And you. would want to add Mr.
 homings.crth and Mr. Smith, I take it?

       MISS ADDLEtiAN:     Tnat is ri.;ht.

       *uE COROr.TR:     What about you?

       Md. CATCHPuLE:        Si?, as I said before, at the moment
  11   I -an say, sir, is that we would like to reserve our
 posiion.     It nay wall be that for the purposes of. Mr..
 King and tiie families it would be better all rojndi.if a l l ...
 t;»e sta tements w e n t in from the principal p layers.but we
 need .to t:lk to our clients direct and also to ha y e ; '
 discussion b e t w e e n ourselves.                     V; .i

       T ’*.r
            . COKOtfER:          You will a^preziate that in respect of
 quite a Tew of tne names that have been mentioned tnere
 a.*e ver/ c o m p r e h e n s i v e PACE statements vnich, of course, p.
 _*11 be read anyway," whatever we do' about i t . " 'ifhat'^’d o ' y o u
 say t tnat, Mr. King?                Suppose for a minute that all
 :^ese coll eag ue s of yours said, yes, they think it is a
 splendid id a of your.; and Mr. Isaacs, we will apply it to
   11 of • *em.      W o u l d you accept it?

        Mil. KI.-G: Si *, ray position is I would have liked to
 h :ve read out the whole of the Taylor Report and the w hol e
 of tie tr nscri pt and just submitted to law on you,yso to
 th 3 t extent, sir, I would not object to that course.

      .Tii.I CORONER:     Than*< you.

       i1R. CATCHPOLE:       There was one point you mentio.-.ed
 t lat t iere w o u l i be some live evidence tomorrow.   Tnat
 certaLnly took me sonewhat by surpri-se and I tnink tnose
 arou d me as w.ll.        I wonder if you ....

       iilE CORONER:         Sorry about that.  W ten I f'eci ied to
 scr.ip, if taat is the ri^ht word, th.* summaries, or the
 spec-cnes or w h a t e v e r you like to call ther., I thought we
 woul   ha.e a bit of tine, so we are going to take the
 fi*st four p e o p l e on the list for Wednesday morning and
 t ac will give u- a slightlv easier day on Uednesday, and



                          <2   3   >
*;e have ,>ut it up at the ’.jack actually* It is there.
That is where we are goi ng to put the list.    We intend to
put tne list up at the back so that it is visible,     j

     So tne plan tomorrow is morning, videos, afternoon,
four ..it.messes whose names I can't quite remember at the
moment.

     MR. KIUG:     The four witnesses at the top of the list
for Wednesday,   sir?

      Til : COROiJEK:  Yes, I think so.     Certainly three of
*. em but we m a y have h a d 'to shift the fifth and the fourth
arou d.     It is the top end of the.Wednesday list.

       I just vrant to c h e c k one other thing.  You remember I
meitionei the transcripts to you at the business meeting?
We have he~rd from three firms.         One said they did not
w nt one, two said thsy did.         Is that correct?  It is no
use turning up tomorrow morning and saying, "Yes, I did
w .-nt a transcript".      As I explained to you, it is entirely
up to you.       It does not make :*ny difference to me whether
you have t ' a a a or no:.

     HISS HAMPT/i.*: I thin: we would be a third firm|that
would require a transcript.

     THu COKONER:       T h a n k you.  Ladies and gentlemen, /. :
thank you v ery muc h indeed.        It has been quite a lqijg :day,
as Mr. Isaacs said - interesting, in many respects. ‘We
will a d j our n tlien.

(Tne Inquests were a djourned until the following m o r n i n g )
                                                             14




     As a comment on what Mr. King has said, strictly it appears
to us that he is saying that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus actus. i.e. something which
intervened after the crushing and before the deaths, which causec
or contributed to the deaths of at least some of the people, and
the response of the Chief Constable to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can quite see that is something which
people would wish to see investigated on the question of how it
came about.  I only make that comment in an endeavour to be
helpful, but the position of the Chief Constable is that he has
ho submissions one way or the other.
                                f
     May I just say while I am on ray feet with regard to what Mr.
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Police have admitted negligence.   It is well known and has
been well publicised that what has happened is that the Police
have agreed to make payments to those people who were injured ane
to the dependents of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made.   Also there has been a civil actior
in respect of apportionment of liability in respect of those
matters.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed.   I accept
entirely what you say and in a sense I accept what Mr. Manning
says as well.  It is not really relevant to my proceedings
whether or not negligence has been admitted or not admitted.   It
is neither here nor there.  So I did not comment on it, but I
appreciate what you have said.

     MR. ISAACS:   I think, sir, in fact, that is Mr. Hale.       Mr.
Manning sits to my left.

      THE CORONER:    I beg your pardon.   Forgive me, please, both
of y o u .

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir. I have no submissions.  It is entirely a
matter for you having regard to the breadth or depth which you
consider appropriate for this particular Inquest.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have exactly similar comments as far
as my client is concerned.

     MISS SINCLAIR:      I have no submissions on this matter, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I add to that.  The matter is entirely for
you.  You are the best person, having read all the evidence, to
make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had, as
you have already pointed out, sir, a fairly detailed
investigation into the earlier Inquests.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, this is not an application of which I
have had previous notice, and which in the circumstances of the
application is some surprise to me. All I think I should, sir.
is this is not the time and place for some sort of Public Inquiry
into the activities of the A m b u l a n c e Service and the Emergency
Services, and it is not appropriate to bring such a matter into
the arena   as a sort of side wind.   Beyond that, sir, it   is
obviously   a matter for you.

     MISS ADDELMANN:    Sir, I have no observations or submissions
about the point, and Ican do no better than echo those remarks
made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.

     MR. RUSSELL:    I too endorse those remarks.  None of us,
other than ray learned friend, Mr. King, has seen the original
statements, and so are being invited to comment upon a course in
the dark because we have not seen the nature of an example of the
material he now seeks to rely upon.   I recognise it is a matter
for you, and if you decide I d6n't take a stance one way or the
other.

     THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point? Is there
anybody else wants to say anything on this issue? Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Sir, only to emphasise that it is not a side
wind which I am embarking on.  I am seeking to address causes,
contributory causes to the deaths, and I am concentrating on
that, and it is in that context I have invited the Court to look
beyond 3.15, and certainly we are dealing with it from the point
of view of possibilities of novus actus. yes, I accept that.

     THE CORONER:   I have listened hopefully with attention, anc
perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on.
I know you have not had the advantage of seeing the letter, but
it is only fair to say Mr. King in his summary of the points as
far as I can see summarised the points which his clients were
making entirely fairly.  There is nothing extra in the letter, sc
to speak, except connecting words, basically.  That is for your
reassurance, if I can put it like that.

     Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "go" on the
15th April, 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in thinking
how to set about dealing- with the Inquests was to as far as
possible treat    the Inquests as if they were completely
standard, if Ican put it like that - it is a horrible word -
but completely normal Inquests.     The fact that it was national
news, that it was 95 young people, that it created a terrible
amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in some ways is unique
because of the    numbers, buteach individual death I dealt with
families are in exactly the same situation, and I tried to
think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
opposed to an incident in a football stadium.      I have thought
back on many occasions to say a road traffic incident where
somebody might have suffered a serious head injury.      That
person may well have been at the road side for X number of
minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
attend.   They may then have been taken by an ambulance to a
hospital.   They may have gone into the resuscitation room.
They may have been worked on by the doctors. They may have gone
into hospital and they may have then died two, three days, may
be longer after the incident.     Or alternatively, you could have
                     /
                   /here by chance the road traffic incident occurs 'on
                    a doctor happens to be. He walks up to the
                  ks and says. "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
                  rson is dead".   Or you could have a situation where
                has this road traffic incident and is taken into
              !tid is certified dead on arrival.

             /ione of those instances would I as a matter of routine
             /dence of what happened after the incident .-itself was
            ed. and indeed, the pathologists in the example which i
           sed would have given as cause of death serious head injury
          istance, or multiple injuries with fracture of the skull, 01
         .hing of hat nature.    It seems to me that the fact that the
        on may suvive an injury for a number of minutes or hours or
         days, isnot the question which I as Coroner have to
      sider.     MVtask is to establish who the person was - I am
     /ry to repet this - where he died, when he died and how he
    /fed. It is from my understanding of the pathological evidence.
   ,he overwheling pathological evidence is and was that the people
  ilied as a realt of crushing or traumatic asphyxia.      Different
/words were uad, but the sense was always the same.        The
/ underlying ppblem which these poor men and women were subjected
f to was an iroility to breathe.
?         That d<5 not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
     respire forLperiod of time or even have a heart beat
     thereafter,Ut the damage was done, and indeed, both Dr.
     Gumpert, Drglater, Prof. Usher, who dealt with this question ir
     an overall Jint of view, all in fact said, as I understand theii
     evidence, e?ctly the same.

          One oi   points,       King, which you have made is that
     because ;                                                        jr
                                                                   With
     tne greate*                                             fe -
     "reasonably                                              lich I
     would take          if you think about it for   moraeni      am sure
    you would $ee with me. if a body were to be found in a
    macerated <bte one would call a doctor who would
    certify de«fi, but it would be a little bit illogical to
    assume thatthat particular body was actually alive
    until that>oint.

       The i$ue of death certification and the timing cf it is
 important, jecause one wants to have if possible certainty.   Tha*
  s      firs thing.  Secondly, the conventional way of
  ^ a.        a person is definite dead is that a medical man say:
  o. but to draw the conclusion that until a medical roan has said
  o a person is alive is in my view an impossible proposition to
maintain.




                       /I do understand the anxiety... .
    •>
                                                                                             17

A



               I do understand the anxiety which a lot of the families
          have about this issue, but as I have already said the
B         overwhelming medical evidence, the pathological evidence,
          and that is the crucial one I am interested in, is the
          damage that caused the death was done due to the crushing.

               Now I picked the arrival of the first ambulance not
         because there is anything magical about that but because
         when we J.ook at the videos we can actually see that and it
         is a«convenient marker; that is all.    If the first
         ambulance had arrived at 3.30 I would have picked that time.
         It is simply intended as a marker, but, and this is an
         important point, I considered the medical evidence.   The
         medical evidence was that once - I am not quoting verbatim -
         but the sense of what Professor Usher said, and,.Jj^deed, the
         others as well, —                                          “

                                                          yj^and


              Now I felt that the evidence which I had heard and in
D        the light of what I had read that                    the
         latest,'                        i;^?P^5 Mi^.^ay,e;i;aris,^M^uld
                                                                    whir-h   ^
                                     e r^ia        be fore T but let us
         assume six minutes past, arM— a n i ^ . m i puLejs^tOi^tha-t^
         that is tj^ely£^rai^ut^s^asi^nd^nen^s^s?saylifewent^on^tp
                                                                   In
         other wor




              I have already indicated that at the - I will call them
         the interim inquests if I may just for the sake of^a name -
                               iAefiai                      ly u±6x..
                                                                  ^~             S<and.5in
          fat sense I tjroke 'my’ own rule straight away because I said
         I wanted to treat this matter as if it were a completely
         standard normal road traffic incident, if you like.      I
         didn’t, I gave a great deal of information for various
         reasons which I don't need to go into now.

               As an aside I can assure you that within the limits of
         our ability the summari<            ies and the evidence which was given
         was an accurate reflect:            :ion of what people said and if there
         was a gap, for instance, as has been suggested in some cases
         which is unexplained,                  -ftjy            sn        use£'there^j^S
                               idence
         #§Bi3Jhidde.n ,;.ay.i<•• «*
                            r'L'
                                             l i e n w e n a v e  put under  the curtain,
         But b e c a u s e w e ' d i d n 't know of it or couldn’t find it or it
         doesn't exist.           The tru th of the matter, of course, is that           ....
         people weren't being wa tched individually continuously by
                                                                            18




somebody else    r e c o r d i n g what was happening.    It is entirely
fortuitous as    to w h e t h e r or not there is a witness or
witnesses who    h a p p e n s (a) to h a v e been with a person, (b)
who remembers    who h e is a n d (c) has some idea of the timing.

     Some of you wh o were there will remember that in some
cases we had a gre at deal of ev id enc e with regard to what
had happened post-crush, shall I say, and in others we had
next to nothing b e c a u s e it is very sad particularly for
those families where we have got so little to share w i t h
them, but we are living in the real world and in some cases
there was o v e rw hel min g - for instance, there were dozens of
photographs as you k no w - some of the people were all over
the newspapers and in others we could not find any.           It
can't be helped, it is just one of those things.

      Bearing in min d that                            , s tage to d e a l ^
        egjquestion^of^hp^, and I do intend to deal with it
reasonably co mpr eh ens ive ly , I h a v e to remember two things:
that my powers are limited.             I don't have an open ended
authority to carry out an investigation.                 The Rules and the
Act, indeed, are q u i t e cle ar as to the limits of what the
coronal inquiry should be.             I admit that the word "how" is
a little bit f le xible and a ss umi ng we call all those
witnesses on that p r e l i m i n a r y list w hic h I have circulated I
hope you will agree that I have bee n reasonably flexible
wit h that word, but ne vertheless I do h a v e to draw a line.
Indeed, this was d o n e in ot h e r inquests.           If you think back
to the Zeebrugge inquest, for instance.              T he learned Coroner
there drew a line.       He was ju dic ia lly reviewed on whe re he
dre w it and in that p a r t icu la r c a s e the Divisional Court or
the Court of Appeal, I c a n ' t r em ember now, clearly said that
a line has to be dr a w n and in the Zeebr ugg e case they agreed
it was right.     I am d o i n g my best.        I am tryine to d r a w a
line as well.

      If you think of the other m a j o r disasters where
inquests have a l r e a d y taken place, you will find that lines
were drawn there as well and I think you will find that the
line with regard to the qu es t i o n w h i c h we are now thinking
about was very, ve r y m u c h tighter than what we have already
done.

       In answer to your submission, I still consider that as
a general p roposition we are going to accept - I am go i n g to
take these inquests and d e a l w ith the que stion of how on the
basi s of what h a p p e n e d to about 3.15 or thereabouts.     I
have explained it to you so I am not going to repeat it and
I ba s e it mainly upon the p ath ol o g i c a l medical evidence.

       Having said that, I think it is probably right to say
bec au se we will be c a l l i n g witne sse s it may be that
           s.-whichv,worr y ~y ou   ay,-b e.-.dea 1 1 ;:with-to -a minor'
vaafi-tca.yado wn « th aJ^4>Afch..

         I have also got to say, it is o n l y right, that w h a t A ^ ^
   tiriin^^j p l f l a r e t i r e a i J c y M a d a i y i t f Mr. King, jJHESKfibld*
 1g^fetiUCiJiera33udicialiKlTiquiry®lnti««maft<*re»4.;nt<>*iffi^h, as I
   unde rs tan d it, ^ r e i^utside^Tnji^uthori-ty»a-nda!St£!OW%.           I also
   seem to recollect, alt ho ugh Lord J u s ti ce Taylor s Inquiry
   isn't - as I have alre ad y said to you at the business
   meeting, I don't really want to spend too much time on it -
   but I do recollect that the emergency services w ere very
   well represented at that Inquiry and, indeed, a lot of
  discussion, from my reading of the transcripts, did deal
  with the issues of the medical response.

            Whether or not that was satisfactory, whether Lord
  J u s t i c e Taylor should have done more, whether somebody else
  should look into that when we have finished that is nothing
  to do with me.         However, as far as I am concerned, my
  intention is to stick with what I gave you as my initial
  preliminary intention.

         I have, of course, already looked through the documents
  which you sent me and insofar as in one or two instances
  witnesses are mentioned, if I think, and, indeed, I have
  thought that one or two of these in fact I think three at
  the moment, you have got a point.          It would per hap s be
  advantageous to call those persons and w e are m a kin g
  appropriate arrangements.        Please don't think that I have
  said, "Good grief, fifty pages, I am not dealing w i t h that,"
  I have already spent quite a bit of time thinking about it
  and I will hopefully h ave anot he r look.       If I w e r e - which
  is h i g h l y unlikely - in any p art icular instance to feel we
  ought to go a little bit further down that line b e c a u s e
  there is a specific point to be mad e in any p a r t ic ula r
  instance, then I will if I think it necessary, tell you.
  However, I think it is un lik el y from w hat I have seen and
  what I have read and for the reasons w h i c h I have giv en you.




                  MR. KING:          Sir,   thank you for that...
     MR. KING:   Thank you for that.   Can I raise a
separate matter, sir, which is not connected with the issue
of cut off but is connected with the issue of 50 pages
which you have referred to?

     THE CORONER:      I was not saying that as a criticism.

     MR. KING:   Not at all, sir.   One only has to state
the number of families whom I represent to know that.
Sir, a number of the families have raised specific
questions relating to the summaries which were put before
you in their individual Inquests.   I just give one
example, sir; in the case of No. 13, Jonathan Owens, you
will note they have a particular concern as to the timing
when their son came to the ground and a particular concern
to the fact that the summary suggests he joined the crowd
at twenty to three when, in fact, they point out to you
that the positive video evidence shows they were standing,
not having joined the crowd at all, round about ten to or
eight minutes to three.   I put that as an example.

     Are you willing, sir, to go through those individual
questions - not now - and indicate at some stage, perhaps
even in writing to us, whether or not you would be prepared
to reopen those individual Inquests to deal with those -
may be small points in the whole but to the individual
families - important points of factual errors which seem.to_
have crept in by reference to positive evidence whicn can
now be laid before you?

     THE CORONER:   My recollection of the papers is that
they affected very few or where I feel it is justified.    I
think those two things go together.   As I say, I have not
had sufficient time to study it in detail but if I were to
think there was a genuine error and that that error was
actually relevant - the incident which you have given me
indicates with respect to the family it is an anxiety to
them - but the crucial point is not whether he was standing
in a crowd or whether he was standing aside but where was
he or at least at what time was he still outside the
ground?   One has to ask the question, does it actually get
us any further forward?

     MR. KING:   May I just interpose to say that the
example I gave was directed as much to the timings outside
the ground in fact.

     THE CORONER:       If we have made a mistake, and we will
be checking t h a t ...

     MR. KING:      I am obliged.
A


         THE CORONER:   When points have been made of actual
    error we have been trying to check.    If we agree with
    them, as Hr. Fraser and some of the others will remember
    we have made from time to time a£ hoc amendments when
B   points of error were pointed out to us.    I am not averse
    to that, not in principle anyway, and if it helps someboa
    by clarifying something then I will be pleased to do so b
    I would not want necessarily to spend endless time on
    clarifying minutiae which, in the final analysis, do not
    matter so far as the Jury are concerned.    I am sure you
    accept that.

         MR. KING:   I understand that, sir, but I am sure whe.
C   families are supplied with an "agreed" summary and they see
    matters which are of great concern to them which appear to
    be incorrect then obviously they are desirous that that
    should be rectified as quickly as possible.

         THE CORONER:      I take it none of you have any adverse
    comments on that?

         MR. KING:   What I am going to suggest is that those
D   instructing me extract from those documents which do
    confuse two issues, those which are directed specifically
    to individual questions and they can be then sent to you in
    a more orderly manner which enables us the more quickly to
    obtain help from you.

         THE CORONER:      That would be very helpful indeed
    because then we wo u l d really know what we are looking at
    and what we have got to concentrate on.
E
         MR. KING:      Yes,   sir.

         THE CORONER:      Are there any other comments from
    anybody?

         MR.   ISAACS: . Yes, sir.   I just wondered how we are
    going to   deal with these matters.   I know that you started
    with Mr.   King and I thought probably what you would do is
F   run down   the line so to speak.

         THE CORONER:   Yes, we will do that.      Have you got
    any submissions to make?

         MISS HAMPTON:   I have no submissions raised by Mr.
    King, though he has raised one particular matter which
    concerns the City Council with regard to the agreed summary
    of facts.   They have been through the proposed summary
G   prepared for today's hearing and there are one or two
    matters, they have instructed me on, which concerns them,
    sir.
     THE CORONER:   I think I will be able to short circuit
this submission.  You will recollect, ladies and gentlemen,
at the business meeting a suggestion was made that we
should try and extract various paragraphs out of Lord
Justice Taylor's Report as an agreed statement.   I was not
particularly enamoured of the view and for some reason
which at the moment I cannot account for I forgot to
mention at the meeting that we were actually in the process
of preparing what we thought was an actual non-
controversial, entirely neutral, account of various
activities which we hoped it.would be possible to put to
the Jury so that they had an underlying base on which one
could build the edifice, so to speak.

     In the events which have happened, we have heard from
most of you, if not all, but whilst quite a lot of you have
actually come back and said that you are reasonably hap py
with the summary there have been quite a number of you who
have ha d substantial points of criticism to make with
regard to the content.    Unfortunately some of these points
- and I do not think I am criticising anybody and I am not
going to name any names either - were not made until Friday
or even later.    When I say Friday, I mean Friday late
afternoon.    I have come to the conclusion that we are not
going to use these summaries at all.    We will build, if
that is the right word, what we need as we go along.

     I mention that now, and I will mention it when the
Jury are here, but what we are going to do is that we have
got some two dozen slides which we are going to show.
They are shots of the ground from the air and so on in
order to give the Jury some idea of what we are talking
about and then we will just build the evidence on it as far
as is necessary for the purposes of the Inquest.      I think
that probably deals with your point.    I know that many of
you thought it was a jolly good idea but in the event it
has not worked out.    I thought it was a jolly good idea as
well which is why I intended to do it but I wo u l d rather
not.   Some of the points which were made, I could see what
was being said and some were very good, but I would rather
not have anything which people were not entirely happy on.
Some of you might feel you have been pushed because you
have bee n asked to agree to something.   If you are not
happy with the evidence, that is another matter altogether.
I take no responsibility for what the witnesses say.      We
have to accept the evidence that is given.    Are there any
other submissions you want to make, Miss Hampton?

     MISS HAMPTON:   No, thank you,   sir.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Hale, what about you?
                                                                    27


A

    The first, of course, is Rule '22 of the Coroners Rules or             *
    1984, dealing w i t h self-incrimination, sub-Rule 1 - and
    tnis is the m a t t e r that I referred to:

         "No witne ss at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
         any q u e s t i o n tending to incriminate aitnself."

    And then S e c tio n 14 of the Civil Evidence Act, wnich in my
    submission is to the same effect but I refer to it for the
    sake of completeness.        That is the Civil Evidence Act of
    1968, s ub-section 1:
                                     «
         "The right of a person in any legal proceedings,
         other than criminal proceedings, to refuse to answer
C        any q ues tio n or produce any document or thing if to
         do so wo ul d tend to expose that person to proceedings
         for an o f f e n c e or for the recovery of a penalty, (a;
         shall app ly only as regards criminal offences under
         the law of any part of the United Kingdom, and the
         penalties provided for by such law and (b) shall
         include a like right to refuse to answer any question
         or produce any do cument or thing if to do so would
         tend to e x p o s e the husband or wife of that person to
D        proceedings for any such criminal offence or for the
         recovery of any such penalties."

    I mention s u b - s e cti on (b) only because it is there not
    because, of course, it is in any way relevant to this
    case.

         So, sir, that is the position.            Mr. Duckinfield, as
    with any witness before you and before the Jury, has that
E   privilege not to answ er any question which may tend to
    incriminate him.           So, sir, what does that mean?^ Could I
    then ask you to turn to the bundle?            My submission is that
    there are two cases, one in the Court of A pp eal one in the
    House of Lords w h i c h followed, in which the House of Lords
    confirmed the d e c i s i o n of the Court of Appeal, which gives
    you a great d e a l of guidance as to v; lat constitutes a
    risk, a tendency, of incrimination.            The first one is that
    in the Court of Appeal, the case of Re Westinghouse
F   Electric C o r p o r a t i o n Uranium Contract Litigation HDL
    Docket No. 235 (No. 2 ), reported in the third volume of
    the All England Reports of 1977 at page 717, and I would
    ask you at this stage, sir, to find that, w h i c h is at
    folder 6.

         Sir, the fact-, of that case are wholly different to
    tne facts of this, but of course it is the statement of
    principle, the rat io of the case to which I wish to refer.
G   May I first of all read that part of the preamble to the
    headnote:

          "Evidence - Privilege - Incrimination of witness or
          spouse - Belief that evidence would expose witness to
          proceedings for offence or recovery of penalty -




H
                                                          28




     Reasonable ground for belief - Sufficient to show
     real and appreciable risk that proceedings would be
     taken or increase of an existing risk of proceeding ;
     • • •



and then it goes on to deal with discovery of documents,
production of documents and I don't weary you with that
now, sir.

     Sir, I don't think it will be helpful to you or to
those who are listening to this submission to deal with
the facts of that cas , other than to say that it was
action involving an American corporation against RTZ, Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation Limited, and there was an
application for discovery of documents which Rio Tinto
Zinc did not wish to produce because they said that to
produce those documents would give rise to the possibility
that they may well face prosecution or a penalty within
European Community law, but I now deal with what was held,
and this, sir, is at page 718, and these are the
statements of general principle wnich in my submission
a^ply to the giving of evidence in any Court, and
tnerefore before you, sir.

     THE CO.KONER:  May I just stop you - the page numbers
are missing off mine.

     MR. ISAACS:    It is the second page - the next page
after the first.   I do apologise, sir.

     “Held - A witness was protected from incriminating
     himself by the production of documents

- and, it therefore follows, by the giving of any answer
to any question -

     "... if he could satisfy the court that there was
     reasonable ground to believe that production of the
     documents would furnish evidence against him which
     would be used in proceedings for a penalty ...."

- and agair;, that was, of course, relevant to that case,
but it applies to proceedings for a criminal offence, and
indeed it could be said, having regard to the wide ambit
of tne Coroners Rules, for example proceedings in relation
to disciplinary matters, wnich of course you, sir, know
Hr. Duckinfield along with others still faces.

     "Reasonable ground for the belief might appear from
     the.circumstances of the case or from matters put
     forward by the witness himself, but the witness was
     required to show only that tnere was a real and
     appreciable risk, or an increase of an existing risk,
     that proceedings would be taken against him for an
     existing penalty offence, and not that proceedings
     were likely to be or would probably be taken."
                                                            29




You will see. sir, as we go through the reports, that one of the
points made by those who objected to the claim to the privilege
was that, "Well, the European Commission already know about this
and so you are not going to make your position any worse" . We
shall see, sir, I hope, how both the Court of Appeal and the
House of Lords dealt with that proposition, because that might b
a point that is taken here.

     Sir, knowing that you d o n ’t have page numbers could I ask
you to turn to the next page over, page 721, the right-hand side
of the first judgment which was that of the Master of the Rolls.
Lord Denning.  It is the right-hand side of the page, and he
deals with the common law as to self-incrimination.     I ask you t<
look first of all at between D-E:

          "Today we are not dealing with a party to a cause, we
          are dealing with a witness.   At common law, when a
          witness is being examined in the witness box or is
          subpoenaed to produce documents to the court then,
          quite understandably, he may have something he
          wishes to keep secret to himself so that his
          neighbours or his competitors should not get to
          know of it;  something which he might reasonably
          believe he ought not to be compelled to disclose.
          Not, at any rate, if it exposes him to risk of
          some ill befalling him. The common law does in
          some circumstances cast its protection over him.
          It adopts the maxim nemo tenetur seipsum prodere.
          No ;one is bound to furnish evidence against
          himself. It says:   ’If a witness claims the
          protection of the court, on the ground that the
          answer would tend to incriminate himself and there
          appears reasonable ground to believe that it would
          do so, he is not compellable to answer” .

Then th^re is some reference by the Master of the Rolls to a
certain number of cases which I shall not weary you with, because
they are all dealt with in the judgment itself and the statements
of principle in the judgment.

     Could you go down to H on that same page:

          "But if it appears to the judge that,  by being
          compelled to answer, a witness may" (I stress the "may'
          sir) "may be furnishing evidence against himself, whicf
          could" (I stress the "could" sir) "be used against him
          in criminal proceedings or in proceedings for a
          penalty, then his objection should be upheld.

          There is the further point:   once it appears that a
          witness is <»t risk, then ’great latitude should be
          allowed to him in judging for himself   of the effect of
          any particular question':   see R. v. Boyes".
I would ask you to pay particular attention to the next few
line;;, sir:

          "It may only be one link in he chain, or only
          corroborative of existing material, but still he is
          bound to answer if he believes on reasonable grounc
          that it could be used against him.  It is not neces
          for him to show that proceedings are likely to be t
          against him, or could probably be taken against him
          It may be improbable that they will be taken but
          nevertheless, if there is some risk of their being
          taken, a real and appreciable risk as distinct from
          remote or insubstantial risk, then he should not be
          made to answer or to disclose the documents".

I stop/there for my purposes in relation to this authority, a
least'in the judgment of Lord Denning.

     Could I then ask you to turn over to the next page. We i
move to the judgment of Lord Justice Roskill, which is pages
and 725, and I ask you to look at page 725, the right-hand sic
of the page at D.
          "It has long been a rule of English law, as Lord
          Denning MR has pointed out, that a person cannot ...
          be required to answer questions or produce documents
          which may lead to his being, if I may be forgiven a
          colloquialism, 'convicted out of his own m o u t h ’. Tt
          is a long line of authorities dealing with this topi
         ‘of which the earliest cited to us was R . v . Boyes. a
          decision of the Court of the Queen’s Bench subsequen
          expressly approved by this court in Re Reynolds, ex
          parte Reynolds. Those two cases, and there are othe
          to the same effect, show clearly that a mere asserti
          of a claim for privilege on the ground of an alleged
          risk of self-incrimination is not enough to enable t
          privilege to be successfully claimed.   Nor, of cours
          will the court uphold such a claim for privilege whe
          it is made in bad faith."

May I stop there for a moment, sir. An example of that would
this, and there are reported cases to this effect, where a man
has for example, given a statement to the Police.   He goes int-
the witness box as a prosecution witness.   May be because he h.
been given immunity he says, "I do not wish to answer these
questions because the answers may incriminate me", when in fac1
he does not wish to protect himself but what he is trying to d»
is to protect another by not giving that evidence, for example
previous employer or a friend.   In those circumstances he woul<
not be acting in good faith but in bad faith and the privilege
would not be upheld.

At F:
          "The first question which a court must ask itself is
          whether the facts proved in evidence disclose the
          commission of an offence, in some cases a crinsinal
                                                         31




          offence.  The first question here is whether those
          facts disclose that there is a liability on Rio Tinto
          for what counsel for Rio Tinto called *a penalty
          offence'.....

          What, then is the degree of risk of penalty proceeding
          following? It seems to me that once a party to legal
          proceedings who is resisting production of documents
          can show facts which establish the existence of a
          penalty offence (or in other cases the commission of a
          criminal offence) the courts should be slow to deprive
          that party of his privilege against self-incrimination
          which the common law now for some three centuries, and
          s 14 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 today, accords him
          In the absence of bad faith, to say that there is no
          risk of proceedings may in all but the plainest cases
          involve a court claiming for itself a degree of
          prescient foresight to which it would not be wise to
          pretend for it its forecast were wrong and if
          proceedings and penalties were to follow, damage will
          or at least may be done by an erroneous decision of tb<
          court which it would not be easy thereafter to undo or
          redress."

I ask you to turn over the page again to what would be 726, the
left-hand side of the page at D. Again, after a review of the
authorities. Lord Justice Roskill says:

          "It cannot, I think, be right in these cases for
          the court to attempt a quantitative assessment of
          the probability one way or the other of the risk
          of proceedings ultimately being taken, and then
          to seek to draw the line one way where the
          probabilities in the view of the court are
          thought to be more or less evenly balanced and
          the other where the balance is more disparate.
          It is not for the court to resolve problems of
          this kind by calculating odds.  I think that the
          right question to ask is that posed by Shaw L J : can
          exposure to the risk of penalties (or in other cases t-
          the risk of prosecution for a criminal offence) be
          regarded as so far beyond the bounds of reason as to b*
          no more than a fanciful possibility?"

In fact, later on Lord Justice Shaw said exactly that.

     Could I ask you to turn from that case to part 7 of the
folder you have been handed, because the case ended up in the
House of Lords, where as I say the Court of Appeal's view was
upheld, as were the dicta of the Master of the Rolls and the
learned Lord Justices.   It is interesting to note when the House
of Lords dealt with the case what was said in relation to this
question of the information already being in the possession o f ,
let us call them in the context of this case, the prosecuting
authorities.   I anticipate you are lacking in numbers again.  If
I could ask you to turn over the first page and go to the second
This would be page 437 on the right-hand side, sir, dealing with
                                                            32




that part of the case as to what was held by their Lordships,     i
would draw your attention to (ii) starting with "The RTZ
companies".


          "(ii)  The RTZ companies were entitled to claim the
          privilege from the production of documents given by s
          14(1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding that the
          commission had knowledge of the cartel and had not
          taken any action in respect of it. for if the documents
          were produced under the letters rogatory the RTZ
          companies would be exposed to a greater risk of
          proceedings being brought against them by the
          commission for recovery of a fine than they were
          exposed to at present, since production of the
          documents might authenticate and support the existing
          information in the hands of the commission and afford
          conclusive proof of a breach by the RTZ companies of
          the prohibition against cartels, and might cause the
          commission to decide to take action against the RTZ
          companies".

So, sir, we have there the House of Lords dealing with the point
that may be raised in this case as to the decision that has been
taken by the Director in this case, but who knows what will
happen in the future.

     Could you then turn four pages on to what would be page 44S
between B-C, still the speech of Lord Wilberforce.  He says at C

          "I base that conclusion in part on evidence which was
          before and considered by the High Court and the Court
          of Appeal and in part on the proposition that the
          tendency to expose to a penalty would be increased if
          the documents in question were to be validated and
          connected with the RTZ companies by sworn evidence,
          as opposed to being, as they are now, pieces of paper
          found in a file".

Sir, it w o n ’t have escaped you the difference between, albeit th<
evidence that was given before Lord Justice Taylor was all taken
down, it was not evidence that was given on oath, but of course
the evidence before you would be given on oath.

     Then, sir, could you turn another six pages, pages 456 and
457.  "To give any evidence".  This is the speech of Viscount
Dilhorne. between G-H, and you appreciate, sir, I am only pickin.
those parts which are germane to this matter:

          "Secondly, it was argued that the discovery of the
          document would not in the circumstances tend to expose
          the RTZ companies to such proceedings". (That is for a
          penalty)  "It was said that as the commission had
          knowledge from the 'Friends of the Earth' documents fo
          a considerable time of the existence of the cartel and
          had taken no action, there was no real risk of such
          proceedings if the documents in the possession of the
                                                            33




          RTZ companies were disclosed".


Then he deals with the arguments and reference to certain
authority.

     If you could move to page 457, the right-hand side, between
C-D, and he refers to what was said by Lord Denning in the Court
of Appeal to which I have just referred you, he says:

          "With these observations I respectfully agree.     It was
          suggested that the reasoning in the Triplex case had
          reduced the burden which formerly lay on a person
          claiming privilege but I do not think that that is the
          case.  In his judgment du Parq LJ reviewed the earlier
          cases and based his conclusions on them.     Lord Denning
          MR contrasted a real and appreciable risk with a remote
          or insubstantial one, and once it appears that the risl
          is not fanciful, then it follows that it is real.     If
          it is real, then there must be a reasonable ground to
          apprehend danger, and, if there is, g r ea t.latitude is
          to be allowed to the witness and to a person required
          to produce documents.

          If the RTZ companiesare compelled to produce the
          documents which they were asked to produce, I
          cannot reach the conclusion that it would be
          fanciful to suppose that that would expose them to
          no greater risk than at present of proceedings for
          the recovery of a penalty being brought against
          them.  The documents might well authenticate and
          support the information now in the hands of the
          commission".

So what the learned Law Lord is saying, sir, in my submission,
that even though the Commission nad evidence before it which the>
had decided to take no action on, the production of these
documents, the production of additional information, may well be
sufficient to cause them to take a different view.

     There is just one further part I would ask you to look at.
and that is in the speech of Lord Diplock.  Page 465 on t h e ’
right-hand side of a page which begins, "The privilege claimed b:
the RTZ companies".  Could you go to the right-hand side, sir, a-
B:

          "I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to
          dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents
          relating to the cartel were produced at the trial in
          the Virginia proceedings and came, as they then would,
          into the public domain, the resulting publicity in thi:
          sensitive political field might result in pressure cn
          the commission to take against the RTZ companies
          speedier and severer action than they might otherwise
          have d o n e " .

Sir, having regard to both past and recent events, some events s
                                                         34




recent as to be only a matter of days ago in relation to pressui
which. properly placed, perhaps, is being placed upon the
Director of Public Prosecutions, sir, those observations, those
dicta of Lord Diplock, have a particular relevance to this
particular case.

                            /So. sir, that is the law....
                                                                                   37




 misund ers to od the s i tua tio n so far as the Director's
 decision was concerned.          At that stage they indicated that
 Mr. Duckenf ie ld w o u l d then be prepared to make a statement,
 or might be pr ep a r e d to mak e a statement, for the pu rpo se s
 of the d isc iplinary proceedings.        T he y received by lett er
 of the 6th September, 1990, this reply:

       "You are cor rec t when you say that the DPP has d e c i d e d
       that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute y o u r
       client for any cr im i n a l o ffence arising out of the
       H i l l sb oro ugh tragedy.      It is also correct to say that
       the di sci p l i n a r y issues now have to be considered by
       South York sh ire Police in consultation with the P o l i c e
       Complaints Authority.            I b e l iev e you are also aw a r e
       there are o u t s t a ndi ng civil actions being brought by
       various p arties wi t h an interest in the matter and that
       there are ni n e t y - f i v e Coroner's inquests to be
       reconvened.

      I am aware that at the interview on the 3rd of July,
      1990, yo u r clien t intimated that once the DPP had m a d e
      his d ec isi on in respect of the criminal issues he w o u l d
      consider being i n t e r vi ewe d in respect of any
      dis cip li nar y matters.           If that is still his wish then
      I am ready to c o n d u c t that interview, but it must be
      understood that the d i s c i p l i n a r y matters are very
      closely related to the criminal issues so any i n t e r v i e w
      would h a v e to be c o n d u c t e d u n d e r a Police and C rim i n a l
      Evidence Act c a u t i o n a nd the transcript of the
      questions and answers would h a v e to be sent to the D P P
      for further c o n s i d e r a t i o n of the criminal matters.

      That is the p o s i t i o n in respect of any new or
      additional evider.ee w h i c h comes to light, for example,
      that w h i c h may arise out of the civil actions or the
      Coroner's inquests.          It is not for me to advise you or
      your clie nt as to h o w you, or he, should proceed, but
      it seems to me that y ou should be aware of the
      foregoing in fo rma ti on. "

     Sir, one cou ld not have a c l e a rer statement, in my
submission, of it b e i n g said that anythin g that is said by
any witness in these proceedings, but my concern is Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, who aft er all is the only p o l i c e
officer in this m a t te r who was susp end ed and remains
suspended'as a result of this tragedy, that anything that is
said by him will, as a m a t t e r of course, be sent to the
Director and, w h o knows, it m ay be that the Director on
receiving such in f o r m a t i o n wil l r e c o n s i d e r his decision.

     In my s u b m i s s i o n it c a n n o t be said that the risk    to
Chief Super int end en t D u c k e n f i e l d is a fanciful one as    to the
likelihood of p r o c e e d i n g s taking place.       Indeed, one    knows
that only a m a t t e r of days ago, and I ask you to look             at
                                                                           40




somet hi ng I m e n t i o n e d earlier, and this is at section 3 of
the bundle:

      "Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d , as with some other Officers, s t i l l
      has h a n g i n g ove r his head the di sc ip l i n a r y proceedings
      pursuant to the making of comp la int s un d e r R e g u l a t i o n 7
      of the P o l i c e Disciplinary Regulations of 1985."

T h o u g h d ocu m e n t s h a v e been served o n him pursua nt to
Re g u l a t i o n 7 d e a l i n g w it h those matters.




                   Of course, anything h e says
                                                                                     42




       off en ce h ad b e e n c o m m i t t e d and that for other
       verdicts (except an o p e n verdict) they h a d to be
       sa ti sf ie d on the b a l a n c e of probabilities.
       Furthermore, w h e n d i r e c t i n g a jury on
       m a n s l a u g h t e r co m p r i s i n g un lawful killing a l l e ge d
       to h a v e o c c u r r e d b e c a u s e of neglect on t h e part
       of police, the coro ner was r eq ui re d to d i r e c t the
       jury on four m a t t e r s . . . ”

I pa us e there.           M y s u b m is si on is this, against the
b a c k g r o u n d of the s u b m is si on I hav e already made, namely
th a t any qu es ti on w h i c h Mr. 'Duckenfield was a s k e d wo ul d
h a v e the t en de nc y to i nc ri mi na te that in relati on to tho se
four mat te rs that the D i v i si on al Cou rt refer re d to, if any
qu es ti on is asked of Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d which touches upon any
of these four matters, or of a ny of the four ingre di en ts of
the first m a tt er t o wh i c h th e D i v i si on al Court refers,
there will be a t en de ncy to i nc ri m i n a t e him in the v e r y
natu re of the qu es t i o n itself b e c a u s e these are qu e s t i o n s
w h i c h w o u l d be d i r e c t e d to t h e p o s s i b l e c o m m is si on of a
criminal offence.                Those m a t t e r s are these:

       "...firstly that they h a d to be satisfied, on the
       evidence, of four ingredients, namely (a) that
       the p o l i c e wer e under a du t y to have r e g a r d to
       the h e a l t h a n d w e l fa re of the d e c e a s e d . . . ”

So any q u e s t i o n to Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d as to his d u t y in
rel at io n t o the spectators a t Hillsborough, or th o s e w h o
tr a g i c a l l y died, w o u l d r e q u i r e a n a n s w e r which w o u l d h a v e a
t e n d e n c y to incriminate.          It continues:

       " — (b) that in the c i r c u m s t a n c e s there w a s a
       fai lu re to do w h a t s h o u l d ha v e b e e n done f o r the
       heal th and w e l f a r e of t h e deceased..."

So any q u e s t i o n a s k e d of Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d as to w h a t he d i d
or d i d not d o th a t day w h i c h t o u c h e d upon the h e a l t h a n d
w e l f a r e of the d e c e a s e d w o u l d b e a question w h i c h w o u l d
require an an swer w h i c h w o u l d t e n d t o incriminate him.               It
goe s on:

       "...(c) that the f a i l u r e a m o u n t e d to a
       s u bstantial ca us e of d e at h. .. "

So any q ue s t i o n a s k e d of h i m - of c o ur se this is onl y a
p r iv i l e g e of s e l f - i n c r i m i n a t i o n - as t o causation b e t w e e n
w h a t he d i d and any d e a t h or deaths, or the d e a ths of th o s e
w h o d ie d in gen er al terms, w o u l d b e a question w h i c h w o u l d
t e n d to incriminate, that is, the a ns we r w ou ld t e n d to
in criminate and:
on that p a r t i c u l a r q u e s t i o n Mr. Duckenfield or perhaps
my s e l f saying, "Sir, I o b j e c t to answering th a t question.
I r ely on p ri vi le ge ".           The risk of p rejudice so far as the
J u r y is then c o n c e r n e d is overw he lm in g both in so far as
Mr. Duckenfield is c o n c e r n e d and indeed the p o s i t i o n so far
as the South Y o r k s h i r e P o l ic e themselves as a b o d y are
con c e r n e d (and h e r e I i n t r ud e a little on to Mr. Payne's
territory).

         One can perhaps, no m a t t e r how carefully you are
directing, see the d i f f i c u l t y that w o u l d be in the m i n d of
the Jury if to e v e r y q u e s t i o n the po si ti on of pr iv i l e g e is
claimed.        They w o u l d b e b o u n d to think, "What has this m a n
got to hide?"        You, sir, k n o w and m y learned col le ag ue s a n d
I know, that such a p r i v i l e g e is said not to b e taken
against a man b ut l ay p e o p l e and lawyers are qu i t e
diffe re nt a n d the re comes a time when they say to
themselves, "There is so m e t h i n g funny here.           W e are not
b e i n g told the w h o l e t r u t h a n d whatever".    M y c o n ce rn .i s
tha t even in the a s k i n g of a question that m a y b e
d i s a ll ow ed by you t h e r e w i l l be sufficient in t he q u e s t i o n
to prejudice the J u r y a g a i n s t either Mr. D u c k e nfi el d or
others.

         I come b a c k to t he p o i n t I made earlier a b o u t the line
b e i n g drawn.      E v e r y t h i n g at the m o m e n t is ab o v e the line.
I a m concerned th er e s h o u l d b e nothing bel ow t h e line w h i c h
m a y prejudice Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .      M a y I go bac k t o the
a n a lo gy you d r e w as to the s tr ai gh t f o r w a r d case of the
reckless drive r a n d the fatal it y?

          I        anticipate t h a t it w o u l d be y ou r p ra ctice - let us
s a y no PACE i n t e r v i e w h a d t a k e n place - that t he driver h a d
r e l i e d upon his r i g h t n o t t o answer any questions, as has
t a k e n place in this c a s e so far Mr. D u c k e n fi el d was
concerned, and y o u w o u l d n o t in those circums ta nc es w it h
the driver facing t h e p o s s i b i l i t y of p ro se c u t i o n say to t h e
driver, "You m u s t a n s w e r t h e s e questions as to w h a t you d i d
and w hat you th ou g h t " etc.           Yo u w o u l d not expe ct the d r i v e r
to answer those q u e s t i o n s in those circumstances.               Mr.
Du ck en f i e l d is in e x a c t l y t h e same position.

          It m ay be s a i d t h a t Mr. D uc ke n f i e l d is s u c h an
important p a r t i c i p a n t in the events of that d a y that
w i t h o u t him wh a t is t h e p o i n t of going on at all b u t in m y
submission that w o u l d be m i s c o n c e i v e d because t h e p r i v i l e g e
is o n l y against s e l f - i n c r i m i n a t i o n . There are many, m a n y
people, b oth p o l i c e o f f i c e r s a n d civilian's who c a n give
ev id en ce as to the facts a n d the factual deci si on s that Mr.
D u c k e n fi el d took on t h a t d a y a n d so the Jury wi l l not in
any w a y be d e p r i v e d of the o p p o r t u n i t y of hear in g about
wh a t happened.        T h e y w o u l d ju s t be de pr iv ed of no t being
t o l d b y Mr. Du ck enfield.
          I com e b a c k a g a i n to the point tha t I mad e at the
outset.           W h i l s t this is a high, pro fil e Inquest, it is
important not to d i s r e g a r d the rights of any individual w h o
has interests of his own and important interests which a r e
a f f e c t e d b y the law.

          I f i n a l l y s a y this - and I know I have been on ray f e e t
for q ui te so m e t im e a n d I do not want to w ea ry you
further - th a t if it be felt n ecessary b y you, a nd both y o u
and I know, sir, t ha t there are no PACE statements or
interviews b y Mr. Duckenfield, that the J ury m u s t hear
something ab o u t w h a t Mr. Du ckenfield s a i d about the day
then, sir, up o n ins tr uc tio ns - and it is only on this b a s i s
that I p u t this - I hav e no complaint w i t h what Mr.
D u c k e n f i e l d s ai d to the Taylor Inquiry going before the
Jury.         I say that b e c a u s e that is all abo ve the line as
o p p o s e d to a n y t h i n g n e w b e l o w the line.

          That has a l r e a d y b e e n co ns idered b y the Director a nd
my con ce rn is t hat t h e r e is something else.            It m a y be
said, "We c a n ask h i m the same questions a nd if the
D i rector has a l r e a d y c on s i d e r e d those matters, wel l then,
frankly wh a t has he got to w o r r y about?"             Sir, the asking
of the q u e s t i o n (a) is un li k e l y to be in the same terms a n d
(b) the a ns wer is u n l i k e l y to b e in the same terms and it
does not h ave to be an a n sw er whi ch is an admission of a n y
offence.            It on l y h a s to be, on the authorities, a step
p o s s i b l y t o w ar ds this, an d again, sir, y ou have the dicta
wh er e that is m a d e ab u n d a n t l y clear.
                                                                            •


         I fear, a n d I k n o w yo u are mindful of this, sir, t h a t
this is r e a l l y t he l a s t o pportunity for the families (and
one c an u n d e r s t a n d t h e i r co nc er n and I do not c riticise
the m at all) t h r o u g h m y learned friend, Mr. King, or Mr.
Hytn er w h o m a y we l l b e b r o u g h t in, as Mr. King m e n tio ne d on
the last o c c a s i o n to, .cross-examine Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d or
oth er witnesses, to p r o d u c e extra e vi dence to g et that
w h i c h the y have, w h i c h w e see, bee n p r e s s i n g for.     It is in
those c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h a t seeking to p r o t e c t Mr.
Duc ke nf ie ld' s interests, to be fair to h i m w h i l s t being
fair to others, a n d b e i n g mindful of the re s t r i c t e d area of
Inquests as this is no t a Public Inquiry, this is not the
S p a ni sh Inquisition, this is not the S t a r Chamber, not o n l y
s h o ul d be the q u e s t i o n s wh i c h he is to be as ke d that he
shou ld not b e o b l i g e d to give evidence at all.               Those are
my submissions, sir.

      THE CORONER:             C a n I just make two small points b e f o r e
I c all a n y b o d y el s e ?     Perhaps it was m y fault, I do not
recollect, b u t if I i n s t a n c e d an RTA w h e r e the driver was
reckless then I m ad e a m i s t a k e because if a d r iv er had b e e n
reckless he w o u l d h a v e b e e n charged w i t h causing death by
                                                                               46




reckless d r i v i n g a n d under Section 16 of the Coroner's A ct
I w o u l d h a v e h a d t o adjourn it sine d i e . The point I was
tryi ng to m a k e was that under normal circumstances it was
the o r d i n a r y driver.

     MR. ISAACS:         Let us say, it is pr ob a b l y m y fault,
careless d r i v i n g or driving without due care.

     THE CORONER:        It makes no difference to the argument
but I just w a n t e d to be clear that we were talking about
the same thing.
                           4


        MR. ISAACS:          It is important.  The seriousness of the
c r im e is n e i t h e r .here nor there.  It is a privilege, as you
a n d I know, a g a in st self-incrimination in any offence.      I
am o b l i g e d to you, sir.

          T H E CORONER:           It is 1236 and in twen ty minutes we
will be r i s i n g b e c a u s e at two o'clock we are starting w i t h
the Jury.            C a n y o u indicate whether any of y ou feel you
wi s h to a d d r es s me on the po i n t which Mr. Isaacs has ma de ?
What y ou are s a yi ng is that there is clear auth or it y that a
p e r s o n does n ot h a v e to answer questions wh i c h tend to
incriminate him, t o use the text of the rule, and you c i t e d
the rule p l u s s e v e ral cases.           Do a n y of you feel you wa n t
to address m e on t h e point which Mr. Isaacs has made?                        As I
u n d e rs ta nd it, w h a t you are saying is that t h e r e is clear
auth or it y f o r s a y i n g that a person does not hav e to answer
a q ue s t i o n w h i c h m a y tend to incriminate h i m a nd you cit ed
the r ule p l u s seve ral cases.             It is e x c e e d in gl y d ifficult
to f o r m u l a t e q u e s t i o n s where people are in d an ge r of
p r o s e c u t i o n w h i c h a re meaningful a n d in the circumstances
wha t is the p o i n t of getting the m a n or the wit ne ss to c o m e
into t h e b o x a t all ?            You are not s ug gesting that a PACE
statement, if t h e r e is one, or anybody else should be
excluded?

       MR.   ISAACS:       NO,   sir,   not at all.

     THE CORONER:         Have I summarised very,             v er y briefly
the he a r t of y o u r submission?

     MR. ISAACS:               Indeed you have, sir.          To call him in
those c i r c u m s t a n c e s wo u l d o n l y serve to d i s adv an ta ge hi m as
well as o t h e r s in addition t o the p re j u d i c e w h i c h would be
caused.     You h a v e s um marised it absolutely correctly.

          T H E C OR ONER:      The fourth po in t you h a v e ma d e is that
the d a m a g e of r e f u s i n g to a nswer the q uestions is out of
p r o p o r t i o n t o the b e n e fi t of having hi m here as a witness?

       MR. ISAACS:           There is no benefit in h a v i n g him here
bec au se a ny q u e s t i o n he is as ke d is b o u n d to h av e the
ten dency to incrim in at e h im on the basis of the principles
I have p u t b e f o r e you.

       THE CORONER:      I look to Mr. King, first of all,
bec au se h e is the m o s t likely p e rs on to address m e o n    the
issues.     Ar e you li kely to address m e on this?

     MR.  KING:   Sir, I w ou ld wish to. Th er e are two
matters.  One I w o u l d w is h to hear if anyb od y else h a s
anything to say in support and, secondly, in the li gh t of
what has just fallen from my learned friend's lips as to
the use of the tra ns cr ip t I V/ould like to take c e r t a i n
instructions from those w ho m I represent.

         THE CORONER:         Mr. Isaacs, it seems to me that it
w o u l d be wise, b e f o r e I g iv e a ruling on yo u r submission,
to allow o the r p e o p l e to have their say so that I c a n hear
d ifferent po ints of v i e w and secondly, it gives m e a chance
to think ab ou t it as well.            If you dp not think it rude,
w h a t I i n ten d to do is not pro ce ed wit h the po in t at this
stage b e c a u s e w e c a n n o t deal w ith the submissions on wh a t
is qu it e an important p o i n t actually in t w e nt y m i n u t e s and
we will de a l w i t h it e i th er at four this afternoon, subject
to your agreement, w h e n the Jury g o or if it is m o r e
con ve ni en t to y o u w e c an deal with it at four t o m o r r o w or
any other day.




                    /Mr. Ducken fi el d is not going.
                                                                     48




Mr. Duckenfield is not going to be called in the immediate
future, so in that sense it is not urgent that we have got
to have a ruling this morning.

     MU. ISAACS:    Sir, save for this, that I am afraid -
and you may have gle an ed tnis from some of tne newspapers,
I think - that I wil l not have the privilege of being
before you on mos t days during this Inquest.

       THE CO&t)HE;\:    I had not appreciated that.

      Mil. ISAACS:   You had not, sir, but no, I am afraid
that is the position.       Without going into any details I am
afraid that the cast of representation would be so great,
and there is no sufficient funds for him at the present
time.    The Police Au th o r i t y have unfortunately failed to
agree that he or others in a similar position should have
their representation paid for, so I am afraid that he will
not be r epresented d u ri ng the course of this inquest, sir,
other than on the days when, if you do decide that he
should be called, he is actually giving evidence.

     THE CORONER:   A nd presumably on the days when any
statement - in fact, I think there is one,   it is not very
long but I think there is one - were to be d e a l t with?

     MR. ISAACS:          T h a t may or may not be the case, sir,
but one can u n d e r s t a n d tne difficulties.   May I say this,
in relation to w h a t you said just a moment ago, and this
perhaps is a little special pleading?            You said a moment
ago you did not want to be rude - I think I c a n speak on
behalf of all my learned friends, it is a long time since
we have been b ef or e a tribunal viich is so co ur t e o u s and
we are very g ra te fu l to you for that.        We are n o t perhaps
used to being tre at ed so well.

       T HE COilONER:   Will you be here this afternoon?

       MR.   ISAACS:    I shall be here this afternoon,       sir,
yes.

         THE CORONEK:    In that case shall we deal with it
this afternoon?       Is that agreeable to all of you?  I know
it makes it a longer d ay but I did say at our business
m e e ti ng that the lawyers nave to put up w ith the strain.
I don*t like to sub je ct my jury to too heavy pressure,
because it is not fair on them, but we have just got to
put up with it, so to speak.       Is that agreeable to
everybody?      Good.

     Is there any ot h e r --- perhaps you could outline the
nature of you r submissions, so I know what we have got in
sfore, so to speak.

       MR. MANNING:   Th e first thing I am going to do, if I
may,   is to pay tribute to the way in which my learned
                                                               49




friend Mr. Isaacs has put the matter before you, and the
second thing I am not going to do is to repeat it,  It
does not get stronger or better by repetition.

     You k n o w that I represent Superintendent Murray.  He
has made a statement under the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act.     I expect that in one form or another that
will be brought before this hearing at some stage, and
having done that I find myself adopting, and -.li the more
so, the views that have been canvassed before you.

     At*the end of tnis hearing the verdict will be one
for the Jury and as lenrned as we hope we may be in the
ways in which a Coroner's Inquest is to proceed, the fact
of the ma tter is that the probability is that most of the
people wio will be on the Jury have never been on any
jury, and I shall certainly be surprised if they have ever
been on a C oroner's Jury.  With tne best directions in the
world, the fact of the matter, as we know from juries and
experience, is that some people can take one \.’hat seems to
be minor and inconsequential point and make that the
deciding and turning factor upon which everything else
falls.

      It is impossible, in the words that have been read to
you by my lear ne d friend, for it to be conceivable tnat a
Jury will not in its mind's eye say, "What on earth is
*oing on here under this rule against self­
incrimination?", and "Why are we not being allowed to see
the person?", and therefore there is damage beyond maasure
in even go i n g to that stage which suggests that a person
should be c a l l e d into a witness box, give their name and
address, and somebody, whether it is you or whet he r it is
the witness or the lawyer for that witness, referring to
the Rule, and w nether then the Jury is asked to retire,
tne fact of the matter is they have got the whiff of
something and w ne n they have got that scent the brain
begins to run wild and we can have no control over what
part that is likely to play in the ultimate de cision
maki ng process.

     Therefore, in adopting tne legal submissions and in
not seeking to put them before you over and ov e r again, I
have to say that considering what questions may be raised,
and c o n s i d e r i n g those criteria which have been put before
you as to the sorts of questions which clearly have to be
in the mind, and have to be enquired into, if those are
tne ques ti on s w h i c n normally would be asked and there is
the Rule a nd the law, and that is what we, and you, sir,
are here to uphold, the law, if the law says that a person
should not be put in that position, categorically should
not, then it seems to me, with respect, that you should
therefore m a k e a ruling that you are not going to have tne
witness put into it, and you can make whatever explanation
you want, b e c a u s e you can simply read the law to the Jury
 and, make them clear that they should dismiss                that from
 their minds.

      THE COKONE;::   Mr. King,             I will skip   you,   if I may -
 not out of discourtesy.

      MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I do not adopt the submissions
 made by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, and indeed, I have
 no other submissions to make at this stage.

     * TilG CORONER:            You do not?

       MISS S I N C L A I R :     I do not.
     HK. CAICHt’OLE:   Sir, can I say,, on behalf of t:ie
Officers of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that we
came nere prepared and expecting to see every witness
called to give evidence, subject to the normal rules, and
indeed, as I hope has been made clear, we are anxious to
help throughout.   I would like, however, to reserve my
position in the light of any ruling you may make.    If the
senior Police Officers are not going to be giving evidence
at this inquiry naturally that is something I would li{ce
to Yiave the o p po rt un it y of discussing with my clients. I
cannot predict what the outcome will be of that, and if
necessary I will make an application at a later stage.        At
present I have no ob se rvations actually on the
applications made by my learned friends.

     MRS. McBRIEK;           Sir, I would personally be very
pleased if Mr. Duckenfield would appear in this Court so
that I can put questions to him directly. As he was t^e
main p articipant in the di sa s t e r I was looking forward to
meeting Mr. D u c k e n fie ld so that   I would    be   a bl e to meet
him face to face.        T ha t is all.

      MR. CALLAGHAN:             Sir,    I have no observations to make.

fh   pM i^S A p D ^ El'iAN:      Sir, as you are aware I represent
       ^ i 1CCi                  and the rulin6 that you are about to
tn           * y-               e a 6 e n e r a lised applic at io n and apply
this            witnesses w h o m I represent.           Sir, in short, at
echo               ? ° U. Wlsh to say that in Principle I also
rnv l * i r n J          U OSe s u b m i s s i°ns Whicn have been made by
                f r i e n d > Hr. Isaacs.         Clearly individual
decisions are going to have to be made by certain
individuals, dependent upon your ruling.

      What I would say,           sir,   in particular,   is that in ray
s u rh "?  *2U ? 1SSi° n     wo ul d indeed be preferable for
such individuals not to give evidence at all if that
indeed was your decision, rather than running tne risk of
Rowing the seeds of preju di ce in the J u r y ’s m in ds I n t h V
  ay wnich has been d e scr ib ed by my learned friend Mr
 \oquently.m ^                  Mr* ‘
                                    “       g/if   I may say s t ^ l o
                                                                 51




   , For my part I w o u l d submit that it must be right that
there is very little i ndeed which could be asked of such a
witness, the answ er to w h i c h would not have a tendency to
incriminate.   Sir, I w o n ’t repeat all the submissions
which have been made by my learned friend but I would
specifically w i s h to rein fo rc e those particular ones.

     MR. RUSSdLL:       Sir, as you will recall I represent
Superintendent G re e n w o o d and I would endorse ^hat has been
said principally by my learned friend, Hr. Isaacs.         Sir,
it may be that you w o u l d prefer me to add my two penny
worth to those argum en ts at 4 o'clock.

     THE CORONER:     It depends how long you will be.    Yes,
I think tnat might be w i s e r because I don't want to rush
you.  Is anybody at this end going to want to ....

     MISS HAMPTON:      I have no submissions.

     MR. HALE:   I will say that in principle I would
support Mr. Isaacs b e c a u s e his arguments are so very
soundly based and based on precedent.        Whether I avail
myself of them will be a diff er en t matter.     Mr. Marshall
may wish to give e vi de nc e but that, of course, will be his
choice.

     MR. PAYNE:     Sir, the position of the Chief Constable
is that he .supports the p os ition taken by individual
Officers, and accor di ng ly , therefore, supports the
submissions ma d e by Mr. Isaacs.

     THE CORONER:    Very well.        We will leave this
submission tnen, at this stage, in order to particularly
enable Mr. King to c o n s i d e r it and to put a ny thing he
wants to me.

     May I just a sk w h e t h e r you will have any ot he r legal
submissions w h i c h a re b u r n i n g and which need to be made
today?   Please do n * t think that I wish to stifle you in
any sense of the word.         I a m just trying to assess
timings.   No?    Good.

     We in this room - y o u know hov. to get in - as far as
tne legal r e p r e s e nt at iv es are concerned there is quite a
large room - it is c al le d the safe and I think it has got
steel doors - the key to it is under the control of the
local authority and a r r a n g e m e n t s have been made for it to
be open between 9 and 10 a n d A and 5, so that if you wish
- and I stress if you w i s h - you can deposit any of your
papers - this goes for you as well, of course, Mrs.
McBrien - in that room, but you cannot assume that the
local authority will take responsibility for them.             The
roonrvill be und er the c h a r g e of one chap with a key and
he will open and shut it, but you have to accept the risk,
so to speak.      You don't h ave to use it.        It is a facility
which we have tried to provide.
                                                                 52




      , Secondly, those of you who were here for Lord J u s t i c e
Taylor's Inquiry, we have been provided with the big rooms
on the other side of the main staircase - one is called
the Mandela Room, tne other I have forgotten the name of.
The Mandela Room has been laid out with a big screen like
t h i s , so if tuere is an overflow or somebody wants to k now
what is going on but does not want to be in the Court,
they can go and w a t c h and near.    As I understand it, if we
use, for example, a video, you will see tne video but you
will not be able to see the Court, because we have only
got one camera.      In the normal course of events you will
be' able to see and near what* is going on in Court but in
certain ci rc um st an ce s you may have a slightly limited
recording, because of the facilities - we have had to d r a w
the line somewhere.

     The other ro o m has been laid out and is intended
really mainly for the families, if they want to w i t h d r a w
and sit and be quiet.    That is one half of it and in the
other half we have built small partitions, cubicles, so if
any of you wish to speak to your clients you have got a
measure of privacy but they are not soindproof, so you
have to judge how g oo d they are and whether you want to
use tnem.  They are there for your use if you wish.

     At the back of the hall I think there is a list of
restaurants, w h i c h has not been put up by me, so if you
want to go and loo k and see what is what and wh er e you can
go - and no doubt there are dozens of otners as well - we
are rignt in the c e n t r e of town so it should not be too
difficult to eat a n d have refreshments.

     We nave had q u i t e a long session.   I hope you will
forgive me, but I w a n t e d to get on with it.  We are going
to rise.  Is there a ny thing - yes, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McSRIEN:       I just wanted to say something
relating to the o t h e r matter earlier in the day.  I was
wondering if the time limits could be extended, in the
individual inquests, the time limit of 3.15 for the day in
question could be e xt ended for individual inquests but not
apply to the g e n er ic inquest?

     T H E CORONER:         The answer to that is that I took Mr.
King's submission to incorporate that point and I have
said what I want a n d am not going to change my mind on it.
I am going to stick to what I have said, 3.15 or
thereabouts, so I a m not extending it b u t w e d id say that
if there are any s p e c i f i c errors which you were going to
bring to my a t t e n t i o n in the summaries, that I would
consider it, and that would apply to you as well, of
course, as far as your boy is concerned.

      MRS.   McBRIEN:   Thank you
                                                              55




town so there are plenty of facilities, including a restaurant
upstairs.  So we are going to say to you, fend for yourselves'
and my Jury Officers will sort out the financial reimbursement
There are rules and limits, but they will have told you that,  i
they have not, ask, so that you know how much you can spend
without being out of pocket.  It is adequate, you will find.

        One advantage of giving you sandwiches, was that we had vou
nicely segregated from everybody else, and we w o n ’t have that if
we allow you to run free, but after all, you go home in the
evenings as well; don't you, so I can't see any good reason why
you should not do whatever you wish, but please remember the rul<
is no discussion with anybody about the case.     It is very
difficult, but you must follow it, particularly in a building
like this where you can see there are quite a lot of people here
I have met quite a lot of these people and I still d o n ’t
recognise most of them, and so it is very easy if you start
talking to strangers you may find you are talking to people who
you in no circumstances you should have opened your mouth to.     S<
d o n ’t talk to anybody.  So will you please do that for me?

     If you find I am going on for too long, because we won't be
rising quite as frequently as we did at the Medico Legal Centre
because it is slightly different now, but if you think I am goin;
on too long you are near enough now to attract my attention and
to say, "Can we stop and have a cup of coffee", or something, an<
of course, if any of you need to stop because yo u are not feelinj
well or because you were indisposed in some way then obviously
you must let me know.  It is exceedingly important that vou are
all here, because if we are not Me have to stop.   We have no
control over our lives completely, but unless there is a really
compelling reason why you cannot be here please be here.   It doe.
not actually inconvenience me, because if I am not here I am
doing something else, but it inconveniences everybody else,
because we would have to adjourn it until we are back again, so
to speak, as a group.

     I think that is all I need to say on domestic matters^  May
I ask, were any of you in Court this morning, because somebody
suggested that you were? None of you were in Court? That is
good, because we did not want you in Court.  That is right, none
of you, members of the Jury, were in Court in the morning? That
is important, because if we have legal submissions and I ask you
to go out you must stay out.  It may be when it is all over and
we have finished I will explain to you why we do that, but I
don't think I will do it now because we have     not got much time,
and it can wait, I am sure.

     I am not going to tell you the potential verdicts which you
will have to consider because we are going to hear the evidence,
and when we have heard the evidence I am going to sum it up,
hopefully, and I will direct you with regard     to the law and
anything else I need to tell you, and then you will retire and
take~your time and so o n .

     I do want to draw one or two rules to your attention,
because it is exceedingly important that you should understand i
                                                                          56




now and that e v e r y b o d y else should un de rstand it.  This is not
act ually a rule but it is a general point.           We are doing
Inquests.     The re a re 9S of them but w e are d o i n g them together.
This is not a trial.          N obody is accused of anything in m y Court.
It is not a P u b l i c Inquiry, so we d o n ’t r oam beyond my brief,    i
is not advers ar ial in the sense that the parties can introduce
their own w it n e s s e s and put them up to m e to listen to and then
m a k e a judgment.      I introduce the witnesses.     That is not to say
that if parties w a n t to dra w my atte nt io n to a particular witnes
or witnesses w ho m they would like me to consider, they can do
that and have d o n e because a lot of wa te r has flowed under the
bridge since we last met, but in the final analysis it is my
d e cision whom we call, rightly or wrongly, and it is an
inquisition.

        The next th in g to understand, and this is very, very
important, is t ha t this is an inquisition not on behalf of the
relatives, not o n behalf of the South Y o rk sh ire Police, not on
behalf of the club, not on behalf of Eastwoods, not on behalf of
the supporters generally.          It is an Inquiry by me, and if you
like because I am called Her Majesty's Coro ne r you may take it i -
is on behalf of t h e State or Her M a j e s t y the Queen.          So it is
important to un d e r s t a n d that, and I have to kee p on reminding
my self of this as well, because oth e r w i s e w e get misled into
thinking we a re d o i n g this for others, and of course you realise
and I am cons ci ous and so are you and e v e r y o n e else, of the
families, so it is important that the e v i d e n c e which we call
shou ld seek to be int elligible and re le v a n t and answers as far aj
o n e c an som e of t h e things which c o n c e r n and w o r r y them.  It is
ver y important to kn o w that this is not d o n e because they are
bereaved people.        It is because s o m e b o d y has d i e d and the Act
says that when t h a t happens the C o r o ne r sh ould hold an
in quisition e i t h e r on his own or wit h a jury.          Well, we are with
a Jury, of course.

     I have a l r e a d y indicated to you the over al l limitations of
an Inquest, so i a m not going to r e p e a t that, but there is
another v e r y i m p o r t a n t corol la ry to this, and t hat is Rule 22.
am going to read this rule to you b e c a u s e you have got to
understand it, becausie it may be r el e v a n t at so m e point.       It
won't be re lev an t today, but I want to get it right at this
stage.  W hat it sa y s is:

            '*(1) No w itness at an Inquest sha ll be obliged to
            answer a n y q ue st io n tending to in criminate himself.

            (2)   W h e r e it appears to the C o r o n e r that the witness
            has b e e n asked such a q ue s t i o n the Coroner shall infori
            the w i t n e s s that he may r e f u s e to answer".

Now, this is a f un da me nt al principle of C o r o n a l Inquisitions, an<
it may well be a f undamental principle in a load of other courts
but I am not i nt e r e s t e d in what happens elsewhere.             I am
interested here.            An important thing to u n d e r s t a n d is that if
somebody e x e r c i s e s their right it is a right.           It is not that
they may or m a y not.            They have a right .not to answer questions
wh ic h may i n c r i m i n a t e them.  You must not d r a w inferences from
the ex er cis e of their rights.

          That d oes not m ea n to s a y that you m ay not hear evidence
from other p e o p l e whi ch m a y tend to i ncriminate them.        That is
not t he point, but you cannot expect somebody to stand u p and
say, "I did it".                 It happens in TV series, but it does not happer
g e n e r a l l y s p e a k i n g in real life, but it is part and parcel of the
overall s t ru ct ur e of Co ro na l jurisdiction, and it is designed (a)
to prot ec t the individual or individuals who m a y be involved, anc
(b) to e n s u r e tha t if it were to be that some ot he r proceedings
w e r e to take pl ac e in some other court we have not muddied the
water.




                               /So there is ac tu al ly a dual
                                                            59




   ' MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, and members of the Jury, I am
Joan McBrien and I appear on behalf of our family in this
matter.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Andrew Callaghan, solicitor, on
behalf of the Ambulance Service.

     MISS ADDELMANN:   My name is Andrea Addelmann of
Counsel.   I am instructed by Russell, Jones and Walker
and I represent the Police Federation.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I am Christopher Russell.   I am a
barrister.   I am instructed by solicitors called Barlow,
Lyde and Gilbert and I represent the interests of
Superintendent Greenwood.

      THE CORONER:  You might ask, having told you all
about this inquisitorial system and how I do it all:
what are they doing here?   The answer is that the rules
which I have already referred to permit interested
parties to be present, obviously.   The rules permit them
to ask questions which is why Mrs. McBrien is there, and
the rules also provide that people can be represented by
their legal representatives and that is why they are
here.

     Of course, if it is correct and opportune they will
ask questions of the witnesses and within the limits
which I have outlined to you they will be permitted to do
so.

     Now without any further ado, all I will say is that
these inquests are concerned with a disaster which
happened at a football stadium known as Hillsborough
Football Stadium, on the 15th of April, 1990.    You will
learn as we go along more details about it.

     Now I think the first thing is we will call Steven
Brown.

                  STEVEN BROWN Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

Can you give me your full name? - A. I am Police
Constable Steven Brown of the West Midlands Police.

Is it right, Mr. Brown, that you have with you some
overhead photographs of various scenes? - A. Yes, sir.

These are photographs mainly of the stadium.and its
surrounds? - A. Yes.
                                                                               60


                                                    S.   BROWN



          THE CORONER:        Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you have
     got good eyesight,      the mod el is over there:

Q. T h e s e ph ot ographs, mos t of them were taken after the
   incident?         In fact all of them were taken af te r the
   incident? - A. M o s t of them, yes, sir.

Q. Can you put them up one at a time and we will number
   them.   L e t ’s put the first one up.   We are going to
   give these all "C" numbers in our usual way.      This is
   C.249.   T h a t is what? - A. Aerial photograph of the
   ground, sir.

0. Can you put the next one up?            This will be C.250. - A.
   This is a p h o t o g r a p h of the south stand and the Spion
   Kop.

Q. Can you po in t on the model? OK.   Next one.   What is
   this? - A. This is a photograph, sir, of the north stand.
   (C.251)

Q.   It is taken across the Leppings Lane terraces,              is that
     right? - A. T h a t is correct, sir.

        TH E CORONER:     L adies and gentlemen of the jury, in
 . football parl an ce , apparently, the stand is a place w h e r e
   you sit and the ter ra ce is the place where you stand:

Q. Yes, next please.    W h a t is that?   (C.252) - A. It is a
   photograph, sir of the w e s t terrace and w est stand.

Q.   (C.253) - A. T h i s is a photograph of the p e ri me te r gates
     at Leppings L a n e end o f the ground.

Q. Som e of the p e r i m e t e r gates.     In fact it is a p hot ograph
   in two bits, in effect? - A.            That is  correct, sir.

Q. C a n you put the second o n e up as well?            (C.254).       Th e
   next one please.          This is another ae rial view.           T ha t
   gives a b e t t e r i mp r e s s i o n of the Leppings L a n e end? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q.   (C.255).       N e x t please. This is very similar to one you
     h a v e a lready seen, but what are we intending to see on
     this one? - A. Sir, this shows the turnstiles 1 to 16.

Q. Tu rnstiles 1 to 16?      (C.256).         T hi s is what?    - A. Thi s
   shows the tu rn st il es A to G.

Q.   (-G-.257).      C a n y o u see the A to G on   there? T he re are
     the big " Bs" and then underneath it there are the
     letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, G.           Next. - A. T h i s shows
     the c o u rt ya rd area beyond the perimeter gates and also
                                                                             61



                                                    S.   BROWN


     tl\e m e t a l p e r i m e t e r wa l l and turnstiles which have the
     letters A, C, B, from left to right.

Q. Can you point to the A, C and B? - A. A h e r e , sir.              c
   and B.

Q. That is h o w the turnstiles were numbered.   Th a t was
   C.258.      What is this? - A. Sir, this is gate B.

Q. (C.259)

          THE CORONER:      Are you sure, Mr. Jones?              What is
     turnstiles 1 t o . 16?

          DCC JONES:        C.256.      Two photographs, sir, C.255
     and C.256.  Tu r n s t i l e s A to G, C.257.   Courtyard and
     metal wall C.258        and C.259 is gate B. We hav e missing
     turnstiles A, C and B.

           T H E CORONER:     No, we had that.

Q. Can you put that back?           That is turnstiles...          What is
   that? - A. T h a t is turnstiles A, C and B, sir,             also the
   co urtyard a n d the m e t a l wall.

Q. I see, these a r e bracketed.      Now put gate B up again,
   please. . T h a t is o n e of the exit gates.  (C.259).   What
   is that? - A. T h a t shows gate C to the left of the wall.

Q. Can you      point at it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. (C.260).     - A. Sir, this photograph shows the g a t e locks
   and the o b s e r v a t i o n p a n e l in the gate.

Q. T h e o b se rv at io n pa ne l Is that little square thing? - A.
   Yes.

Q.    (C.261). - A. Sir, this shows          a vie w of the concourse
     be yond the tu rn stiles and a hole in the wall w h i c h leads
     round to the n o r t h - w e s t terrace.

Q. (C.262). - A. T h i s shows the tunnel leading to enclosures
   3 and Aand also shows the standing     sign and the letters
   B and A   a b o v e the tunnel.

Q. This is b e hi nd the turnstiles... - A. Leading              from the
   conc ou rs e into the enclosures.

Q.    Down towards the terracing.           (C.263) - A. This
     p h o to gr ap h shows th« standing    sign on a pillar at the far
     »-ght of the p hotograph.

Q. Can you a g a i n point to it up there please7   If you had
   followed that you w o u l d have finished up in enclosure 1.



                                   (§ £ )
                                                                        62




                                                    S.   BROWN


     (C,264). - A. This shows a double gate at the end of the
     conc ou rs e end of the tunnel.

Q.    (C.265). - A. T hi s shows the gates at the terrace end of
     the tunnel and the radial fence w h i c h separates the two
     enclosures.

Q.    End on, of course,       the radial fence? - A. Yes.

Q.    (C.266).   This pho to gr ap h was obviously taken very soon
     after the incident.      Wh a t is it? - A. This shows the
     gates at the rear of the enclosures giving access to all
     of the en cl osures in the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. Can you p oin t whe re they are?   I can see them because I
   kno w where they are.     (C.267).   Just point to the
   tunnel exit.     Yes. - A. This photograph shows the
   barriers in enclosures 3 and 4.

Q.   (C.268) Cou ld you point out which is enclosure 3 and
     wh ic h is e n cl os ur e 4? - A. This is enclosure 3 and
     en closure 4.

Q. It is just an overview. - A. This photograph shows the
   p e r im et er fences s e p a ra ti ng the terraces from the pitch.

Q. (C.269).        T h e people on that photograph had nothing to
   d o w i t h it*      It just h a p p e n s that they were there. - A.
   This shows the top of th os e fences.where the wire bends
   inwards towards the enclosures.

Q.   (C.270). - Th i s shows the radial fences separating the
     enclosures in the Leppi ng s Lane terraces.

Q. (C.271). - A. This shows the p o li ce control box and the
   electric c l o c k a n d d i s p l a y board a b o v e it.

Q.   J u s t show u s wh ere     the   c l o c k is. - A. This is the
     electric clock.

Q. Switched o ff? - A. S wi t c h e d off, and the display board
   here.

Q.   T h e police c o n t r o l  box is that build ing wi t h the word
     "Skips" w r i t t e n on it, or that structure? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. (C.272). - A. Finally, sir,           this is an internal view of
   the police c o n t r o l box.

Q. T h a t will b e C.273.

      —    T HE CORONER:        Any questions of this Officer?
                                                       S.   BROWN


       MRS. McBRIEN:          Sir, have you a photograph of the
 area past gat e C, t he no nan's land area, where people
 wer e not s u p p o s e d to go but they w e n t for safety reasons,
 I think?      Have y o u a n y photographs where they could ha v e
 gon e in that p as sa ge wa y?

       THE CORONER:      I k n o w what Mrs. McBrien is after.
 We will h a v e a l ook and see whether w e have got a
 photograph of that area.           It is in fact on the aerial
 shots if you look.       W e w i l l see wh et he r we have got one
 whi ch might sho w that area for you.

       MRS. McBRIEN:         T h a n k you, sir.

      THE CORONER:     Tha nk you, Officer.           PC Brown will
 be   back probably t o m o r r o w morning w i t h the videos.

     Next M i c ha el L a y t o n if he is           here.       You are sworn
actually, Mr. L a y t o n so you don't               n e e d to be sworn again.

     Ladies and ge nt le me n, witnesses w ho have already
been sworn I c a n see no advantage in re-swearing.     Are
you happy w i t h that or did you wish to hear him sworn?
I cannot see any po i n t in it.

                      M I C H A E L LAYTON Called

                          By T H E C O R O N E R :

     THE.WITNESS:          Sir, Mich ae l Layton, Detective
Inspector, c o l l a r n u m b e r 9 3 6 4 of the We s t Midlands
Police.

N o w you h a v e p re pa re d a summ ar y on vi deo and ph ot ographic
evidence? ** A. T ha t is correct, sir.

Wou ld you p l e a s e g i v e it to me?    It wil l b e perfectly in
o r d e r for y o u to r ea d it to m e bec au se I don't expect you
                   *                               A ‘ Yes» sir*     S i r » following the
  illsborough disast er , a vid eo and photographic section
was formed as par t of the m a i n inquiry team to look at
a l l aspects of v i s u a l e v i d e n c e a v a il ab le from various
sources.


M f « S U ?5onb e JWeen the 19th of A P r i l i 1989 and the 9th of
May, 1990, I was r e s p o n s i b l e on a full-time basis for the
supervision of this p a r t i c u l a r team of officers.

                         w a s t^ e c ° H a tion and examination of
S . " !          in
                 tially ?or the judicial inquiry and
latterly for the C o r o n e r s inquests.

yideo recordings, b oth p ri or to the event, during and
lltiraately s h o wi ng the a ft e r m a t h were obtained from a
                                                   M.    LAYTON


   s
number of agencies.          This material wh i c h varied both in
content, quality of picture and evidential value was
viewed by members o f the team, copied and scheduled.
Each film and ph o t o g r a p h w e r e given a unique reference
number.   The s ch e d u l e s p re pared were in themselves a
precis of the ev ents shown on film.

Ultimately, sir, a c o mp os it e film was prepared in
conjunction with the Tr easury S o l i c i t o r ’s Department,
which w a s shown at Lord J ustice Taylor's Inquiry.          This
film was designed to show wha t was felt to be the most
important scenes a n d sequence of events.

Sir,   that film was g i v e n the reference number MRE.2.

Is that the one that I... - A. That is the composite
film, sir.

The compilation?       - A . . T h e compilation,       sir, yes.

I think it is ri gh t - you have said it but I just want
you to confirm it - this w a s n ' t prepared solely by the
West Midlands, it w a s done in conjun ct io n with the
Tre as ur y Solicitors? - A. T h a t is absolutely correct,
sir.

They had. somebody there w h o was looking? - A. Physically
present, yesj sir.

Li kewise ph ot o g r a p h i c m at erial was obtained from various
sources which was e xa mi ne d a n d scheduled in the same
manner.         Co n t i n u i t y in r espect of all this materi al is
not n e c e s sa ri ly c o m p l e t e s i n c e the p e r s o n handing over
the m a t e r i a l to the p o li ce is not necessarily the person
origin at in g that material.




                In an e ff or t to analyse
                                                                      65




                                                            M LAYTDM

    In an effort to analyse the contents of the visual evidence
    for the purposes of the Inquest some of the material has
B   been grouped into a number of key areas.  As such the
    sequence of events as referred to here in this statement do
    not run in strictly chronological form, rather it deals
    with a number of specific points.

       First of all, sir, having regard to the movements of
    people at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I can make
    the following observations with regard to the visual
    evidence.   On a video film reference TB2 which was filmed
C   on the South Yorkshire Police CCTV system using an operator
    set database, in other words, this shows the date and time
    on which the film was recorded, this camera has pan
    facilities.

       It should be noted that videos RJH1 and RJH2 have no
    such time clock and these relate to Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club's own video system.  In order to try to
    establish the times of events shown on these tapes a
D   comparison was made from events that occurred on the RJH2
    tape which are also shown on the video referenced TB2 taken
    from almost identical positions and which show almost
    identical footage.

       To be.specific at 14:47:38 hours on the tape referenced
    TB2 a youth, is seen to jump from the roof of Turnstiles A
    to G into the concourse area.     This same scene can be seen
    on 'the tape referenced RJ H 2 . On the tape referenced TB2
E   again at 14:52:30 hours a youth is seen standing against a
    wall near to Gate C with his arm raised and an identical
    scene is shown on the tape reference RJB2.     The timings of
    other events as they appear on RJH2 can then be calculated
    using wha t is called a real time counter on a video player
    from either side of these fixed points.

       THE CORONER:   Just pause for a minute.    (To the J u r y )
    Bave you understood what he is saying?
F
    Q. What you are saying is that two of these tapes did not
    have a time clock on them? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. An operator one?    -   A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. Then you try to match scenes which were identical and
       once you had got a time for that scene' you could
       calculate backwards and forwards? - A.     Yes, that
G      is right, sir, using a real time counter.

    Q."Please carry on?   -   A. By using this method of
       calculation it is estimated that the tape, referenced
                                                                         66




                                                             M LAYTO m

   RJH2, w o u l d have been switched on at about 12:56
   hours.    The same will apply for all the tapes given
   the reference RJH because I understand they were all
   switched on at the same time by PC 1421 Guest of the
   South Yorkshire Police who I believe has since
   retired.

       On a video tape referenced TB2 at 12:00:48 hours,
   supporters are shown arriving in a slow trickle and
   entering the ground at the Leppings Lane end.   At
   13:40 hours on the same video a steady flow of
   supporters are- seen entering the ground and at
   13:56:33 hours on the same tape the volume of
   supporters has increased.   At 14:35:30 hours there is
   a very dense crowd in the courtyard and the perimeter
   gate area.  A view of the courtyard is also shown on
   the BBC tape which has been given the reference
   number Map 9. This is a digital reference of 0602
   and the estimated time of that is at 14:35 hours.

Q. Can you just pause there for a moment?     -   A.       Yes.

   THE CORONER: . Members of the Jury, are you happy with
that?  I just wanted to be sure that w e know what w e are
talking about.

Q. I want to turn to the digital reference now?        -     A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. The advantage of having the digital reference is that
   you can find the frame, the scene on the tape; but it
   does not tell you anything about times, is that
   right?
A. At a peri od of time which in fact I have covered at
   the bottom of this page bu t it does not show an
   actual t i m e .

Q. Carry on?      - A. Again on Map 9, digital reference
   0842 a c r o w d is gathered in the Leppings Lane end and
   the courtyard is full. A t a digital reference of
   0906 Superintendent Marshall is shown amongst the
   crowd. At a digital reference of 1034 youths are
   shown climbing over a metal ribbed gate on -to the
   roof of Turnstile 16.      Between a digital reference of
   1212 and 1239 Superintendent Marshall is shown
   outside the gates in Leppings Lane, the whol e area of
   which is heavily congested.      With regard to the tape
   reference M a p 9, as I have said, there is an operator
   set digital database on the film.      In the initial
   ■stages only an estimated time can be worked out on
   the basis that the BBC cameraman, Ian Young, states
                                                                                  67




                                                                         _M LAYTON

th a t f i l m i n g took p l a c e outside the g r o u n d at the
L e pp i n g s L a n e e nd b e t w e e n 14i35 hours and 14:50 hours
a n d i n d e e d there a re a lso apparent breaks in the
filming.         In resp ec t of subsequent filming inside the
g r o u n d it is accurately t i m e d and time b a s e d between
15:03:30 a n d 15:16:58.


        On a v i d e o tape referenced RJH2 at an es timated
tim e of 14:46 hours a n umb er of youths are seen to
c l i m b on to the roofs of Turnstiles A to G from
o u t s id e p r i o r to dr opping into the stadium.       On a
v i d e o t ap e TB2 at 14:55:21, supporters are shown in
the c o n c o u r s e are a m o v i n g towards the tunnel.   A
n u mb er of th es e c h a n g e d direction towards a gap in
the w al l w h i c h gives access to the no r t h s i d e of the
ground.

        On v i d e o tape RJH2 w h i c h gives an e s t i m a t e d time
of 15:05 hours, the turn sti le area and o u t si de
c o u r t y a r d s are c l e a r of incoming supporters.            An
O f f i c e r in a flat c a p and t wo Police Co n s t a b l e s are
se e n to r u n from outsi de G a t e C al o n g the p e r i m e t e r
d r i v e t o w a r d s the so ut h stand.          Seconds afterwards a
P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e runs t h r o u g h G at e C tow ar ds the w e s t
s t a n d c l o s e l y f ol l o w e d f r o m all the Of fi ce rs in the
t u r n s t i l e area.                    ~

        Sir, in respect of v e h ic le mo ve m e n t at 14:08:20
hou rs o n a vid eo tap e refere nc e TB1, a S o u t h
Yo r k s h i r e Police v i d e o , 'tr af fi c f l o w e d q u i t e freely
a n d c o n t i n u e d to d o so u nt il 14:33:08 w h e r e it can be
s e e n t h a t no t r a f fi c is ab l e to f l o w due to
p e d e s t r i a n con ge sti on in Leppi ng s Lane.           A t 14:33:27
on the t a p e TB1 a b u s a n d t w o cars are seen m oving
s lo wl y t h r o u g h t h e ,c ro wd in the roadway.

         A t 14:35:56 hou rs on T B 2 another bus m o v e s
t h r o ug h t h e c r o w d a n d at 14:36:24 a car.           A t 14:41:15
a c o a c h m o v e s t h r o u g h the c r o w d a n d a t 14 :4 5 : 0 1 what
looks l i k e a wh it e ro ofed v e h ic le is seen ar ri v i n g in
Le pp in gs L a n e i mmediately b e h i n d a bus fr o m the
d i r ec ti on of Penistone Road.               At 14:45:03 t hi s bus
p a ss es a n o th er one coming i n the o pp os it e d i r e c t i o n
b u t the w h i t e r o o f e d vehicle remains s ta t i o n a r y in
the crowd.          Sir, f r o m r e s e a r c h of t he w r i t t e n
e v i d e n c e I belie ve in fact this veh ic le w a s a Police
L a n d r o v e r bei ng d r i v e n by PC 1863 Buxton of the South
Y o r ks hi re Police.

          THE CORONER:           He will be called in due course.
                                                                                  68




                                                                           M LAYTON


 Q. P l e a s e continue.         - a . No further ve hicles apart
    f r o m this o ne are seen until at 14:55:35 hours a bus
    a n d a c a r are seen and a further veh ic le at 14:57:25
    hours.          Th es e latte r two vehicles c o m e to a halt in
    Lep p i n g s Lane a n d remain stationary.           In t h e tape
    R J H 2 the v e h i c l e b e l i e v e d to be the Police Landrover
    dr ov e t h r o u g h the courtyard area p a s s e d G a t e C on the
    p e r i m e t e r d r i v e at an estimated time of 15:06:49
    hours.

              In re la t i o n t o the perimeter gat e which
    s e p ar at es t h e t u rn st il e area from Leppings Lane I can
    m a k e the f o l l o w i n g observation with r egard to t h e ;
    v i s u a l evidence.        A t 14:35:22 hours on a v i d e o tape
    r e f e r e n c e d TB2 the perimeter gates are open giving
    acce ss t o t u r n s t i l e s and the area n e a r to G a t e C._

Q. C a n y o u p o i n t to w h i c h perimeter gates we are talking
   abo ut o n t he scre en ?           Can you find t h e o ve rh e a d and
   p u t th a t up too?        - A.         Yes.    At 14:40:26 hours on
   t h e s a m e v i d e o all the perimeter gates a ppe ar closed.
   A t 14:52: 57 o n TB2 pe ople c a n b e seen t o b e c l i m b i n g
   ove r t h e c l o s e d p e r i m e t e r gates.   A t 14:53:40 hours
   this s e c o n d g a t e f r o m the left as y o u look at the
   sc r e e n op e n s a n d supporters enter t h e t u r ns ti le area
   in f r o n t of T u r n s t i l e s A t o G.

Q. I r e a l i s e t hi s is n o t the video you a r e refer rin g t o
   as t his is a s t i l l b u t is that the g a t e w e a r e -
   t a l k i n g a b o u t c a n y o u remember? - A.      Yes, looking
   at it f r o m t h e o p p o s i t e direction t h e v i d e o c a m e r a is
   there.

Q. Fro m t he i n si de o u t a n d so it is the o n e t h a t is on
   the r i g h t o n this p ho tog ra ph ? - A.    T h a t is right,
   sir, yes.

Q. Y o u h e a r d t h e q u e s t i o n from M r s . McBr ie n a bou t the
   ste ri le area, is t h a t the area where t h e v an is
   parked?        -    A.    I b e l i e v e it is s li ghtly f u r t he r in
   than w h e r e t h e van is parked.

Q. Furt he r in towards t h e ground are you sayi ng ?           - A.
   (to the C o u r t O f f i c e r ) If you co u l d just per ha ps
   ind ic at e G a t e C for m e I believe that *the sterile
   are a w a s m o r e or less to the far side of th a t gate.

         MR.   HALE:       It is clear on the model,            sir.
                                                                      M.. LAYTO w

        TH E CORONER:      C o u l d you please c o nt in ue ? I am
so r r y to hav e in te rr up te d you.    - A. At 14:53:44
hours the left h a n d p e r im et er gates are o p e n . At
14:55:17 hours t h e right hand perimeter ga te s can b e
seen open.        A t 14:56:32 hours the area in front of A
to G up to the p e r i m e t e r gates appear clea re r and
Po lice Officers can b e seen holding the cr o w d back to
the roadside of the perim et er gates.           A t 15:02:11
hours there is a close up view of the p e r i m e t e r gate
ar e a w h i c h shows that they are open a n d r el atively
cl e a r w i t h supporters entering the ground.

       Fo u r photo gr ap hs taken by Michael Wa rb u r t o n Lee
of the S o u t h Yorks hi re Police show some d a m a g e to a
re ta in in g b o l t of the second set of p er i m e t e r gates
as you look f r o m the groundside towards Leppings
Lane.     These p ho to gr ap hs are referenced as DPP190.
Th er e is no ace ta te available at the m o me nt for you
to view.

          In r e s p e c t of v i su al evidence relating to
m o u n t e d O ff ic e r s at t h e Leppings Lane e n d of the
g r o u n d t h e v i d e o tapes t hat cover this a r e a a r e So ut h
Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e C C T V a n d on tape r e f e r en ce d TB2,
a l s o S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football Club's C C T V on a
ta p e r e f e r e n c e d RJH2 a n d a B B C T V outside b r o a d c a s t
on a tape r e f e r e n c e d M a p 9.

        A t a d i g i t a l r efe re nc e of 0602, e s t i m a t e d time
14:35 on v id eo M a p 9, t w o moun te d Officers c a n b e
see n d i r e c t l y in front of Turnstiles A to G n e a r to
G a t e P.

Pau se again.             H a v e w e g o t the acetate pl a n of the
g r o u n d a n d if so p u t it up please? C a r r y on reading
b u t st a r t aga in w i t h "mounted Officers"?             - A.    At a
di g it al r e f e r e n c e of 0602, estimated time 14:35 on
vid eo M a p 9, t w o m o u n t e d Officers c a n b e seen
d i r e c t l y in f r o n t of Turnstiles A to G near to G a t e
B.      A t 14 :3 5: 22 hours on video reference TB2 two
m o u n t e d O f f i c e r s can b e seen apparently t a l k i n g to
supporters in fr on t of Turnstiles A to G.

          B e t w e e n d i g i t a l references 0839 to 0847 o n a
vi d e o M a p 9, nine m o u n t e d Officers can b e s e e n in the
co u r t y a r d area fro m the outer perimeter gates to the
Turnstiles A t o G.                  A t 14:38:08 on video r e fe re nc e
TB2 a m o u n t e d O f f i c e r c an be seen attempting to ease
the c r o w d b a c k fr o m Turnstiles and Gate C.             A t an
■estimated time o f 14:48:23 on video r eference RJH2 a
m o u n t e d O f f i c e r can be seen blocking the e n t r y of
                                                                              B LAYTON

supporters t h r o u g h G a t e C. This can also be seen at
14:48:26 h o u r s on v i d e r eference TB2.

      A t 14:49 h o u r s on video ref er en ce d TB2 a m o u n t e d
officer can b e seen o u t s i d e Ga t e C controlling t h e
crowd.    A t 1 4 : 5 1 : 5 0 h o u r s four moun te d Officers c a n
b e seen o u t s i d e Ga t e C.       At 14:53 hours four m o u n t e d
Officers can b e seen c o nt ro ll in g the crowd in the
area of G ate C.          A t 14:53:32 hours two mounted
Officers can b e seen supervising the flow of
supporters t h r o u g h G a t e C.

          In or de r to t ry a n d analyse the visual e v i d e n c e
available in r e s p e c t of the opening of the c o n c e r t i n a
gates r e f e r r e d to as A, B and C, it is necessary t o
r e f e r to t h r e e v i d e o tapes.          V i d e o tapes r e f e r e n c e d
RJH 2 a nd RJ H l a r e b l a c k a nd wh it e video,, of poor
q u a li ty a nd w i t h no sound.             RJH2 refers to a f i x e d
site c a m er a w h i c h o ve r l o o k s the rear of T ur nstiles A
to G a n d the c o n c o u r s e area.             RJHl is also part o f
t he system a n d cover s t h e area of Gate A and the
c o nc ou rs e area.         The p a r t i c u l a r reference to the
co n c e r t i n a G a t e C, sir, it is a pp arent f r o m v i s u a l
e v i d e n c e on t h e d a y in qu es t i o n it was r egularly
b e i n g u s e d as a n e n t r a n c e and e xi t p o i n t for a n u m b e r
of r e a s o n s i.e. t h e e j e c t i o n of supports and t he
m o v e m e n t of P o l i c e personnel.

          Be i n g m o r e sp ec i f i c on a t a p e referenced TB2
ti m e d at 1 4 : 3 9 : 3 1 h o u r s a b o y is c a r r i e d through G a t e
C b y P olice Offic er s.              T h e gate appears to be c l o s e d
at 14:40:45 h o ur s.            O n a video t a p e re fe ren ce d R J H 2
w i t h an e s t i m a t e d t im e o f 14:48:04 hours Gate C w a s
o p e n e d to e j e c t a support.




                                      /At this stage
                                                                   71




  At. this stage a lar^e number of supporters rushed
  •hrough the gate into the concourse area.

 On the same tape, at an estimated time of 14:48:31
 hours Ga t e C is closed.  On the same tape at an
 es timated time of 14:52:06 hours Gate C is again
 Mj.ooed-, and a large number of supporters entered
 through it int?> th» ground.   At 14:57:40 hours, as
 shown on the tape referenced TB2, Gate C is closed.

 On a vi di o tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated time of
 I4:.r«9:12 hours. Gate C is again onanod, with supporters
 entering the ground.           In respect of Gate A on a video
 tape r ef e r e n c e d TB2 it is apparently open at 14:58:09
 hours w i t n s up porters entering via it.      At a time
 estimated a t ’ 14:58 the same •cene is siown on the video
 ta »e r e f e re nc e! .t’JHl.  On video tape referenced TB2 at
 14:58:23 a line of Police are shown supervising the
 supporters tnr ou gh Gate A.

 There is no cl e a r evidence, sir, -of openings in
 relation to Gate B.        The video tape from the camera
 that cove rs tnis area is one of two that were found to
 be m i s s i n g when they were originally taken possession
 of.

 Sir, I feel it is important to point out in respect of
 all the e s t i m a t e d timings, given that where seconds are
 indicated there are alwiys likely to be slight
 variations and tnese are dependent on the individual's
 in te rp retation of a pnrticulnr se quence of film.

 Tie e vents that o cc ur red inside the ground leading up
 to k ic k- of f and until the football m a t c h was stopped,
 were r e c o r d e d by B B C television and a ma i n recording,
 together w i t h in di vidual recordings from separate
 camera angles, j a s supplied to the Inquirv, as
 previously refer re d to.

 Having v i e .e-*> the m a i n recording, refe ren ce d Map 1,
 which is a BBC tape, and in particular the movements of
 supporters in E nc losures 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
 end, I a m able to m a k e the following observations.         At
 14:38:4S th3re is a strong sur^e of people al on g the
 •'ividing fence bet we en Enclosures 3 and 4.          At 14:40:09
 a youth in a re'* top is seen standing on top of a
 barrier in E n c l o s u r e 3.  At the same time a beach ball
 is bei :g push- d a r o u <d by the crowd in the same
 enclosure.

  At 14:40:10 hours there is a further sur^e of people in
  Enclosure 4 a l o n g the -ividing fence with Enclosure 3.
  At 14:40:34 hours a youth in a blue top is seen on top
"”5f a b a r r ie r in Encl os ur e 3, near to tne d ivi d i n g fence
  of Enclosure 4.       At 14:45:41 hours a youth in a white
  top is seen d a n c i n g on a barrier in Enclosure 3.
At 14:40:29 hours Jo i n Motson, a BBC commentator, makes
a remark about the empt in es s of Enclosure •">. At
'14:47:33 hour* a youth in abrown too is seen standing
on a barrier in Enclo su re 3    and the youth in the white
top, as previou-ly referred      to, is pulled off at
14:47:46 nours.

At 14:49:53 hours a hole develops in the crowd in
Enclo su re 3 and people ap pear to be looking down at ‘.:ie
floor.    Three m en who had fallen over are seen to get
up.   At 14:50:26 hours there is considerable crowd
moveme.it i.i E nclosure 3 but still no apparent problems
at t.ie '"ront of the enclosure.   At 14:55:49 hours a
string sar.e from taa direction of the tunnel, into
Enclosures 3 and 4, takas place.     In respect of
Enclosure 3 the' s-jr’e is along the dividing fence, and
in t.ie case of Enclo su re 4 the surge is down and to the
rit;ht as you look at the screen.

      At 15:07:.'>9 hours   ....

      THrl COiiONE/xi You are talking about the vidao, of
cou.*se.   Can you just turn round, and when you say to
the rij»ht, I think on the plan it would be towards the
In ft, would that be right, in Enclosure 4? - A. As you
look at it, sir, it would be to the ri«ht.    It is to
vie left on tie olan, yes, but to the right as you look
on tne screen.

Yes, that is right.          The cameras are looking at it from
t.ie o ti er end. - A. At 15:07:09 hours supporters are
sh svm bei-ig pulled up from th~ rear of Enclosures 3 and
4 into the seated area above.           At 15:07:15 nours a
l'jr^e s=:r ;e takes place in Enclosure 3, from the left .
of ce ntre to '.ne right front as viewed on tne screen,
and the video tape re fe ren ce d TB1, wh ich is again South
Y o r k s h i r e Police CCTV, at 14:59:t)4 hours, Gate 4 can be
seen open, and at 14:59:20 hours Gate 3 can be seen
open.

At 14:59:51 hours Gate 1 was opened to al lo w supporters
from i.ie track area into the enclosure.

From s p h o t og ra ph taken by South Yorkshire Police at a
time snown at 15:03 Gate 3 can be seen open.
P n o to gr ap h ref er en c d PR1/10A specifically refers. At
a time snown as 15:04 hours Gate 4 can still be seen
open and pn ot o^ ra ph referenced PR1/22A specifically
refers, again taken by South Yorkshire .Police.

I have been unable to establish, sir, any visual
eviden ce to suggest that these perimeter gates were
closed after these par tic ul ar times.  It should be
noted that tie times shown on these photographs was set
by tho individual came ra operator by reference to his
own :atch.   They we r e not synchronised, nor were they
                                                                          73




   varifie.i. In other words, tho photograph referenced
   PR1/1A shows a time of 15:01, ’whilst a clock on the
   photograph in the grou d shows 15:00 so there is a
   ..•riation, sir.

Q. So tnat could mean that either ha is a minute fast or
   •.le clock is a m i n u t e slow, or >oth of t iem could be
   wrong? - A. That is ri.^ht, sir.       Having viewed tha main
   x*ideo recording referenced flap 1 I am able to give tne
   following infornation in relation to events on the
   pitch.

Q. i’i*».'•. regard to the tiBC filns, the Map Is and 9s, I
   th:nk toe computer set the times, is that right? - A.
   That is r:^ht, sir, except for th<i outside.       We are
   satisfied that t~ie ti es inside would have been
   correct.

Q. T h . timings we are now getting to, on Map 1, these
   would be accu*ate as far as you can tell? - A. Yes,
   si*.    At 14:51:0-: th.3 Liverpool team was announced,
   foll-.>.»ed at 14:51:47 by the Nottingham Forest teao.
   Th se annou .c.ments caused obvious excitement amongst
   i le -upporters.     Tne Liverpool team came onto the pitch
   at 14:54:0-.? hour;*, followed by the Nottingham Forest
   team at 14:55:22.      The two teams were joined on tae
   pitch at 14:57:25 hours by the referee and linesmen.
   Tie toss-up took -lace at a time shown as 14:57:48
   h->ur.~ and it should be noted at this point, sir, that
   tie • ‘tnbase ac tually stopped counting for a short
   perio .. I d o u * t know waat the explanation for that is
   but it restarted again at 14:58:43 hours, and the mat ch
   kicke • off at 14:5V:30.

   At l'>:00:32 a c orner ki-k to Nottingham Forest was
   avir.’ed at the north west corner of the pilch.       At
   1 ! :00:41 hours a large group of supporters are seen
   being led by Police .rom tne direction of Enclosures 3
   a.jd 4 t-iwarris tae Hort'i Stand.    At 15:00:43 hours
    •upporters are seen cl im b i n g over tae perimeter fence
   from Enclosure 4 to th-.* pi tc h side.    At 15:00:50 hours
   t :e corner kick to N o t ti ng ham Forest was taken from the
   nort^ west corner.      At 15:04:09 hours Gate 3 is open,
   supporters are shown climb in g from Enclosure 3 into
   Enclosure 4 via tMe di vi d i n g fence, and people leaning
    in over tne peri iter fence in an apparent effort to
   reach pso -le i*: tna enclosures.

   P !ay -oniinued and at 15:04:52 hours a Peter Beardsley
   sh-t hit tho c ro s s b a r of the N o t t i n g h a m ‘Forest goal.
   Shortly afterw.rds, at 15:05:24 nours, Superintendent
   Greenwood ran ont       ch~ pitch towards tha referee and
   : '.e natch cas stopped.

   On vidoo tape referenced M ap 5, whi-h is again BBC TV
   coverage, but from a separate camera an?,le,
.Su -er ntend nt Murray can be seen on the football
pitch, gesturing to Liverpool supporters at a time
referenced 15:05:30 hours.

With regard to the rescue operation, visually.on a Map
1 BBC tape at 15:07:09 hours supporters can be seen
b-ii :. pulled from th* rear of Enclosures 3 and 4 into
*. '.e s e a t ’d area.  At 15:08:54 hours Police Officers can
b<= seen at tna peri meter fence motioning towards people
in Enclosure 3 to mov e :>ack from the fence.       At
l.":0 :5; hours is seen t h 2 first sighting of a casualty
and this shows him being taken towards t ie Spior. Kop on
a.i ambul nc        stretcher.

At 1":1*>:03 nours on M a . i 9 a South Yorkshire Police
Ins H.ctor is seen and heard to request a serial of
Police Officers.     At this point he is on the perimeter
tr:«ck near to E n closu re 2.   At 15:10:24 hours, Map 7,
whi n is also a S B C tape, shows Police Officers placing
a Lad.:er against tne perimeter fence at the Leppings
La.i* end.  At 1.;:12:1J hours on Map 1 Chief
Superintendent Ne^bit- is sUown on the perimeter track
nnac t_» Enclosure 3.     At 15:12:50 hours on Map 7
supporters are sho wn sitting and lying on the pitch at
t*ie Lepp ngs Lane end of the ground receiving
attention.

Th   fi-st sighting of a casualty leaving the stadium is
«no wn at an e st i m a t e d time of 15:15:40 hours and is
sh-'wn on. the tape r e f e r e n c ’d RJH2, whe n a casualty is
carried through G a t e C by supporters to an ambulance.

At 1 ‘ :14:51 hours on Map 1 Superintendent Greenwood can
be seen on the pitch using his personal radio.

At l r-:13:ll hours on !la i 1 a casualty is seen being
carried from Enc l o s u r e 3 into the tunnel by a Police
Officer and a s ipport~r.            At 15:15:33 hours on M ap 9 a
St. J o h n ’s a mb u l a n c e is seen arriving on the pitch and
b.-i-.g d riven towards the Leppings Lan e terraces.

Is that 9i or M a p 1? - A. Sorry, that is Map 1.       At
1 :1 ;:0 * hours on M a p 7 a group of supporters c an be
seen pulling dow n tne perLnter fence at the front of
Enclosure 4.    At l'*:l:>:12 hour.-i on Ma p 1 a large number
of Police Officers m ov e from the Kop end of the ground
t wards tne Le pp' n g s La.ie end.   On Ma p 7 at 15:19:24
supporters are snown at Gate 3 being carried out of tne
enclosure by Police Officer-.

On a video ref e r e n c e d TB2 at 15:19:58 hours
Superintend nt G r e e n w o o d is seen at the perimeter fence
of tne Leppings Lane terrace, apparently using a
Lou :hailer to c o m m u .icate with supporters in Enclosure
3.  A second a m b u l a n c e arrives at the Kop end, this
b?ing a Soucn Yor k s h i r e Metropolitan ambulance, which
                                                               75




is snown at .15:20:41- hours on a video referenced Nap 1.
Evid.nc   of the rescue operation, sir, continues for
some time and is snown on video and photo >.or.iphic
fo6 a;*e.

Vidjo ev dsnce was also obtained from the FA Cu > semi-
ti .'iIs neld at H i l l s b o r o u g h in 1981 and 198':. With
regard to tne l‘J8'. semi-.*inal, this match was filmed by
Yorkshire TV.    T n e r e is no database on the recording.
However, at a c o mme .tar / time, 15:11 p.m., the
comnent :tor remarks about supporters being on the pitch
behind tne goal at the Leppings Lane end, and
supporters can be seen clim b i n g tne perimeter fence
onto the pitch.      Th_jre th=n follows views of supporters
sitting on m e touchline behind the goal, marshalled by
tne Police.

At ’
   n aif-time th;.* su pport ers on the pitch ran up the
pitch towards the Spion Kop.       The Police cordon is
sub.<eque *tly placed a round the pitch and there are no
fur* '.er points of interest.

Witn re^a.:- t? the semi- final held on 9th April 1988,
• lere is video -vi.*ence available from the South
Yorkshire Police CCTV re ferenced TB5/2 and TB5/3, and
:-lso BBC television r e f eren ced JG1 and JG2.       T he video
tapes are av a i l a b l e and s h o w extensive coverage of the
bui r-up and m a t c h coverage.        As a comparison exercise,
a composite vi deo tape was prepare^1 which shows crowd
.'c.- .es at the Leppings Lane end outside the ground
betw«e^ 14:00 and 15:02 h o u r s on b o t n 9th April, 1983
and 15th Airil, 1989.         This, sir, has been *,;iven the
reterenc     n umber SDB1.

From this v ; d s o it can be seen that at 14:00 hours in
1988 -.he per i m e t e r gates nearest tne River Don are
c 1c ? .* creating: a steril e are a along the side of the
tur .stiles A-G, towards Ga t e C, wnereas in 1989 tnese
gates are open and p eopl e c a n be seen moving freely in
tnis area.       At 14:16. nours in 1988 there is a build up
of support-rs in front of turnstiles A-G, and back
along Leppings Lane.          In 1989 the b uild up is more
severe and the area near to Gate C has become very
crow.ed.      In 1988 at 14:29 nours the roadway in
L e p p ;ngs Lam* remai?s relat ively clear, although
crow'*:*d, w h e reas at 14:30 hours in 1989 the Leppings
Lane area nas become very congested, with supporters
spilling into the centre of Leppings Lane and blocking
the road.

At 14:43 hours in 1988, a l t h o u g h it is very crowded,
traffic is still able to pass and the perimeter gates
are still closed, w h e r eas at 14:48 hours in 1989 th?
area in iront of the turnstiles and Leppings Lane is
t Ta l l y blocke d.
At 14:52 hours i ■ 1088 t"h> area adj acent remains
sterile, whereas at 14:52 hours in 1989 the concertina
Gate C was opened t o allow supporters into the ground.
A t 15:01 n o u r s i n >oth 1988 and 1989 the crowd i n
Leppings Lane is v e r • similar in size and under
control.

Sir, during th.- c o u r s e of the preliminary inquests I
:;ave evidence in r e s po ct of locations at which it was
believed that tn? de ce a s e d were either alive or dead or
 »oth in Encl osure s 3 and 4.       Plans were produced in
respcct of individual deceased.          Subsequently composite
 •ltns were p r e p a r e d of some of tnese locations, based
on my evid^nc , by Miss Da*’n Goodall, senior plan
d.*3wer of the West Hi 'lands .Police.       Because of t'ie
problems a s s o ciate ^ wit-i tr»i g to put all locations of
 eceased on t lese two >lans, tney actually only s :tow
tho Ins* posizion es tablished alive, and th= first
wiere believed - eceased.

Sir, I p n H u c e a c o m p o s i t e plan referenced DHG9 in
res _ct of t te 1 n a t i o n of the positions of deceased. .
alive, and a c o m p o s i t e plan refere ced D.iGlO where they
were beiiaved to be          eceased in the enclosures.      Sir,
thire are over eads avai-able of these two plans.




  /Q. Yes.   - A. T n e r e   is one point
                                                          77

                                           M.   LAYTON


   Sir, there are overheads available of these two plans. There
   is one point which I need to raise in respect of one of the
   plans, sir.  Since the limited Inquests, Mrs. Traynor, mother
   of two of the deceased, has viewed visual evidence again. At
   the limited Inquest a plan was produced which showed
   Christopher in enclosure No. 3 at 14:45, and that location is
   reproduced on the plan DRG.9. Since that time Mrs. Traynor
   has found Christopher alive at 14:45 outside the ground. So
   in fact I would ask you to disregard the one location in
   relation to the deceased No. 60 as shown on that plan.

Q. What time was he shown on the plan? Would you repeat the
   time? - A. 14:52 outside the ground, sir, and 14:45 was the
   original identification by Mrs. Traynor inside the ground.

Q. So what you are saying is Mrs. Traynor has now reidentified
   him but alive at an earlier time than she originally thought?
   - A . In fact alive at a later time. So in fact, the point I
   am making is on the plan DRG.9 we should disregard the
   location shown for that particular location.

Q. We will' deal with this again.

        THE CORONER:    This, Mr. King, is a typical example of
   the corrections one would wish to make with regard to the
   summaries.   I did not know what Inspector Layton has just tol<
   me, but it is clear it needs amendment, and obviously we woulc
   want tor get that right.

         . THE WITNESS:  I can tell you the original plan which
   was produced at the limited Inquest was given the reference
   No. C.140.

     THE CORONER:   Before you put that up can we number that
   plan of the ground C.274.  The plan of the ground is C.274.
   Can you put the next one up:

O. Inspector Layton, which one is this? - A. If we go
   chronologically as far as the statement is concerned it shoul<
   be the other way round.  I don’t think it matters as such.

O. You mean the deceased first? - A. I am sorry, is this the
   first one, sir? This is the deceased alive.

Q. I think we will have the people alive first. - A. This plan
   is DRG.9.

Q. That is C.275.  These are the people last seen alive as far a:
   you can establish based upon the evidence which yougave at
   the interim Inquests? - A. That is correct, sir, and it is
   this plan which bears the identification which I have just
   referred to in respect of Christopher Traynor.

O. I-^don’t suppose you know where he is? - A. It is to the top.
   just near to the top.   (Indicated on plan)

Q. Can we get Miss Goodhall to delete it? - A. We can do. sir.
                                            M.   LAYTON




And we will then reproduce it as an amended version.  it gi*
you a visual impression of where the people were when last
seen alive on the visual evidence.  Put the other one up nov
please. - A. This plan is DRG.10.

That will be C.276.

     THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, the purpose of this
is just to give you an impression where the people were to
save you looking at 95 individual plans:

That is right, is not it? - A. That is right.

It does not have 95 spots on it because we did not find
everybody on the visual evidence? - A. That is right, sir.
Finally, as I have already stated, the events outlined in thi.'
statement are not actually in chronological order, and to
assist with this particular aspect a schedule has been
prepared which has been referenced SB.l, which seeks to place
some of the events into chronological order.  I produce that
schedule.

Have we got that on an overhead as well, perchance? -      a   . I
understand the quality is not....

It is too difficult to read.      C.277.

      MR. KING:      Would it be possible to have photocopies of
it?

     THE CORONER:       We will do that.   Tomorrow morning you
will have them.

      THE WITNESS:      Sir, that completes »y evidence.

     THE CORONER:    What we are trying to do with that
schedule is to pick out some of the major events. You have
given us an awful lot of detail which is useful, but that
picks out' some of the major events In chronological order as
to the outside of the ground and to the inside? - A. That is
right, sir, and where there is an "E", that is estimated time
sir.

     THE CORONER:   It is supposed to be an aide memoire so i
somebody says, "What time did that gate open?", we can tell.
It is difficult to follow because there are so many numbers,
but basically he was telling us events which he and his team
found either on photographs or videos, and relating to variou
things.  When you see the schedule it will be shorter.  We
will have them available tomorrow morning.

      Any questions of Inspector Layton?
                                         M.   LAYTON


                 Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

You referred at a point about quarter-of-the-way through your
evidence, to a photograph taken by a photographer called
Warburton Lee.  I just did not get the reference. - a . The
reference given is DPP.190

What was that of? - A. It is in relation to damage to a
retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates as you
look from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.

     THE CORONER:   Can you point? - A. It is the second set
of perimeter gates as you look from the ground side towards
Leppings Lane.

We will put the overhead on. Show us which one it is?
(Indicated) - A. That is right, sir, the second set of
perimeter gates from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.
Exactly where Mr. Brown is pointing.

That is C.254.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Layton, could you help me with just a number of matters.
How many   people in your team? - A.   It varied initially from a
its height I think 12 to as a norm     an average of 6.

Let us put to one side for a moment the accumulation of the
evidencie.  I am only concerned with the looking at the
evidence, particularly of the video evidence, and you have
told us something of your observations, and when I say ’•you"
mean you and your team, of, for example, outside and then
inside the ground of certain parts of different videos. Coulc
you help   me with this against that    background.  Taking,for
example,   what was seen on the videos inside the ground, for
example, the BBC film that was being taken, in order to
produce the observations which you have produced how long
approximately would the film have been looked at for? I don'
want it S minutes, 10 minutes. How many hours? - A.
Countless.   The process was never ending.  I think it would b
fair to say every time you view a video you see something
else, because there are so many images on the screen that it
is not possible to take them all in at one viewing.   It was a
continual process right up to the time of the limited
Inquests.   Indeed, I have no doubt since then it has continue
as well, albeit on a more limited scale.

So could you help u s , have you done any of the watching
yourself? - A. I have done some of it, yes.

But are we talking about a video, for example, inside the
ground where you tell us that certain things were taking
pTace, being watched over 20 hours or 40 hours or 100 hours o
more than that? - A. It would be impossible to put a figure o
it. As I said at the beginning, the initial process after
retrieving the original video tapes, was to copy them.
                                                               80

                                                M.   LAYTON


         Once they were copied the copies were viewed and a
         schedule, which is a precis of events shown on the film,
         was prepared.  From that schedule really the continual
         process then was. as part of our brief, to try to locate
         the deceased either outside; or inside the ground, and as
         part of that process we were continually viewing.
B
    O. To see what events were occurring, any incidents that occurre
       and the like? - A. Primarily our brief was, having scheduled
       the tapes, to locate the deceased for the Inquests.  There
       were other specific areas which were dealt with as the inquir
       progressed, but because of our brief to locate deceased it wa
       a continuing process.

    Q.   But as you were saying, as well as doing that you would see -
         when I say "you" - you and your team would see different
         incidents taking place on virtually each and every occasion
         you were looking at the tape? - A. That is right. One scene
         on one video could show numerous people.

    Q. As opposed to, for example, someone who was looking at that
       scene as part and parcel of the events of the day which would
       be quite different? - A. I am not sure I follow you.

D   O.    Let me indicate exactly what I mean. We have on the one hand
         Police Officers for the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor's
         Inquiry and for the purposes of this Inquest looking over and
         over and over again videos taken of for example a certain
         section of the ground, whether it be outside or inside, and
         seeing something different perhaps or something else in
         addition? - A. Yes.

    Q. On each viewing, and then we have an individual who may be
£      looking at the Leppings Lane end for a fraction of a second as
       part of the day's events? - A. Yes, I accept your point.
       There is a difference between our brief, which was to view the
i      videos to either obtain evidence or to schedule them so as to
       become a sequence of events as to what to what took place,
       there is a difference between that and purely viewing it
       perhaps on a monitor.

    O. And it required from your point of view repeated lookings at,
       if I can use an inelegant phrase, in order to get a complete
       picture? - A. Depending on what we were seeking to establish.
       Certainly in relation to the deceased, yes.

    Q. Thank you very much.

                         Cross-Examined bv MR. KING;

    Q. Arising out of that last question, if one is looking for
       precise details, a particular individual, you need to look at
       a video over and over again? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.

    Q.   If you are looking for a general impression, a build up of
         fans, emptiness of a pen, the fullness of a pen, the first
         time is sufficient for that, is not it? - A. Yes. sir.



H
                                \ OOj
                                          M.   LAYTON




              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN
 ✓
I would like to go back to the point where the fans enter
the ground at 2:48 p.m.' Could you read that part out, pi
- A. Yes, if you can just bear with me a second, please,
you want the whole section again?

The wording you used? - A. Page 10, I think, sir.  On a v
tape reference RJH.2 at an estimated time of 14:48:04, Ga
was opened to eject a supporter.  Is that the bit?

Yes. - A. Do you want me to go further?

Yes, just a little. - A. At this stage a large number of
supporters rushed through the gate into the concourse area

Yes. thank you.  It is the part that they rushed in. and :
was established at the preliminary Inquest that the fans t
actually allowed in at that time, as Police Officers ther<
mistakenly thought that Gate C had been opened in responst
Superintendent Marshall's request.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I will phrase your quest
for you:

Mrs. McBrien is asking you whether this was the incident c
the timing as far as you can establish from the video
evidence, where the gate was opened as a result of an orde
opposed to not? - A. No, that is not that particular openi
of the gate, not the one you refer to.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   The transcript of Superintendent
Marshall's evidence at the Taylor Inquiry....

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry:

Inspector Layton, read the whole section through again, or
you like specify the openings, because it may assist you.

     THE CORONER:   I think you may have your timings wror

     MRS. MCBRIEN;   We brought this point out at the
Preliminary Inquest, and it was altered in the Preliminary
Inquest.  It was altered to "allowed", "they were allowed”
"They were allowed in".

     THE WITNESS:   The timing you are referring to is the
occasion on which a person was ejected from the concourse
area via Gate C and out. Certainly it is apparent when yc
view the video, and that is why I have differentiated with
it were, the official opening when people walked through,
is certainly apparent on the video for this earlier openin
they did not go in in the same fashion.

     THE CORONER:   This was at 15:52, was not it?      So 14:
was one opening? - A. That is right, sir.
                                                                61 A


                                                 M.   LAYTON




    Q. What time was it closed then? - A. At 14:48:31.
          ✓
    Q. How long was it open? It was only open for 2/ seconds? -        a   .
       That is right, sir, yes.

B   Q. And then it was reopened at 14:52.     Is that right? - A. That
       is right, sir.

    Q. And then it stayed open for how long? - A. At 14:57:40 the
       gate is shown closed.

    Q. That is about 5 minutes? - A. Yes.     We are talking about two
       distinct openings there.

C   Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  I was firmly under the impression that
         fans were encouraged through that gate at that particular
         time.

              THE CORONER:   We will be hearing evidence.  Inspector
         Layton has told you what he has seen on the visual evidence.
         He can't say any more than that.  It may be - it may be;   I
         say no more - that some of the other witnesses might be able
         to give you some more help on this.  I don't think Inspector
D        Layton can.

              MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much.

              THE CORONER:   When you say, Mrs. McBrien. there was a
         correction made at the interim Inquest, are you talking about
         the interim Inquest relating to your son?

              MRS. MCBRIEN:   Yes.
£
              THE CORONER:   I will have a look at it.  I will check it
         and see what is actually said, but not now because I have not
         got it here. Any other questions arising out of Inspector
         Layton's evidence?

              Tomorrow we will give you a copy of the abbreviated
         schedule, and I think everybody will find it is a lot easier
         once we have that to look at:
F
    Q. Inspector Layton, as always I am exceedingly grateful to you.
       Thank you for your help.    The only thing I would ask you is iJ
       you could arrange to have that plan redrawn with the
       amendments, and also let me have a short statement regarding
       this matter, and we will either deal with it by way of
       documentary evidence or I will have to bring you back,
       depending on what I think.    It is a point that has got to be
       corrected. - A . . I think P.C. Brown should be able to assist,
G      sir.

         —     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, we are aiming
          timewise to start at 10, rise about quarter-to-1, 1 o'clock.
          Obviously we can't be absolutely sure.  We know that from
          experience already.  Start again about 2.  It depends what
                                                       82


                                        M . LAYTON


time we rise for lunch.   Then aim to finish about a , and a
there will be a little bit of flexibility.   You may think
i's not too bad, but you will find it is quite sufficient i
you said and listen to evidence for five hours.   Inspector
Layton's evidence is interesting but jolly difficult to
follow, not because he is difficult but because of the num
and maps and goodness knows what. A lot of the other evid
which you will hear will be easier to follow because they
be ordinary people.   I don't mean he is an extraordinary
person - he may be - but it will be just people telling us
about things.

     Now, it is quarter-to-4. I d o n ’t think we will start
with anything further tonight as far as you are concerned.
I also have some more legal submissions to deal with we die
not quite finish.  So I am going to rise. You can leave.
Please be here on time so we can get cracking at 10 tomorrc
morning. What we will do tomorrow in the morning is we wi]
look at the videos, this compilation tape, which is about t
hours. So we will watch for an hour and then stop and have
coffee and watch the other half.  Then we have two short
videos. One has two screens.   It compares 1988 with 1989 c
best one can, and then I have had another short compilatior
made of 1981 and 1988, I think, which shows the events. We
thought if we did the words today you would follow the vide
that much better tomorrow.  Is that satisfactory to you? I
the afternoon we are starting with some real live witnesses

     Can we rise for five minutes or so.

                    (Short Adjournment)
                                                                        83




                     ( In the absence of the      jury)

       THE CORONER:       Yes, Mr. Isaacs?

       MR. ISAACS:       Sir, before my learned friend Mr. King
ma kes such submissions he wishes to m a k e in relation to the
submission that I m a d e this morning, m a y I just take this
opportunity to d r a w to your attention the cit y late edition
of T h e Star.      If I hand my copy in - you, sir, have not had
the benefit of g o i n g out to the local news vendors.     If I
could be h a n d e d •another copy.

      First of all I would ask you to read it.     First of all
against the ba ckground of the submission that I made this
mo rning my argument is this that nothing co u l d b e more
des igned to add fuel to the submission I m a d e than what,
sir, you will n o w read.

     T HE CORONER:       Well, Mr. Isaacs, I ha v e to agree w i t h
you that it was a n unwise - if the q u o tation is correct and,
of course, I can*t say w h e ther it is or w h e t h e r it isn*t, I
think it was an u n w i s e comment, bearing in min d that we are
sub judice here a n d it is a matter for this court, or my
jury, if you like, to take decisions on what w i l l happen.

        MR. ISAACS:     Sir, that is anothe r a s p e c t o f the m att er
wh i c h perhaps I c a n refer to in a m o m e n t a nd w h i c h I k n o w
others will refer to and that.is.the q u e s t i o n a3 to wh ether
The Star, rightly o r wrongly, have b e e n party to an attempt
to influence the jury to b r i n g in a c e r tain verdict.            That
is certainly one aspect of the matter.

       Th e aspect  I would s e e k to address you. u p o n in relation
to the contents     of this a r t i c l e is/this, that d e a r l y ,
however you see      these inquests, and, o f course, you are in
control, those w h o represent..*           I p u t it a n o t h e r way. The
families quite c l e a r l y see these inquests as a n evidence
g a ther ing exercise in o r d e r to produce fresh e v i d e n c e w h i c h
will, they hope, e nabl e the m to per suade o r e n a b l e the
Director to take the view that criminal c h a rge s should be
preferred.

     In my submission, so far as Chief S uperintendent
Duckenfield is c o nce rned h e should n o t b e put in a position
- should not even b e put into the witnes s b o x w h e r e he could
be put in a position where, by asking h i m q u e s t i o n s wh i c h
would then be disallowed, then be disallowed, t hen be
disallowed in the m a n n e r that I referred "to this morning, so
as to increase the possibility, probability, w h a t you will,
of the jury returning a verdict of un lawfu l killing.

     In my submission, sir, this article and the contents of
it do add a great deal of fuel to the submission I made and
                                                                        84




 the. dangers inherent in calling Mr.         Duckenfield to give
 evidence.

      T HE CORONER:       Than k you.     Mr. King, I will listen t«
 you now.

      MR. KING:   I understood, sir, that those acting on
 behalf of Officer Greenwood still had submissions to make t
 you, sir.

 I     THE CORONER:      You are quite right.          Thank you for
I reminding me.

       MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, happily in supporting my learned
. friend Mr. Isaacs I need not reh earse his very articulate
  submission and exposition of the rule.    I adopt his
  exposition of the rule without gloss.

          As far as Superintendent Gree n w o o d is concerned, there
 are four areas from which further action might come, from
 w h i c h he requires protection against any conceivable self-
 incrimination which might flow from his giving evidence.

       If I can list them briefly, it is further action by the
 Director.    Second, a judicial r e v i e w of the D i r e c t o r ’s -
 decision.    Third, a private prosecution.        Fourth,
 dis ciplinary proceedings.

        Sir, the depth and the stre ngth of the feelings of the
 families of the bereaved was perhaps spoken in words louder
 and better than I can select when my learned friend Mr.
 Isaacs outlined what was the nub of h i s .submission, and you
 w il l remember the reaction that that took*    We now hav e on
 the front page of the newspaper w h a t is a transparent use,
 or intended use, of these inquests before you.

          As far as disciplinary proceeding s are concerned, I
p r e f e r to dwell on that to the e xclu sion of the others
b e c a u s e my learned friend Mr. Isaacs has mentione d the
pos ition of the Director.                It is, of course, sanction which
c o u l d lead to the dismissal           of lon g-sta nding officers,
including Superintendent Greenwood, w h o m I represent.                Sir,
you may well be familiar w i t h some of the publicity that
surrou nded the application to the Police Autho rity for funds
for not only Superintendent G r e enwoo d but the other senior
o ffi c e r s concerned and that has been prompted by the fear of
there being no funds for such pro cee d i n g s as the
d i s c i p l i n a r y proceedings.      It is n o t merely an empty
threat.           Th e s e proceedings are   on foot arid what happe ns to
them will, to an extent, be coloured by w h a t happen s within
these four walls over the coming weeks.

     Sir, it is important perhaps a l s o to envisage the wide
scope of the offences and they are of fences u nder the Police
                                                                            85




        Discipline Regulations 1985, that c o n s ti tute those
        di sc iplina ry proceedings.      Perhaps I co u l d invite you
        b r i e f l y to consider the nature of the co mplaints that have
        been ma d e against Superintendent Gree nwood because in my
        submission they show that the wider the scope of the off ence
        the more difficu lt it is to conceive questions the answers
        to wh i c h will not tend to incriminate Superintendent
        Green wood or anyone el s e in a similar position.

             T he allegations of complaint come from two
        complainants, bo t h of whom I note from the contents of
        letters and other documents put before you this morning, are
        represented by my learned friend Mr. King.       Mr. Jo nes -
        Leslie Jones - the father of Richard Jones, makes four
        allegatio ns which consti tute his c ompl aint against
        Superintendent Gree nwood and I say at the outset these are
        allegations which are, and will be, refuted by
        Superintendent Greenwood:

■<;          "A. You failed to carry out your assi g n e d dut y by '
J             placing you rself in a position by the players     tunnel.
\             Using your radio and your eyes you should have been
              awa re of the d an gerou s situation and control led your
              officers accordingly.

  i           B. You failed to give instructions to your offi cers to *
 *            m o n i t o r the pens for over-crowding in r elation to the
 ;l          crowd safety at y o u r briefings.

    j        C. You wer e totally ineffective in m o u n t i n g a rescue.
              T h a t is, you mad e no attempt to o r g a n i s e the polic e
is           officers in a w a y w h i c h would have h e l p e d to bring
|            about a s u c c es sful rescue operation.

    I        D. You failed to send officers to the rear of pens 3
I            and 4 to reli eve pressure when you w e r e in c o n t r o l of
             the area.     T h i s was when you k n e w that gate C was
             being o pen ed to allow supporters in.*'

             Sir, Mr. T r e v o r Hicks, who al s o instructs m y . l e a r n e d
        friend Mr. King, is the other complainant.          He m a k e s three,
        perhaps broader, allega tions in his complaint:

              "1. You failed to prevent a d an gerous b u i l d - u p of
        I    supporters o u t s i d e the gates.

        (    2. You failed to control the move m e n t of supporters
              subsequent to the opening of gate C..

              3. You failed to respond to the dev e l o p i n g tragedy and *
              were slow to e f f e c t a rescue o p eratio n."

             I say again the totality of each of those a l l e g ati ons
        is refuted, but they d o serve to show the wi d e na ture of the
                                                                  86




position of Superintendent Greenwood and the way in w h i c h
his position will h a v e to be protected should he give
evidence.    I just invite you to consider the prejudicial
effec t that the c o n s t a n t challenging of questions ask ed and
the jury being told that the officer need not answer them,
if matters are d e a l t w i t h on a question at a time basis*

      Alternatively, if there is dispute about whether the
ans wer to a pa r t i c u l a r question might tend to incriminate
Superintendent Gree n w o o d when such argument, if there is to
be such argument, takes place in the absence of the jury,
the effect and the impression that that will have upon the
members of the jury*

        In those c i r c umsta nces I invite you to adopt the c o urs e
that has been s u g g e s t e d by Mr* Isaacs, that these officers,
certainly S uperi ntend ent Greenwood, should not be asked to
give evidence at a l l because of the p rejudicial effect of
having to deal w i t h eac h question on its merits and in
circumstances w h e r e it is difficult to con ceive any q ues t i o n
wh i c h will not p r o d u c e that response*




                       MR.   KING:   Sir, the families   • • •
                                                             87




   *THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   The families would have liked each of the
senior Officers to have come to give evidence here
voluntarily.    That is what they would have liked. They would
have wished that the truth of the events which led to these
deaths could have come from their lips voluntarily so that
the Jury could hear it. The families are mindful of the law
as much as anybody else and I have advised them what the law
i s . They know and appreciate that it is within the right of
any of those senior Officers that if any question is asked
tending to incriminate that he can refuse to give it.    To
this extent they are in a dilemma because what they want, and •
have always wanted, is for this Jury to hear the whole of the
facts.    It would be a very unreal world which this Jury would
be living in if they did not hear in some way from the
principal players in these events, b y which I mean the senior
Officers.

    One could make trite examples.  The one going through my
mind was hearing Julius Caesar but we did not hear from
Brutus and the whole of the Senate.  That is not meant to be
trivial because these are vital witnesses.

    A few weeks ago, sir, I submitted to you matters relating
to the Taylor Inquiry Report and the transcripts. You k n o w
if agreement were possible the families would wish that the
whole of the Taylor R e p o r t a n d 'the_whole of the transcripts
should be before the Jury.        Indeed, they would wish they
would go there without agreement but again they accept
advice, as they must, that that is not possible without
agreement.  If m y learned friend on behalf of H r . Duckenfield
is saying to this Inquiry he will agree and consent to the
whole of the transcript o f Hr. Duckenfield's evidence b e i n g
read out aloud to the Jury so that they can hear it and
assess it then that in fact from the families* point of view,
much as they would like Hr. Duckenf ield in the witness b o x to
be cross-examined, will b e far better in the effort they
generally have, not In making noises t o the outside world, in
bringing the facts to the attention of this Jury.

    Sir, if that is the position, then much as they would
like Hr. Duckenf ield here, and much as I would say to you
that he ought to come into the witness box and be heard to
say, "I will not answer", if there is that alternative
genuinely being put forward, then I would say on behalf of
the families I represent that that is a course which is, in
fact, preferable as the lesser of two evils from their point
of view.  I say that not in any way reflecting on the right
of Hr. Duckenf ield to take the stance he has but from the
point of view to prejudice of all the matters being before
the Jury.
                                                           88




   ' I do not know, sir, what the position is with regard to
the other Officers, that is to say Mr. Murray, Mr. Greenwood
and Mr. Marshall.   I do not know whether I have the agreement
of those who represent those Officers to the transcripts of
their evidence being read aloud to the Jury.   If I do ha v e
that, sir, then my position will  be different than if I d o
not and it might be helpful from my point of view if an
indication could be given in that respect.

   THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale is not here and so he cannot
respond.  Do you wish to respond or take instructions on
that?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, for my part I would like to take
instructions and perhaps I could do so overnight.

   MR. KING:   In those circumstances, sir, perhaps it mi g h t
be better if I postpone my final words until I hear what
those instructions are.

   THE CORONER:     Iwould prefer to conclude this now.  You
have heard what   Mr. Isaacs says.If he says  no and Mr.
Isaacs says yes, perhaps I may think again but assume for the
moment that everyone will fall in line behind Mr. Isaacs.

   MR. KING:   If everybody falls in line behind Mr. Isaacs,
as I say, sir, much as I would prefer a different course - it
almost sounds like a bargain but it is not meant to be - if
that is the means b y which the families can get facts befor e
the Jury it is the means they would adopt.

   MR. ISAACS:   I wish to make one thing very clear, sir, so
that there is no misunderstanding.   The offer that I make is
this; that the transcript of Mr. Duckenfielti'o evidence b o t h
in chief as it were and in cross-examination before Lord
Justice Taylor can be read to this Jury as being a report of
that evidence he gave on that occasion.   So far as my learned
friend is concerned he understood m e correctly and Z just
want to ensure, sir, that you understood me correctly as
well.

   THE CORONER:   W h a t you are trying to say is that you are
not putting it forward as evidence of the truth of it but
purely of what was said?

   MR. ISAACS:   That is what was said because that is
exactly the point you were making this morning, as it were,
with a Criminal Justice Act statement when, of course, the
witness would be asked, "Is that the statement you have
made?" On this occasion he would not be asked this but it
would be said on his behalf or by you, sir, by agreement,
"This was the evidence that he gave before Lord Justice
Taylor".
                                                           89




   MR. KING:   I understand the point my learned friend is
saying on behalf of Mr. Duckenf ield as to the quality of that
evidence but it is certainly evidence which can go b e for e a
Jury otherwise we would have no function, sir.      I am not sure
now if I understand the distinction being m a d e .

   THE CORONER:    This is the problem.    Mr. Payne.

    MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I was rising to make the point whi c h was
mentioned by Mr. Isaacs simply as a matter of clarification.
If this Inquest is to proceed, as has been suggested, then it
should be on the basis that the evidence, and we are only
speaking for the moment about Mr. Duckenf ield, that he should
riot in fact give evidence but there should be read out at the
Inquest what he said at the Taylor Inquiry, not as his
evidence before you but as a report of what in fact he said
on that previous occasion.   That is what Mr. Isaacs said to
you just now and I was rising to ensure that that was what
was being agreed.

   THE CORONER:    I have not agreed to anything yet, Mr.
Payne.

   MR. KING:      So far so good.  The next question was t h e
purpose for which the Jury could use that evidence and
certainly, s i r # as I understand i t , it should b e capable of \
being used as evidence of that which is stated in i t , in
other words not as evidence to'you, sir, but as evidence of
what was said on previous occasions. Otherwise it w o u l d have
no value.   I am not sure if m y learned friend is trying to
say,. "It can go before the Jury but the Jury must be t o l d
that they cannot put any truth on that which is being
asserted".

   MR. PAYNE:   I think Mr. King can be helped b y the fa c t
that the ordinary rules of evidence as we t e n d to kno w th em
do not apply in these proceedings and certainly for our par t
we can see no objection to the Jury being informed that what
was read out was a true report of what was said before t h e
Taylor Inquiry and the Jury could take it into account in
that context.

   THE CORONER:    Can I just put this to you because I think
I can understand the problem but you will appreciate that if
you say to the Jury, "here is a statement which has now been
read.  It may or may not b e true because y e have not ask e d
Mr. Duckenf ield but it is true that he said that because it
is a report of what he said.   You, ladies and gentlemen, must
decide whether you believe it or whether you do not".    Are
you in effect inviting me to view that statement in that
fd?B»? Have I understood you correctly?
    to. PAYNE:   Yes, I think that is right.  What is being
 said is that the statement can be read out as a true account
 of what was said at the Taylor Inquiry and the Jury can take
 it into account and make what use of it they wish.

    MR. KING:   On that basis I am content as long as my
 learned friend realises the import of what is being said,  it
 is not simply a record.  It is being put to the Jury as
 material which they can assess and use and, if necessary and
 they think fit, accept as truth.

   THE CORONER:   I take it what you are saying is that
because this statement is in the public domain, so to speak,
because it has already been given - whether it has been given
on Oath or not is neither here nor there - it is there for
anybody who wishes to get the transcripts out.  That is
really what you are saying, is it not?

    MR. ISAACS:    That is certainly right and in making that
 concession I did it so not because I felt there was any
 weakness in the submission I originally made to you but in an
 attempt to be helpful to meet the demands of you, sir, and
"the Jury and perhaps the legitimate demands of m y learned
 friend's clients.   If I could put it this way, if the offer
 which is made is unacceptable then it can b e withdrawn and I
 rest on the submission that I have made which is still a
 strong one, in m y submission, but I hope to try and assist
 the Court by saying that, here a t .least is an account which
 has been given b y Mr. Duckenf ield, in the circumstances it
 was given, first of all, in chief and then under cross-
 examination for a number of days. That to some degree will
 assist the Jury in determining in this particular instance in
 this Inquest where the truth lies, that is, how the deceased
 met their deaths.

   MR. KING:   On t h a t basis I am content and wou ld be
content in respect of any other senior Officer w h o allows his
transcript to go forward in that way.

   MR. MANNING:   I have been able to use the intervening
period to talk to Superintendent Murray who instructs me on
the same basis as that put forward b y m y learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, that
so far as his evidence to the Taylor inquiry is concerned it
may be used in exactly the same way.   It was evidence that
was received.   He answered questions in chief and in cross**
examination in detail.   There it is.  It will be received and
read in that way and on the same basis under the same caveat.

   THE CORONER:   M a y I put in my view for what it is worth?
I had listened with considerable interest to your submission
and I have to agree wi th you because this is a regular
occurrence in Inquests that whenever you get the situation
                                                           91




where a person is potentially liable to be charged with some
criminal offence, be it careless driving or even speeding, it
does not matter what, it is next to impossible to construct a
question which is not incriminatory.  That has been my
experience and in a sense I am encouraged that that seems to
be your experience as well.  I thought it was just my failure
in constructing questions.  So far as that goes, I agree it
is exceedingly difficult to formulate questions which
actually advance the matter if a person is in a situation
where an answer may incriminate him.

      Secondly, because I realise that that is so, my practice
has always been to call the driver, or the person whose
conduct is being' called in question, to ask him things like,
"What is your name?" (which is not I think incriminatory) and
then to pause.   If questions are asked and if they are
incriminatory that is pointed out straight away and my
experience generally speaking is that the matter draws to a
close very quickly because people realise there is no point
in proceeding.   It does have the advantage that the witness
who is a player in whatever it is one is enquiring into is
there, is seen to be there and is also given the opportunity
of saying something if he wishes to say something whereas if
you do not call h i m you do not give the witness that
opportunity.

     Now, of course, you might say to me, "I a m telling y o u
that we do not want that opportunity, thank you very much".

   M R . ISAACS: That is exactly what I am telling you for
the purposes of this submission.

   THE CORONER:   The fact that somebody does not give
evidence is also prejudicial.     In a sense the problem has
been made more difficult from the decision point of view
because of the exchange that has just taken place as to what
is to happen with regard to the transcripts of Lord Justice
Taylor's Report and Mr. King, w h o has the primary interest of
a good number of th e bereaved',- feels that this might be a.
better bet than having somebody say, "I am not answering
questions" and you obviously feel that as well.

     I am a little bit concerned about it, in fact, because
quite a bit of the evidence of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, and w e think about him simply because you took
the lead in this matter but it applies to others as well I am
sure, there is quite a lot of his evidence which is not
germane to an Inquest.      It will be ever so interesting but it
is not germane to an Inquest.       I could allow it if you, as
his representative, say, "I do not mind, let us read it all
and have done with it".       I am a little bit concerned about
that aspect of the m a t t e r .
   HR. ISAACS:    There are two ways of looking at it, with
respect.  First of all, it can be edited by agreement and
indeed on your direction because you will have read his
evidence that he gave some time ago now to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry.   Alternatively it can go before the Jury
and you can give directions as to those parts which are
germane to the Jury's task in this particular Inquiry.    I
should point out, sir, that the offer I made was made on the
basis that he was not called.   I think my learned friend
understood that and it was not in the way of holding a gun to
your head at all.   it was a view to being helpful.

   THE CORONER:    Mr. Isaacs, may I ask you this because it
seems to me that it might be possible to achieve the best of
all worlds in this situation bearing in mind the point which
you have made and the acceptance of the issue? It is my
reluctance in a sense to make a ruling that we were not
calling him because I am a little bit reluctant, despite the
very persuasiveness of a lot of what, you said to me, but it
seems to me that your client would not be in any particular
danger of prejudice if the solicitors. Hr. King in
particular, were to agree that if we were to put Hr.
Duckenfield in the witness box having either read his
transcript either jLfl. toto or edited by agreement, that he
would agree not to pursue questions whi ch clearly were
incriminatory because that would then give the advantage of
having Hr. Duckenfield here and yet without having the thin g -
which I perceive to be your main fear is that he will have to
answer hundreds of questions all of which he will answer b y
saying, "I am not answering that question because it is
prejudicial".   What do you feel about that?

   HR. ISAACS:    What will happen is this, let us say it is
my learned friend and he will ask a question which he
believes does not have the tendency to incriminate. Either
yourself or Hr. Duckenfield or myself will say, "We take the
view that it is".   The Jury will go out.  There will be some
legal argument. There will be some reference perhaps to some
parts of the evidence he.has given.   That matter having be e n
resolved the Jury will come back in.   The next question will
be asked and exactly the same thing will happen.   I can
foresee unfortunately that one will have a morning, a day,
two days or three days and after every question that is asked
the Jury will go out, there will be legal argument and so it
will go on.




                       /With respect, sir
                                                                        S3




With respect, sir, that cannot be right, and however mu c h
you, sir, woul d like to see him here, unfortunately the
very nature of the difficulty that he is in, and I stress
against tie i»;cki>round that he does not accept that he has
committed any wrong-doing, but that others may take a
different view, that in those circumstances, and I say
this advisedly, the compromise that seems to have been
accepted is one which should commend itself to you, and
overcome what I appreciate to be your natural reluctance
not to call, even to say, "What is your name?", a chief
player.   Sir, that is th-5 only way that I can put it, but
I do hope tnat perhaps Soth myself and Mr. King can manage
in the event to persuade you to take the course which is
now being put forward, -loth of us no doubt for different
reasons but, having said tnat, reasons that are to each
o:.hec reasonably cogent.

        TH., C O N N E R :         Did you want, to say anything more, Mr.
King?

        HR. KING:            No.

     T H H COilvHJEK:              Did you want to say anything, Nrs.
McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    I thin!: it wo u l d be useful to use the
transcripts from the T a ylor Inquiry but w e all k no w that
the Tayl or Inquiry was never to blam e anybody, it was a
different sort of inquiry to this one, but-it would be
better than nothing, I think.       Rather than have nothing at
all I woul d be happy w i t h that.

     T H E COitONER: v ou are going al ong wit h what is being
proposed as the best?

      HRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, but I really would prefer ?lr.
D uckenfield to appear    in person so that Icould put
questions to him, not     in an incriminatory  way, just to
speak to him.

      T H£ COilONER:        I think I ought to say that I know
Lord J <J S^ice T a y l o r said that he was not going to blame
anybody.     In fact, it        is only fair to say    that an inquest
is in exactly tne same situation.           We are not here to
blame people we are here to enquire into how a deceased
person died and, in fact, the rules I h a v e already
referred to ex pressly say that you mus t -not give a verdict
which in any way blames somebody, and I wo uld follow that
ruling ex ceedingly strictly,, I can a ssu re you of that.            I
appreciate that you may „*ant to ask the questions as
gefTCly as possible but that is not, in fact, the issue.
The issue is not w hether you are a sk ing a que stion nicely
or nastily, but wnat is the content of the question, and
does it tend to increase the risk even b y a little bit
t»iat a person might be prosecuted.          Th a t is the point.    It
                                                                 94




is -ot now you ask t ;e question, wnich I an sure you uill
do in a ladylike manner, but that is not really the issue.

      HRS. McBi’IEN:      I think that he would be able to give
u.i far more i'.ifo-'ination about that day than anybody else
as :e ;as . ie prime actcr.

       TM." CO:!ONEH:      Yes, but Mrs. HcBrien, I thin’< it is
only fair to sav, as I have already indicated, it is, in
fact, practic llv impossible to frame a question, to put
•. ’e question wiece a person is in tiie position of Chief
Superintendent D u c k e n f i e l o , which is not incriminating.
It may .iot he incrimi.nting but it is almost impossible to
frame it and tfte point is that he does not have to answer
that question,      >.<‘aet ler it is incriminatory or not, you
c'.inot dra- a conclusion from it.            If I ask a driver,
"Were you doing 40 miles an nour in a 30 miles an hour
area?", h: can say, "This is an incriminatory question, I
an .ot ;i:swe;*ing it".        You cannot «iraw the conclusion that
h    was doing 40 mile.* an hour from that.          He might have
been hut ne might not.          He might just not want to answer
t:ia question and t lere is no w.-iy of finding out, not in
this Court, and that is t le difficulty in this situation.
It is a difficulty' wt i c h is almost insoluble I think.

     r.:RS. McBKlEHs   If I formed some questions and handed
turn tr>. you for you to look at ...?

     *!•£ CO.UmER:   You could do it but it won't make any
differenc . You would be a ver.’ clever lady if you could
think of a que stion which actually gave you an answer.

      MRS. McSRiEi’:     I would not be recriminatory.

       .iiE CO.IONER^   Th a n k you, Mrs. McBrien.

       You will have guessed that ay inclination h a d been to
turn your request d own from what I nave said, but on tne
o:. ?ar hand I h a v e to take into account what Mr. K i n g has
said, and I have heard, of course, what Mrs. M c 3 r ien has
said and I have to take that into account as well, though
it is clear, I am sure, to you that ay experience is
similar to yours, tnat it is exceedingly diffic ult to
 ictu-illy formulate t ie questions in a meaningful sort of
w y.

        I know you won't be here tomorrow .but I am still
 ::oing to       cfer a -ecision for a day or two.     We are not in
 a hjrr      in t 13 sea.»a that he is coming tomorrow.        It will
 be, I an afraid, several weeks before we actually get to
-trie c r u c i a 1 situ tion but I will think about it quite harr;
   oca-jse obviously if it is acceptable to everybody t.~®n
 tnat may w.ll be th* most convenient w?y irrespective of
 my :’orm-.l         -dice.  I appreciate it is a l i t t l e bit
 i~c ;nve ~ i e -t for you but I don't think I can do a n y t h i n g
                                                                      95




     Sout it.       I do think it is something that I need to
    c.s sidor.

            MR. !lA:»NIisG:     Per :a js just to follow from that, you
     n     :*!te that you will :;ive the decision w ;en you feel
    a ’le t - do so.      Can I ask a backwards way round assurance,
    it as .jot my intention to come tomorrow morning because
    t v d e o s are sonethi g with which I am familiar.           Could
    I he assured by you that you would not -;ive that
    ad j U': L :ntio : at 1-.’ o'clock tomorrow morn'ng, it would be A
    o ’cl ck?

         T i.. CO.'CHJEU: You c ? r . be assured of that and, in
    f ct, if it -vlll .ielp you I ^:11 say that I won't *ive a
    d cision at all and that I will let your instructing
    sol   ■nors of t!,e Of: cars involved ':now w?en I am ready
    t make a.*, a m-ju-ement, so that your instructing
    sol    curs and others can be iere.

           1M. ISAACS:          I am ver. grateful, sir, because I wss
    j;j~t oing i o ask if you could give us           otice then
    z rtai ly some arrangement would be made to ensure tnat
    your .‘.cision on this matter will be heard by somebody
    reoress.nting Mr. Du-i'<enfielrl.        I also ask tnis, that I
    ass.ime : lerafore that you will near no furtner s ubmi ssion s
    0 . t lis p s r t r c u l r matter without somebody being in
    attendance.        I assume t ’  .ere will be no more in any even t
    no..?
        /•


           T!,;: CO.iONErt:        Th; only submission, if you like, that
    1 would like to.near, and I don't think this will
    prejudice y o u r client, will be from ths represe ntati ves of
      .e o', '.er. p e o p l e w.io are in tae. same b o a t t shall we say,
    as t w n e thcr or not thay would go alo g w i t h the
    pro.ios^ls w h i c h have been made.

           Mrt. IS A A 5;   Clearly that cannot affect Mr.
    Duckanfield.       I was only concerned that you aay near - and
    I t w u ht you woul- no-., but may hear submissions ab o u t my
     •Pi)l:“ *»tion in ray absence or in tie absence of any ot.ier
    raprese.itat ive of Mr. Duckenf iel*.

          i;E CO.(,
                  j.,'ER:    No, that would not be my intention
    bcc:u e I q u i t e u d rstand this is an exceedingly
    im srtant m a t t e r for you and for t.ne other Officers.

          M;*.. ISAACS:    Effectively siibmissions on this point
     nn -ow he r     .ir~ad as clossd until y6u ma k e your
    d cisior.?

—            T:::. C»!ilOii£K:   Ye*,   that is ri.;ht.

           MR. ^AVWE:          I won er if I might just m e n tio n that
    t :are is a n o t n e r potential passenger in ttv? boat who has
       t been m e n t i o n e d so far and that is A ssistant Chief
    Co ••.stable J a : ‘
                       ,;son.    I just mention this so that you knov/


                                 CS
                                                                      96




that •■e may he a d -ad to lie group whose submissions you
w l l be c nsid r ng i; due course, when tne derision is
m - r e :bout r.-se position of iMr. Duckenfield.

      TMH COilONER:   Can we ju t make sure that we know who
. e ire    Iking about.    I ‘:now Hr. H.;le isn't tere but the
p'te-'.tia peo.Je w.. are talking about is Mr. Marshall, is
that rignt?

      M.'. P\Y E:    Yes, th = lis*. is Assistant Chief
C   o*able J =cks.:n, Superinten ient Greenwood,
Su •.r nt nd nt Mu r r y, Su,>er:rstend^nt, I believe, Marshall
an-i, of course, Mr. Duckenfield.

       TI!• COi'.OisI'R: And you. would want to add -lr.
iic-mings .orth and Mr. Smith, I take it?

      iiISS ADDLEriAN:      Tnat is ri^ht.

      a :iE   COKOr.'ER:   What about you?

         MR. CATCHPuLE:     Sir, as I said before, at the m oment
  11     I tan say, sir, is that we would like to reserve our
p o s i -ion.  It may wall be that for the purposes of iir. ...
King and tne families it would be better all round,if all
t;t«2 statements w e n t in from the .principal players but we
•le.'d to :\lk to o ur clients direct and also to have: ;
discussion b e t w e e n ourselves.                     i:-

      T ’V. COKOUEK:             You will appreciate that in respect of
quite a Tew of tne names that have been mentioned tnere
a.*e ver.- c o m p r e h e n s i v e PACE statements vnich, of c o u r s e , )? ,
_'ll be read .unyuay, whatever we do about it. 'i^hat'"do y o u
say t tnat, Mr. King?                 Suppose for a minute that all
tiese -olleaoues of yours said, yes, they think it is a
splendid id a of your.: and Mr. Isaacs, we will apply it to
  11 of • *em.       Wo u l d you accept it?

      !isi. Kli-G:   Si *, my position is I would have liked to
h :ve read out t ie whole of the Taylor Report and the w h o l e
of tie tr n s c r ipt and just submitted to law on you ,-so to :
that extent, sir, I would not object to that course.             1

     .Til.'. CORONER:      Than*< you.

      i1R. CATCHPOLE:    There was one point you mentioned
t-jat t :ere woul:! be some live evidence tomorrow.  Tnat
^ertalnly took me sonewhat by surprise and I tnink those
a-ou *d me as w.-ll*   I wonder if you ••••

       iHE CORONER;          Sorry about that.  \ i \ e n I <i*:ci ied to
scr.jp, if tnat is the ri^ht word, th.* summaries, or the
speoc.'ies or w h a t e v e r you like to call ther., I thought we
woul    ha.e a bit of time, so we are going to take tha
f i ‘st four p e o p l e on the list for Wednesday morning and
t ac will give u- a sli^htlv easier day on Uednesday, and


                            C3)
                                                            97




A:e have ,>ut it up at the back actually.   It is there.
That is wh e r e we are going to put the list.  We intend           to
put tne list up at the b 3 ck so that it is visible,   j

     So tna plan tomorrow is morning, videos, afternoon,
four ..it.iesses whose names I c a n ' t quite remember at the
moment•

     MR. KIHG:     T he four witn e s s e s at the top of the list
for Wednesday,   sir?

       TJICO ROWER:      Yes, I think so.  Certainly three of
*. era but we ma y have had to shift the fifth and the f o urth
arou d.       It is the top end of the.Wednesday list.

      I just vant to check one other thing. You         remember I
mentions'! the transcript?? to you at the business meeting?
We have henrd from three firms.        One said they d id not
w n t one, two said thsy did.       Is that correct?   It is no
use turning up tomorrow m o r n i n g and saying, "Yes, I did
w.nt a transcript".    As I e x p laine d to you, it is en tirely
up to you.   It does not make any difference to me w h e t h e r
you have tham or no;.

     HISS HAMPT'.'K: I thin: we would be a third firraJthat
would require a transcript.

      TH u COrtOMEft:   T h a n k you.  Ladies and gentlemen,   ;
thank you ver y m u c h indeed.      It has been quite a lopg'day,
as Mr. Isaacs said - interesting, in many r e s p e c t s . W e
trill adj ourn then.

(T.ie Inquests were adjourn ed un t i l   t*ie following m o r n i n g )




                      A
