/    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH     The Rt Hort Lord Ju stice Taylor
     STADIUM DISASTER
                                       SO Queen Anne’s Gate
P3

                                     . London SW1H9AT
                                       01-273 2 5 7 7 /3 6 0 2 /2 3 7 0
fM




     David Madel Esq MP
     House of Commons
     LONDON
     SW1A OAA

                                       Date 12 May 1989



              fw. K c \c ta ;
     Thank you for your letter of 18 April about the
     Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. Miss Bannister,
     in her letter of 24 April, mentioned that you/'
     letter had been forwarded to me as the
     Secretary to the Inquiry.

     I have shown the correspondence to Lord Justice
     Taylor who has noted it.




                                       R K          w w

              4                   R M WHALLEY
                             Secretary to the Inquiry
                        From   T   he   P   ki \   \ ti - S k cr k t a k y




                                                                              I   IOM E O lT I C l :

                                                                             QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                             L O N DO N SWIH 9 a T



                                                                             24 April 1989




            (\f' '   S^CKcJjii
   JSCa J




    The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter
of 18 April about the tragic events which took place at
Hillsborough.    I have forwarded your letter to Mr R Whalley,
Secretary to the enquiry, set up under the chairmanship of Lord
Justice Taylor, who can be contacted at this address, in order
that the enquiry may take into account the comments which you
make.   In view of the fact that your letter is principally
concerned with the handling of the Football Spectators Bill, I am
copying this correspondence to Mr Colin Moynihan's office at the
Department of Environment in order that they may respond.




                                                                  MISS C J BANNISTER




David Madel, Esq, MP
House of Commons
LONDON, SW1A OAA
                     H OUSE OF C O M M O N ^    • ,, ,',,c '•,$*$
                                                 9 O *
                        L O N D O N SW1A OAA




     I telephoned your Private Secretary yesterday t o
urge that furtuer consideration of the Football Spectators
Bill be postponed until after Lora Justice T a y l o r 'i-'
Inquiry is completed ana publisnea.

      Perhaps I might say in passing that I fully agree
with you wnen you said that the police inquiry was not
there to cut across Lord Justice Taylor's work but to
provide support.      I think that what policemen ov. duty
have to say aoout the oeaaviour of certain people outsiue
tne ground in trie half hour between 2.30 anu 3 p.u.. ,
ie k.ick-off ti;;ie, will be very very relevant anu important,
aowever, I do feel that either Lord Justice Taylor's
inquiry will ask. the foilowin0 question    or some oii
representing the oereaved will ask it - if the
Footoall Spectators Bill had been law and tne
iuemoership scheme operating last Saturday would it
have helped or nindered the situation?

     I fully accept that crowd control outside the ground
and safety inside the grounds can be very difficult things
to match together, and that is obviously what went wron?
last Saturday.

     I am not opposed to the Football Spectators Bill
in principle - I am a regular Luton Town supporter,
and so do not need to say more!   However I would urge
postponement because of the frightful events last
Saturday.

     Perhaps I wight add one more point, which I think
has already been mentioned by otners.   Were the p u d s
maar the Hillsborough ground open until 3 p.m. or not?
