&   HMCIC                                   .




    ACPO SUBMISSION TO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

    The main features of the ACPO submission to the enquiry are
    outlined below. There is no significant conflict with the Home
    Office submission, apart from the ACPO view that there should be
    special legislation directed against ticket touts prohibiting the
    trade of tickets for "all ticket" fixtures on match days. This
    was a point we made on the Home Office draft, which was amended
    to recognise that there was.a significant body of opinion which
    favoured such legislation, but without giving any commitment to
    introduce the legislation.

            1.   The early part of the submission deals with
                 current policing arrangements and the
                 background to establishing in 1979 the ACPO
                 Standing Working Group on Football
                 Hooliganism,
            2.   Recent initiatives in respect of intelligence
                 gathering at local and national level,
                 including the introduction of the National
                 Football Intelligence Unit, the use of CCTV
                 and the strategy of targeting organised gangs
                 is discussed in detail.
            3.   The current policing strategy of containment
                 and segregation is acknowledged as a possible
                 encouragement of antagonistic and tribalist
                 attitude between rival groups and to some
                 degree provides a framework for the "war
                 games” of determined hooligan gangs.
                 However, there is no suggestion that a better
                 strategy is available.

            4.   It is submitted that large crowds in a
                 confined space generates potential dangers
                 and that there can be no absolute protection
                 by engineering, safety measures or policing
                 as any disturbance in such conditions can
                 create shock waves in one part of the crowd
                 with unpredictable results.
            5.   Safety certificates involves the presumption
                 that segregated parts of the ground will be
                 safe for a given capacity. However, there
                 are difficulties where the area in question
                 is terracing. If it is a large area but sub-
                 divided there can be overcrowding in some
                 parts balanced by spaces in others. Better
                 alignment between queueing areas, turnstiles
                 and spectator areas is seen as the solution.

            6.   The provision of all seater stadia is
                 supported.

            7.   Attention is drawn to inefficient manning of
                 turnstiles and fraud which can lead to
        capacities being exceeded without police or
        management being aware. ACPO propose to
        enter discussions with the Football League on
        this issue.

        The designation of fixtures as "all ticket"
        with only approved supporters of the away
        side being allowed to purchase tickets has
        created problems. At such fixtures match
        commanders faced with a mob outside the
        ground have in the interest of preserving the
        peace let them into the match without
        tickets.
   9.   Ticket touts who sell tickets to anyone thus
        disturbing segregation need controlling by
        legislation.
  10.   Disparity between forces as to the rate of
        charges for policing is noted. Suggested
        that to standardise costing the possibility
        of raising a levy on persons attending
        football matches akin to the old "aviation
        security levy" at airports should be
        considered.
  11.   It is noted that the standards of stewarding
        varies, and that there is a lack of clarity
        as to the respective roles of the police and
        stewards. It is suggested that the police in
        appropriate situations take control over the
        stewards through their supervisory chain.
  12.   Certification of sports grounds needs to be
        placed on an annual basis.
  13.   The importance and difficulties of
        establishing effective communication systems
        are noted. However, it is recognised that
        the difficulties are technical in nature and
        with a sufficient level of investment should
        be overcome. It is suggested that investment
        in this area should be a responsibility of
        the football club and more clearly addressed
        within safety certificates.
  14.   Multi-disciplinary safety inspectorate should
        be established involving the police, fire and
        ambulance services as well as a structural
        engineer and a representative from football.




        TO HMCIC
July, 1989
 a




   L                      c'i




          ^CTiT'                               k~~
A is— 1




 /] -                     *


             ( - x- * -         jL-*‘ . - I*             —.-
                                                                  / ~
              c?L**r*~ / ,,             y/
                                             /^ ^1" C   ^ y ’


 :?5




                                                         f " 2.




                                                                        .4
                                                   WEST MERCIA CONSTABULARY
                                                   INSPECTION
                                                   SEPTEMBER, 1986.


9.    COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE


9.1   Early this year, one of the   two Superintendents in the Complaints and
Discipline Department was transferred to Divisional duties and he was replaced
by two Chief Inspectors, both of whom are assisted by an Inspector.
Consequently, the staff has been increased by a third,andthis has reduced the
number of complaints dealt with by operational officers annually from .29 in
1985 to .0 6 in 1986 which amounts to no more than two or three   per year.


9.2   In 1985, five hundred and fifty four complaints were made against
police officers by 308 complainants, compared with three hundred and thirty
nine in 1984 bv 240 complainants.   The increase of 215 complaints (63%)
