                                                               iN?mm
‘ E.R.                                                               Viv
i
                                               cc.   Ms Adams
*                                                    Mr Yates
                                                     Mr Chilcot
                                                     HMCIC
                                                     Mr Boys Smith
                                                     Mr Malone-Lee
                                                     Mr Sandiford
                                                     Mr Nagler
                                                     Mr Whalley
                                                     Mr Waghorn




         Mr Addison

    *      HILLSBOROUGH:   COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE



             I attach a further letter from West Midlands Police Authority
         pointing out that no reply has yet been received to their letter
         of 4 May and seeking a meeting with the Home Secretary. The Home
         Secretary has seen this and has asked that they should be seen by
         Lord Ferrers or senior officials. I should be grateful if Ms
         Adams could let you know as soon as possible whether Lord Ferrers
         is happy to see them. When this has been settled your letter to
         Mr Astling can issue, amended accordingly, since the Home
         Secretary has seen your submission of 28 April and agreed the
         draft subject to the views of Lord Ferrers and Sir Clive
         Whitmore. Neither had any comments on the draft reply to West
         Midlands. As you know, Sir Clive has, however, commented on the
         draft letter to South Yorkshire. I shall show the Home Secretary
         Mr Yates' minute of 4 May over the weekend and will let you know
         on Monday whether the Home Secretary is content for your letter
         to South Yorkshire to issue.




         Private Office                               C J WALTERS
         5 May 1989                           Principal Private Secretary
                                                               Council House
W est m i d l a n d s police aut ho r it y
                                                               Dudley
C lerk                                                         DY1 1HF
A. V. ASTLING LL.M.. M.Soc.Sc                                  Telephone: Dudley 456000


My Re(ercnc«:                                                   or
                      CT/EYP                                         s31 r e le a s e w o u ld p re ju d ic e th e a d m in is tra tio n o f ju s tic e



Y our Ke(crcnc«:




        Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd P.O., M.P.t
        Secretary of State>
        Hone Office,
        LONDON.




        4th May, 1989



        Dear Secretary of State,


         Judicial Review - Hillsborough Football Tragedy


         r «       writinz to ask if you personally *111 meet with a deputation from this
         i          I*.- «o a matter of extreme urgency to discuss the natter of the recovery
                                                            V lrt“ o£ u ‘ lOTOlT“ *ttt in
         the judicial Inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

         m i . request datives from a special aeetlng o{ th.                                         h e W thl» « m d n |


          in full for any additional costs it incurred in this matter.

         I thould b. glad If you would l.t «a haw, a. .ocm aa poaaibl. plea.e, datta
         tfien the Authority’s deputation may meet with you.

          Yours sincerely,




          Cleric




            3410a
