Miss Edwards
Legal Adviser1s Branch

HILLSBOROUGH: COMMENTS BY THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE FEDERATION

I would welcome your advice on a point arising from the attached
correspondence between David Alton MP and the Chairman of the
Police Complaints Authority. At the end of his letter to Sir
Cecil Clothier, Mr Alton asks what guidelines exist for the
publication of statements once a judicial inquiry has been
announced. In his reply, Sir Cecil has deflected Mr Alton to the
Home Secretary and I think we shall have to provide him with a
response.

2. I suspect that the answer to the question is, none. To be
perfectly frank, I am not sure where to go for advice but it
occurred to me that this is an area where Legal Adviser's Branch
may have some expertise. If not, please let me know by
telephone.




                                   E SODEN
                                   12 May 1989
F2 Division
        SIR CECIL CLOTHIER, KCB, QC                POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
        Chairman
                                                                                10 Great George Street
                                                                                    London SW1P3AE

                                                                            Telephone: 01-2*3   273 6450
                   David Alton Esq MP
                   House of Commons
                   LONDON SW1A OAA                                                  2 May 1989




*
                   THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                   Thank you for your letter of 19 April about the disastrous event at Hills­
                   borough.

                   This Authority has no statutory power to initiate investigations. The com­
                   plaints procedure begins with the recording of a complaint pursuant to the
                   Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 with the chief officer of the force of
                   which an officer or officers are alleged to have been guilty of misconduct.
                   Thereafter if the complaint falls into one or other of certain statutory
                   categ o ries, it must be forthw ith referred to this A uthority for possible
                   supervision of the investigation. Whether an investigation is supervised by this
                   Authority or not, the report of it will in due course be sent to this Authority
                   for scrutiny and for the consideration of possible disciplinary action. The
                   arrangements for senior officers are somewhat different.
                   I am not sure whether you are making a formal complaint as a member of the
                   public affected by the happenings at Hillsborough or as a Member of Parliament
                   representing constituents involved in those happenings. If the latter, then it
                   seems to me that Parliament is the proper place for raising your concerns.
                   Conclusions as to the accuracy or otherwise of the many words which have
                   been spoken and written about the incident at Hillsborough will have to await
                   the outcome of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry. I suggest that until that is
                   known, it is premature to make judgments about the police or anyone else.
                   I take the last paragraph of your letter as being addressed to the Home
                   Secretary, to whom I send a copy of this one.




    cc Home Secretary
       F2 Division
       Lord Justice Taylor
       All Members
       Mr Peter Wright
      Mr Geoffrey Dear
                  HOUSE OF COMMONS
                        LO N DO N SW1A0AA

                    David Alton's Office

                                                          19/4/89

 /*/
       <2
Y^ir Cecil Clothier,
 10 Great George Street,
 London SW1



            Cecil   ,
I am writing to request that you institute an immediate enquiry
into the propriety of the remarks passed yesterday by Police
Officers of the South Yorkshire Police Force about the conduct of
fans at the FA Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough on Saturday last.

Given that the Home Secretary had announced the judicial enquiry
into the disaster the day before, and the solicitor for 30 of the
victims' families had begun proceedings against the Chief
Constable and his Force these remarks should never have been
made.

By what right did Police Officers make statements calculated to
be prejudicial to the reputation of Liverpool football club and
its supporters, and which seem to be part of a smokescreen of
propaganda aimed at diverting attention from the truth.

Lord Denning once said that "be they ever so mighty they are not
mightier than the law". I trust that you will use your good
offices to examine how such statements came to be, and on whose
authority they were issued. Perhaps you would let me know what
guidlines exist.

What guidelines exist for the publication of statements once a
judicial enquiry has been announced. I am copying this letter to
the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd MP .




David Alton MP
