h s .10.13/appeals.dm


Mr Bolton



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:   SAFETY ISSUES - APPEALS

I have spoken to Peter Lee at DoE (SARD) . He tells me that their
submission has gone to Minister for Sport with a request for an
urgent response.     It is anticipated that he will take the
opposite view to that taken here. An opinion on the strength of
his opposition was not ventured.

DoE plan to table amendments to the Bill at the end of next week.
My feeling therefore is that we should perhaps now go back to
Ministers in anticipation of an expressed strong opposition by
Mr Moynihan. DoE's line remains unchanged and I cannot envisage
that their Minister will take a less strong view than that
already taken by officials.

DoE will contact us once their Minister's response is received.
If there is to be discussion between our two Ministers there does
not seem much time to exchange correspondence beforehand (I am
not sure from the note sent by Private Office whether the Home
Secretary envisages discussions with officials here or with
Mr Moynihan).

One further point on all of this is that our position on appeals
is not a new one.     The Home Secretary's acceptance of DoE's
proposal made last May (option C of the letter dated 25 May 1989)
was conditional upon "building bridges" and allowing for appeals
where there is conflict (S of S reply 21 June refers) .
Admittedly the concept at that time was slightly different from
what has since emerged. It might however be timely to remind DoE
Ministers of this.

I enclose for consideration a follow-up submission for Private
Office together with a draft letter which might be put to the
Secretary of State to send to Mr Moynihan or Mr Patten.




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division

13 October 1989


Encs


FEP/89 35/48/118
hs.10.13/appeals.dm


From:   P E Bolton                       cc   Mr   Yates
        G2 Division                           Mr   Hammond
        X3322                                 Mr   Boys Smith
                                              Mr   Turney
        13 October 1989                       Mr   Clayton
                                              Mr   Goddard
                                              Mr   Osborne
                                              Mr   Mould
                                              Mr   Lidington

Miss Dent
Ms Rex
Miss Nicholson



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:   SAFETY ISSUES - APPEALS

Miss Bannister's note of 10 October refers.


2.   I think we can anticipate opposition from the Minister for
Sport on the question of appeals raised in my submission of
6 October.   DoE officials advise that a response from their
Minister is still awaited but they do not anticipate that his
view will be different from that already expressed by that
Department.


3.   In view of the time now available to draw up amendments for
Report Stage of the Bill it may be timely for the Home Secretary
to write to [Mr Moynihan] [Mr Patten] to draw out the fact that
appeal rights are not a new issue and that it was always intended
that such rights should be built into the system now created.
This was made clear in the Home Secretary's letter dated 21 June
accepting the compromise formula whereby the Football Licensing
Authority (FLA) would take on certain safety functions.


4.   Unless therefore the Home Secretary is minded to concede to
DoE's wishes in this respect he is invited to write as drafted
within.


                                         P E BOLTON
FEP/89 35/48/118
hs.10.13/appeals.dm                         FILE NUMBER ..FEP/89 35/48/118.
DRAFT LETTER
ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE



TO                          ENCLOSURES        COPIES TO BE SENT TO
[Secretary of State]
[Minister for Sport]
DoE




                                           (FULL ADDRESSES, IF
( ^ i L POSTAL ADDRESS)                    NECESSARY)

                   LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ..Secretary of State...
                                                       (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                  As you know officials of our two Departments have been
                  discussing^ but have been unable to reach agreement on the
                  question of appeal rights against terms and conditions in
                  safety certificates on the direction of the Football
                  Licensing Authority (FLA).


                  I realise this is a difficult area and I shall not
                  rehearse the arguments with which, I am sure,^ ^ou are
                  already well aware.   I do wish to make the ^Iskew though
                  that appeal rights were always considered to be an
                  integral part of the arrangements which would be worked
                  up between our two Departments on the relationship
                  between the FLA and the local authorities responsible for
                  safety certification. I referred in my letter of 21 June
                  to the need for bridges to be built and for appeal where
                  there is conflict.   I had thought that you accepted the
                  need for such measures.    Admittedly all this was at a
                  time when the relationship between the new authority and
                  local authorities was still to be fully settled. T fot our
part we moved away from rights of appeal against the
imposition of all seated accommodation; and}we are not
proposing that an appeal right should exist for the local
authority against an FLA decision but rather a retention
of existing appeal rights under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act).


I do understand your concerns but I do believe that we
ought not to interfere with the existing rights of appeal
under the 1975 Act.    If our experience is anything to
judge by, provided the FLA acts reasonably, such,.appeals'
                                 I ifaTQvu.iA y*
should be few and far between and/would not undermine the
FLA's authority.


If you still feel strongly about this perhaps we should
meet quickly so that we can settle the issue in time for
the Report Stage.
