                           QUESTION                 ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground.
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject
of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                           QUESTION                 TWO

Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience. Intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions in the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would arise where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 7-15, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
                          QUESTION                 THREE

 Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
 thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
 not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
 before the 3 pm kick-off?


  Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
 the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray
 However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
 reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
 the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
 pitch, the option to delay became more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
 purpose for delaying the kick-off.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 16-41, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out. Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not, however,
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
control room.

227. The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it.
                                                                  G^v/jtvVVcna 3



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it.
                            QUESTION                   FOUR


  w L l idnK P° ' iCe r6C° 9niSe overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
  terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
  Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

  No information was received from any source to the effect that iiw «               „
  overcrowding or problems with density" in the c e n w pen" 3 and 4             a S
  Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
  and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him It would be fair to
 tSheyLaT * ie: fr0mthV,eVatedP0Siti0n0f f00tba"             c°mmentator J o ^ Mk^son in
 the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
 realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
 attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings



 OBSERVATIONS
 Please see pages 42 - 52, Volume 2.

 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

          ' m k tream ,rom ga,e C ,,ovve':l throu9h the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excess,ve a,r traff.c on channel 25. attempts could have been made to alert o S s
m th e * pe" meter *rack t0 watch for overcrowding and report their observations
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place fans
con^ro0! " 9 and Signa"ing diS,rSSS N°ne °f ,hiS was See" ” " c S i K V E

fh t5/ The 2? 0ffiC2rS detailed t0 the Perimeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246 The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)". At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowdina
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded o°
\                                                                            G^v/OLS V\'c/v\     (4




     unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
     consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

     247. "Senior officer" meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in
     charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
     players’ tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said.

     "I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
     were in danger. I'd then inform ground control and I would expect someone deDloved
     to the back of the stand.”

     That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
     one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
    that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated” with himself before opening the
    gate, thinking: "If I’m wrong, I'm going to get a right bollocking for this" Naturally one
    would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
    the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

    248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
    then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
    before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
    were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
    witnesses believed. They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
    Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
    pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front.

    249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
    problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

    27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
    pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
    importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected of takma
    appropriate steps to remedy it.                                        '


    Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

    204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding interim
    recommendation 5. That provided:-

      * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
    pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
    officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
    that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
    occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
    steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
    authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

    I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
    but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
                                                                           C ^   kaA's   YS u w



need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 11,12 and 16

11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.

 12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.

 16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
                         QUESTION                 FIVE

Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?

The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did not perceive
overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
down central tunnel.

The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to his attention by any other person,
consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down central tunnel.
On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on talk through,
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to close tunnel.
In 1988 the central tunnel was closed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

9.   Arrangements should be made:-

(a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
otherwise, and

(b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is
about to be reached.
I




                                QUESTION                 SI X

    Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of
    the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
    officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?

    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
    forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
    gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
    communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
    opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
    ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
    he believed correct in a crisis moment.

    Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
    However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
    concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
    disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
    ground.


    OBSERVATIONS
    This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
    gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
    considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

    Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
    the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
    control room for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
    and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
    there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
    screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That’s the gate
    that’s been forced; there’s been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
    later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans’
    account that the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had forced
    their way in.

    99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom.
    Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
    three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
    likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
    want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
    emergency operations.
                        QUESTION                  SEVEN

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.

Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the perimeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, nghtly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authority and they decided that the gates should
be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
decision to leave the gates.

Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
would have to travel some distance. If it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
been at ground very very quickly.

Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson's statement "that anyone who had
considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don’t think I am going to require a
lot of persuasion about that”.

When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
equipment.
                                                                                  I         "7



Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
'Breakin-Kit' on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement'. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 104 -137, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
example, the collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
 Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to
 conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been
 responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
 of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
 overcrowding. Certain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
 were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.


Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i O pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without success.
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

 104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open wherever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
                                                                           'W O W


Cutting Equipment

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind perimeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 17 and 21

17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.

21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fencing to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made - either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to clear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.

The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes clear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 138 - 148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minutes ticked past, some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

Fans

97. Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical
assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of
                                                                        C^\AJZ5V UV\


the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop.
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end.
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 57

Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                          QUESTION                 NI NE

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on
to the pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent
need of trained medical help?

The SYMAS ambulance located at the ground was for use in the event of a major
incident as a base for communication and not for use in the rescue operation.

Mr Hopkins SYMAS was aware of damage caused to ambulances who had in fact
been onto the pitch and of the problems encountered by the drivers of the
ambulances as they attempted to negotiate the ramp giving the only access and
egress to the playing area.

Mr Higgins SYMAS took the view that it was impracticable to take ambulances onto
the playing area due to the crowd and melee that was going on there. A bottleneck
would have been formed by there being only one route into and out of the playing
area. The evacuation of the injured and dead to the Gymnasium was carried out very
quickly and because of the involvement of the police and fans it helped the operation
of dealing with them more smoothly than if they had been dealt with in isolation out on
the pitch.

Mr Eason SYMAS describes actions taken by Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance
and preparing Gymnasium area to receive casualties.

The problems experienced with the only ramp giving access and egress to the playing
area, the crowd, the melee, in contrast with the speed in which the casualties were
evacuated from the playing area by the rescuers would indicate that the decision not
to allow the ambulances onto the playing area was correct.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 149-156, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15
April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was
proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
V
                                                                              vaP       cjvv    IO




                                QUESTION                 TEN

    Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


    Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
    gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
    were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
    them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
    This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
    gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
    conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
    many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

    Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
    parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

    In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
    saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
    would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
    cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

    Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
    Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
    valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
    recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


    OBSERVATIONS

    This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
    gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
    considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

    Please see pages 157 -159, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
    response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
    15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
    attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
    did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
    He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
    on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
    equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
    of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
    whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
    The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
    overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
     <                                                                            I Cfw I 0




milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
