 J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                      FURN IVAL HOUSE
 ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                Furnival Gate
   HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                              Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0742 727599
 WEST M ID LA N D S POLICE HQ                             S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE STA TIO N
 PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                   Liverpool L7 3PR
 Colmore Circus Queensway                                 Telephone: 051-709 7175
 Birmingham B4 6NQ
 Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025                      Your Ref:
 NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N
 Fowler Street                                            Our Ref:     JMJ/DH
 Birmingham B7 5DA
 Telephone: 021-359 3332                                  Date:        27 June 1989



 Mr R M Whalley
 S e c a ^ r y to Lord Justice Taylor
 c/o T w n Hall
 Sheffield




                             /

 TICKETLESS SUPPORTERS

 You will recall on the evening of Thursday, 22 June 1989 we discussed the
 above subject in the light of the "conspiracy" theory proffered by the
 South Yorkshire Police.


Over this last weekend I diverted my staff at Nechells from processing work
to reading 1,961 statements in order to obtain information about ticketless
supporters, and in particular to see whether there was a conspiracy to
force entry by any means at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.  This letter
records our findings.

We have found a total of thirteen persons who describe some kind of
               if en^ ° " to enter the ground without tickets (their statements
    attached).  In addition we found that many other statements identify
significant numbers of supporters without tickets.   I refer you back to my
letter of 12 June 1989 in which I highlighted our survey of 1,699
Liverpool supporters' questionnaires which discovered at least 136
supporters without tickets.

It is our view that many Liverpool supporters arrived in Sheffield without
tickets.   It is our contention that the number could be in excess of
2,000.   However, we do not believe that there was a major "conspiracy" as
such, rather a continuation of a well established practice by many
supporters to visit the ground for this particular match and purchase a
ticket.   Amongst these there will be a sizeable hard-core who will attempt
to enter the ground by fair means or foul, obviously looking for any
weakness in the system or the architecture which they can exploit to their
advantage.   No doubt the Liverpool supporters' experiences at the
Hillsborough Ground last year would be fed back to their "intelligence"
                                                     Cont....




                                              Sheffield
    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T
                                            -   2   -




      system and the word would quickly go around that "opportunities" were
      likely to exist this year. This would more than likely lead to plans by
      some to thwart the system but by how many is difficult to determine.         In
      sum, it is our contention that there was probably a number of small-scale
      conspiracies.         However, overall it is unlikely to be one large-scale
      conspiracy rather opportunism which collectively could be significant.
      Experiences at other grounds recently would tend to support this
^ ^ w i e w p o i n t , albeit the number involved at a semi-final will be greater than
      at most league matches.

   I also enclose a report which has been submitted to me by Inspector Sawers.
   This refers to the witnesses Ferguson, Duroe, Marjoram, Salt and Taylor.
   In addition, there are witnesses Piper and Kilworth.  Some of these are
   referred to in the South Yorkshire Police submission and in addition we
   have identified another.  Their statements are attached for information.

   I trust this is of assistance to you in considering the likelihood of an
   overall conspiracy theory.
                                                                            m«mo2/*«M v2/ 26.6.8e
                                                                                                WG401
                                                                                                 (3.89)


                                  West Midlands Police

TO        Assistant Chief Constable J M Jones (H I)
                                                                  REF
                                                                 STN/DEPT

FROM      Inspector 3451 Sawers
                                                                  REF          Sheffield

                                                                 STN/DEPT

          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE THEME - LIVERPOOL
SUBJECT                                                            DATE        26 June 1989
          SUPPORTERS CONSPIRACY


          I refer to the above theme which has been actively pursued by South Yorkshire

       •  Police and which is the subject of a further submission by them. In addition,
          I refer to High Priority Actions 1591, 1592, 1593 and 1595.

          On your instructions further enquiries have been made and statements, where
          necessary, are attached hereto. A brief summary is as follows:-

          FERGUSON and DUROE are work mates and MARJORAM a director of the company which
          employs them, and Stephen SALT.

          A.       FERGUSON was originally seen by South Yorkshire Police and a statement
                   obtained.   FERGUSON had visited the White Hart Licensed House prior to
                   entering the Pheasant Licensed House. In the Pheasant he drank with
                   DUROE and was later joined by MARJORAM.   FERGUSON states he and DUROE
                   spoke with two Liverpool Supporters but attaches nothing      untoward in
                   anything which they said.

          B.       DUROE was originally seen by West Midlands Police and has been
                    re-interviewed by Inspector DAVENPORT and DS BARKER. A short
                    confirmatory statement was obtained.

                   It was suggested that South Yorkshire Police may have taken another
                   statement but ignored its contents on the basis that it did not
                   support their theory. This is not the case, South Yorkshire Police
                   called on DUROE but, on the witness indicating he had already been
                   seen, the matter rested there and no conversation about his
                   statements' contents took place.

           C.      MARJORAM was first seen by South Yorkshire and the essence of his
                    statement is that he thought the comments made by the two supporters
                    in FERGUSON and DUROE’s company strange

                   "Dont worry about that .......... (the time being 2.45pm) ........
                   we know either a gate will be open or opened."

                    He does not however know anything which led him to believe that either
                    these two supporters did not have tickets or were part of any so
                    called 'conspiracy*.
D.       SALT was dropped off by MARJORAM at the Sicey Hotel prior to MARJORAM
         meeting FERGUSON and DUROE.  SALT is not material to this theme.

          The witnesses TAYLOR and PIPER are social friends and fellow golfers.
          Prior to keeping a golfing appointment TAYLOR called into the Sicey
          Hotel for a drink and listened to Liverpool Supporters talking.

E.        TAYLOR was first seen by West Midlands Police when he volunteered
          himself at Hammerton Road Police Station and was seen by DS McCOMBIE
          and a statement obtained. He was seen 4 days later by South Yorkshire
          Police and a further statement obtained which does not materially
          differ from the first one.

          He has been spoken to on the telephone and can add nothing to either
          version.

          PIPER had not previously been interviewed.  TAYLOR confided in PIPER
          the contents of what he later told police and a short statement is
          included from PIPER.

          Copies of the relevant licensee/staff questionnaires are attached.




INSJWeCTOR 3451 \
HILLSBOROUGH j u d     INQUIRY
