hs.ll.28/hillsb25.dm




                                            273 3099




Mr L N Bush FRICS, C.Eng. MIStruct.E,
City Building Surveyor          FIAS              APSU/CBS-77C/LNB/LS
Building Control Department
city of Liverpool, 5th Floor                       FEP/89 35/40/2
Kingsway House, Hatton Garden
LIVERPOOL L3 2AJ                                  28 November 1989




Dear Mr Bush

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:   INTERIM REPORT

You wrote to me as long ago as 3 September following our earlier
correspondence   about    football   ground   safety   and   the
recommendations of the Interim Report of the Hillsborough
Inquiry.   I think I mentioned when we subsequently spoke that
I had little by way of constructive advice to offer.     Even so
I am very sorry that I have not come back to you much sooner.

First, there is nothing that I can usefully add to my letter of
18 August about the recommended maximum packing density for
standing accommodation.   I think this subject is one which has
or will be touched upon in the working group to which you belong.
I am grateful to you for your comments about written agreements
between club and police.    I have passed these on to colleagues
here in the Police Department.

On the question of ambulance attendance at football grounds we
do support the recommendations. Attendance by a health authority
ambulance and crew under Recommendation 42 does not, I think,
automatically preclude any other ambulance from being provided, -
for example by St John's, supplementing the health authority
provision in order to satisfy Recommendation 43 of the Interim
Report.

Whether a safety certificate can lawfully contain a term or
condition stipulating that only a health authority ambulance must
attend is ultimately a matter for the courts. If, as I think is
implied by your letter, it is outside the scope of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) altogether, the subject
could not be addressed by way of an Order under section 15A.
Assuming such a provision does fall within the scope of the 1975
Act, any such Order would have to be able to be applied to all
the grounds of the class covered by it and would have to stand
the test of reasonableness provided in section 2 of the 1975 Act.
I do not think there is a duty on the Ambulance Service to
provide a, so to speak, standby attendance at a football match:
so to specify in a safety certificate that such an ambulance must
attend without allowing for an agreed, equivalent, alternative
provision might be considered, on appeal, as unreasonable if it
meant that, through no fault of its own, a club had to restrict
attendances solely for that reason.     Equally, of course, the
courts might well take a different view bearing in mind the
tragedy at Hillsborough and that a judge of the Court of Appeal
had (evidently) taken the view that such provision was not an
unreasonable stipulation when crowds of over 5,000 at assembled
to watch a football match, or indeed any other sporting activity
or entertainment.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        D J MOULD
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)



hcc   Mr Whalley
  V




                                              4t         OF                LlVJtiKFUUL                                     (&>
              Local Authority
                                                         L. N. BUSH,       F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng.. M .I.Struct.E.. F.I.A.S.,
      BUILDING                                           CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR.
      CONTROL                                            5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                         Liverpool L3 2AJ.

                       APSU/CBS-77C/LNB/LS               Telephone: 0 5 1 -2 2 7 3911      E xt:   3395
                                                         Facsimile: 0 5 1 -2 2 5 3 8 8 6
                                                         Direct Line: 0 5 1 -2 2 5         3395
      Y o ur ref:


                                                         Date:
                                                                        5th September 1989



      D.J. Mould, Esq. ,
      Home Office,
      Queen Anne's Gate,
      London,
      SW1H 9AT



      Dear Mr. Mould,

 ^fc.’he Hillsborough Inquiry - Interim Report

      I thank you for your letter dated 18th ultimo, and note its contents in respect
      of the two initial problems experienced with regard to recommendations 2 and 4
      of Chapter 24 of the above Report.

      In connection with recommendation 2, perhaps I ought to emphasise that the
      eighteen years' experience which I have had with the Liverpool and Everton
      grounds has taken full account of the spacing and strength of the crush barriers
      concerned, and I would still be happy to exceed the 54 persons per lOm^ which is
      recommended in the Green Guide.  Nevertheless, I appreciate that the politics of
      the matter might dictate a firm requirement for not exceeding that figure.

      With regard to recommendation no. 4, I attach hereto an extract of my own
      comments upon this, which were contained in an appendix to my report to the City
      Council on the implementation of the Hillsborough Report's recommendations.
      This explains the problems of principle in slightly more detail, and might be
      helpful to you in your further consideration of the matter.

      One further matter which is causing concern here arises from recommendations 42
      and 43 of the Report.  I would welcome your views on these problems at an early
      date.  Firstly, it seems doubtful if either of these two requirements could be
      enforced under the provisions of the existing legislation.  Conditions attached
      to safety certificates can only have as their objective the securing of
      reasonable safety at the stadium.  The provision of transport for persons who
      take ill or are injured at a football match, is really no different to that at
      any other venue used for public entertainment.  There must be many examples of
      other such licensed entertainment where the paying public are equally at risk of
      illness or injury as they are at football matches, given that proper attention
      is paid to securing physical safety and adequate competent stewarding.




            When calling or telephoning please ask for


NBEAAP
          ♦




                                                   2


          The Ambulance Authority is an emergency service which,, should be capable of
          providing ambulances required at any venue in their area when a disaster arises
          It seems unreasonable within the context of the safety of the public to require
          them to be allocated exclusively in numbers, at football grounds, and not at al
          at those other places.  This certainly seems to be a matter which requires a
          change in the legislation or the provision of an order under Section 15A of the
          1975 Act.


           You will be interested to know that what I have done here for both Everton and
          Liverpool grounds, is to.accept one fully-equipped ambulance provided by the
           St. John Ambulance Brigade, together with two other ambulances provided by the
          Ambulance Authority, situated near the ground.   The first ambulance is part of
           the service provided to the clubs by the St. John Ambulance Brigade for many
          years now.   It is paid for by the clubs, and the money received has been of
          great assistance to the St. John Ambulance Brigade in maintaining its
          fully-equipped ambulance, which is used at many other venues between matches.The
          attendance of the St. John Ambulance Brigade within the ground has always been a
          condition of the general safety certificate, but the provision of the ambulance
          has not been specified, and has been accepted by the clubs as part of the
          package.

          It has been agreed by all parties, although some friction has been obvious
         between the St. John Ambulance Brigade and the local Ambulance Authority during
         the discussions, that this ambulance satisfies the recommendation no. 42.    The
         provision of the additional two ambulances raises two issues so far as the clubs
         are concerned.   The first is do they have to pay for this service, and why, if
         it is not an enforceable requirement under the legislation, and included in the
         safety certificate? The second issue is whether ambulances provided at the
         ground ought to be furnished exclusively by the Ambulance Authority.   It is
         currently the case that the Ambulance Authority may be contemplating industrial
         action in support of a pay claim.   Therefore, if such action materialises, at
         any time, it is very probable, at best, that only genuine emergency work will be
         undertaken.   That has been the case on occasions when the Fire Service has taken
         industrial action.   In those circumstances, the football programme in Liverpool
         (.and indeed throughout the whole country) could be brought to a standstill if
         the provision of such ambulances was made a condition of the safety certificate.

         I am sure this last point will be a matter of concern for your Department if it
         is proposed to amend the legislation to include the provision of ambulances
         under the general need for reasonable safety at football grounds.  Does your
         Department support the provision of ambulances only by the Ambulance Service?
         Do you think that is likely to be part of any order made under Section 15A?




         City Building Surveyor.




NBEAAP
                                                       - 3 -

               Extract referred to

         *4    Implementation relies upon the Football Clubs and the Police
               However  the recommendation is a matter for some concern of the City
               Council because it implies a division of responsibility for crowd
               safety and control, which is not provided for, or envisaged, by the
                     h   k   tl0n’ The matter has been the subject of discussion
              and it has been emphasised that, in the absence of any delegation of
              t h r ? Q 7 S 8A°!J81^ :ll^ l e s.wl?lch clearly fall upon the Club, according to
                     1975 Act, the Certificate Holder and the Club must remain wholly
              responsible.         The R e g a l i t y of passing any or all that responsibility
                      t Poll<;e ’.whlch Lord Justice Taylor considered had been done at
              Hillsborough         is currently a grey area.         It is understandable that
              the Merseyside Police do not wish to alter that fundamental
                            r6Sp? f ibility, but at the same time, it is appreciated
               hat the Police uniformed presence within the ground, implies an
                               perh®?s .therefore an accompanying responsibility.
                °      ' l u ; ^ rad^tlo?ally emPl°y the Police, by private contract,
                 i®  f?,W i t1? k «eping 1*w and order in the ground.  They would need
              to be called if law and order broke down.      The arrangement probably
                  e from the fact that no other security forces were available when
              l r n n l T n ’r       T *      P? H c e ****** a public Presence outside the
              ground.        Correspondence is in progress with the Home Office on this
                          ^   City Buildin8 Surveyor will monitor this situation
              although the City Council is not required to take any action itself.




NBEAAP
h s .8.18/hillsbl.dm




                                        273 3099




Mr L N Bush
  FIRCS, CEng, MI STRUCT.E, FIAS        APSU/CBS -150B/LMB/LS
City Building Surveyor
5th Floor                               FEP/89 35/40/2
Kingsway House, Hatton Garden
LIVERPOOL    L3 2AJ                     18 August 1989




Dear Mr Bush

THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT

Thank you for your letter of 9 August about the Hillsborough
Inquiry's Interim Report.    I do realise the pressure which a
report of this sort places on those in local authority with
responsibilities for safety certification under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975.      We all appreciate the effort and
commitment which you and others are giving to the implementation
of the Report's recommendation as far as possible before the
beginning of the new football season.

Recommendation 2 of the Interim Report is, I believe, considered
an interim measure which together with other measures recommended
in the report is designed to maintain safety in the short term.
For our part we would not under any circumstances recommend a
calculation of capacity based on a density figure greater than 54
people per 10 square metres (now reduced by 15% in line with the
Interim Report). This is the maximum figure quoted in the Guide
to Safety and Sports Grounds and should be used only in the way
described in paragraph 221 of the Guide.   Any figure higher than
this would not be commensurate with the spacing and strength
specification set out in the Guide for crash barriers and, as a
result, would be liable to pose an undue risk to the safety of
spectators.

On the question of police responsibility referred to in the
Interim Report, the Guide makes clear that responsibility for the
safety within the ground       lies with the ground operator.
Paragraph 204 of the Guide makes it clear that to discharge this
responsibility properly a special police presence inside the
ground may be necessary.     The relevant recommendation of the
Hillsborough Inquiry takes into account the position found to
exist at that ground on 15 April where certain functions and
responsibilities were regarded as having been taken over by the
police.  What is important here is that both the police and the
club should have a written agreement setting out the lines of
responsibility for each and in this way avoid the confusion of
which you speak.

I am copying this to both Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs
for information.

                                      Yours sincerely




                                      D J MOULD
                                                                                                 i I AUG WHS


            M X                            /   Ci t y                     of                     LIVERPOOL
                   f first I Authority
                   Local     At l*lm   /
            BUILDING'                                                         L. N. BUSH,        F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E., F.I.A.S.,

            CONTROL                                                           CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR,
                                                                              5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                              Liverpool L3 2AJ.
           Our ref:           APSU/CBS-150B/LNB/LS                            Telephone: 0 5 1 -2 2 7 3911       E xt:
                                                                                                                          3395
                                                                              Facsimile: 0 5 1 -2 2 5 3 8 8 6
           Your ref:
                                                                              Direct Line: 0 5 1 -2 2 5
                                                                                                                 3395

                                                                              Date:
                                                                                             9th August,           1989

          The Home Office,
          Queen Anne's Gate,
          London,
          SW1H 9AT

          For the Attention of Mr. Mold

         Dear Sir,

         *The Hillsborough Disaster - Interim gennrf



         recommendations which°he r e j i g s I ^ t h l m i n i 1"*'*’ ** Chapter 24, a total ° f 43
         secure safety.  That a p p l i S pleas’      * ”                        ‘ fot th*           to
         Council's functions under the 1975                          the o f f lCer to whom the City

                             *.      current S       a   f    ^   ^   s   '     T      £     *    5       ^      “ Merton




                                                                                                              ^ 5' 6         2’'
     p r u c e 0fh ^ :                                                                  “- - - - " - " - v e t : : x r
     concerned.                                  1           SOme of ohlch                   applicable to the grounds



     c o : " u a ^ r : ! t \ ni^ i ; ; bs
                                        b% ^ n^ ? urir8           * » —    « » . in
     Meanwhile, I refer to S c ^ v e r ^ t L ^ U h ^                             i * * ” 1'*-
     morning, in which I expressed the view that som* of             °n        telephone this
     not possible to implement under the current le»iB?f#-*           £ ® commendati°ns are
     amended in 1987. restricts th* T n m i a «.*. • eglslatlon‘ The 1975 Act, as
     reasonable safety of spectators at f o o t b a l l ^ t0 certlfyin8 and controlling the
     recommendations move i^to the field^o? ^   ^    OUn? ‘ A n ™ ber ° f T a y lor 's
     that description must be applied to the      r f 3n convenience.    In my opinion
     imposes a density of packing on terraces o /        recommendati°n no. 2 which
     when the "Green Guide" itself specifies 54                           an^T                        46        persons Per 10m2»
     experience,        that a density of about 58 secures r e a s Z b l e ^ e ^ . ^                                      18 ^      '




                                                                                            Continued ....




            When calling or telephoning please ask for

NBBABE
                                                                                             /S '   N


 V
          S




                                                    - 2 -




       S‘p~-;S3S;:? gurstnsen -
      S   r     b^   hlS Ste"ards : the Polic“e role w ’ rests ” ith the Certificate
              . being to asaiat the Holder in that e n d e t , " ^ . 7 *” P<,id f°r by the


                                           wouldt^h* " ith ^    * • Hoid, and the
      earliest possible date, give f i r m „ -J   h °wever, urge that you should at ft,
     recommendations, so as to e H m i ™ t n £ T T ? " Pr°blems raised by £ v l o V s
     disasters like Hillsborough            ' ’° tC 0f '“"fusion which does le^d to

     Yours faithfully,




     City Building Surveyor




■E
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY                                WP 89 (M)1


NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM 749 THE HOME OFFICE ON WEDNESDAY
18 OCTOBER AT 2.00pm



Present:   Professor L Maunder (Chairman)
           Mr N Bush
           Mr W Carter
           Mr M Dickson
           Dr C Nicholson
           Mr B Stickley
           Mr J Sweet          (Secretary)

                                                      Action

Professor Maunder welcomed the Working Party
members and set out the background to the group's
establishment. He drew attention to its terms of
reference and members took note of Introductory
Paper W P (89)1. The wording of Para 5 (i ) of the
paper was thought unclear; HSE tests in Sheffield
had not shown, as the clause might be construed to
suggest, that a packing density of 54 persons per
10 sq metres caused discomfort.   Indeed, one view
saw that figure as itself too conservative; Mr
Bush indicated that he had, in the past, used
densities as high as 68 persons per 10 sq metres.
The Working Party recorded the view that packing at
54 persons did not cause discomfort.

2.   The Chairman confirmed that, not withstanding
the Working Party's terms of reference, the group
ought to look at other issues where appropriate.
More particularly, it was open to the Working Party
to recommend making the Green Guide (or elements of
it) mandatory. Crucial issues to be addressed
included packing density, crush barriers, tunnel
gradients, corrosion, perimeter fencing and gates,
and in that context, reasonable safety, rather than
spectator comfort, was the guiding principle.

3.   Discussion covered the history of the Green
Guide;  the incremental nature of its development;
and the contrast between those aspects dealing
primarily with crowd control and those dealing with
crowd safety. The Working Party was concerned
primarily with crowd safety.  It was felt essential
that the Guide be written in a way which promoted
uniform interpretation. The impact of the Football
Spectators Bill, were it to become law, was
unknown, but the Working Party recognised that both
uniformity of interpretation and monitoring might
be improved under the auspices of the Bill's
proposed licensing authority. The roles and
                                                       Action

inter-relationships of the various licensing
bodies, though central to any revision of
practices, were accepted as falling outside the
Working Party's brief.

Agenda Item 2 - Interim Report

4.   The following recommendations (set out on pp
57 - 60 of the Interim Report) were those which the
Working Party agreed to concentrate on:

  Nos.   1-3, 7, 8, 10-12, 18, 19, 22, 31-33 and 40.

The list, though not definitive, emphasised those
areas where the Inquiry had touched on technical
issues.

Agenda Item 3 - The Green Guide

5.   It was accepted. that although the Working
Party should not seek to re-write the Guide
wholesale, it was right to ensure that ambiguities
were removed. The following Chapters warranted
particular consideration:

     Chapter 2   -    particularly parts of para 29
     Chapter 3   -    particularly paras 30-35
     Chapter 4   -    particularly paras 36-39
     Chapters 5 - 1 2
     Chapters 15 - 17
     Annexes   A & C

Agenda Item 4

6.   Given the pressures under which both the
Working Party and the Inquiry were working, it was
essential to capitalise on the members' own skills
and expertise.  It was vital to ensure that the
Working Party meetings maximised use of the limited
time members were together. To that end, it was
agreed that members would address particular issues
in advance of the next meeting, and prepare
preliminary papers for discussion. Members would
not be precluded from discussing any areas of
interest, but it was advisable to assign specific
responsibilities if the necessary progress was to
be achieved.

7.   It was therefore agreed that Dr Nicholson and     Nicholson/
Mr Dickson would examine those parts of the Green      Dickson
Guide dealing with structures and layout (Chapters
4, 9, 15 and Annex C), Mr Bush and Mr Carter with      Bush/
those on flows (Chapters 5-7, 10, 14 and 17), and      Carter
Professor Maunder and Mr Stickley with those on
capacity^ terracing and miscellaneous matters such     Maunder/
as fire (Chapters 8, 11, 12 and 16).                   Stickley
J




    8.   The primary aim would be to highlight those
    aspects requiring greater clarity, particularly
    given the possibility that the Guide might at some
    stage be made mandatory.  It was essential to make
    clear to non-expert readers of the Guide precisely
    what was expected of them when applying its
    recommendations. As an illustration, there were a
    number of respects in which para 119 and the
    ensuing table were unclear, or where explanations
    of the rationale behind the figures were lacking.
    The members agreed it was unnecessary for
    individual papers to resolve outstanding issues in
    advance of the next meeting; rather, their purpose
    was to focus discussion by highlighting problem
    areas.

    9.   It was agreed to circulate the following            Sweet
    documents to members:

          i.    Professor Canter's paper of 2 October to
                the Inquiry on aspects of crowd
                psychology;

          ii.   Mr N Bush's paper of 26 May 1989;

          iii. Mr W Bullogh's note of 17 May;

          iv.   the Building Research Establishment paper
                of 18 May;

          v.    Mr J Korff's letter of 18 May;

          vi.   the fifth draft of the Institution of
                 Structural Engineers "Appraisal of Sports
                 Grounds" [made available at first
                meeting];

          vii. bibliography of relevant articles and
               research papers prepared by the
               Institution of Structural Engineers
               [circulated at first meeting];

          viii Sheffield Wednesday Safety Certificate;

          ix.   list of those firms carrying out barrier
                 testing at football grounds;  and

          x.    the Scicon Report on fire safety/flow
                 rates [to follow].

    Agenda Item 5 - Any Other Business

    10.   There was no other business to report.
Agenda Item 6 - Date and Place of Next Meeting

11.   The following meetings were agreed:-

      i.    Thursday 2 November at 11 am at the
            University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
            (precise details to follow).               Sweet

      ii.   Tuesday 7 November at the Home Office,
            Queen Anne's Gate, commencing with a
            buffet lunch at 1pm (subject to progress
            at meeting (i) above).

      iii. Tuesday 28 November at 11am at the
           University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
           (precise details to follow).                Sweet

Agenda and papers will be distributed in due
course.




23 October 1989
                 UNIVERSITY OF SURREY,
t                 Guildford Surrey GU2 5XH
                  Department of Psychology
                                                Telephone (0483) 571281
                                                Direct Line (0483) 50917&
                                                                                        Telex 859331
                                                                                        Fax 0483 32813

                 David Canter, Head of Department and Professor of Psychology
                 Harry McGurk, Professor of Developmental Psychology
                                                                                                 U          to

                                                                                                 irjK   ft 06^
    2nd October 1989                                  Cc           PoU ?
                                                                                    ^     Oiv.
    Mr R M Whalley                                           H . 3©Vvw.ww           J                   ^
    Secretary to the Inquiry
    Inquiry into the Hillsborough                                    Mcu^-dUy
    Stadium Disaster
    50 Queen Anne's Gate                                   ^ IN*    &ltAA-
    London SW1H 9AT                                                             -        R(NKv4
    Dear Mr Whalley,                                                                        "           ^ 1

    Further to your request of 20th September 1989, enclosed are some notes on the issues
    as I see them in relation to Crowd Behaviour. I have deliberately been as succinct as
    possible, given the amount of documents you will be reading. I hope my notes are not
    too cryptic as a consequence.

    If you require any further assistance do let me know, but as you will see I do think
    that this is an enormous topic with very little scientific information to draw upon.
Yours sincerely,



Professor David Canter
Head of Department

Encl.




                                                 1
                   HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY




                       Comments on Crowd Behaviour from
                       Professor David Canter
                       University of Surrey




  LACK OF RESEARCH

  1. Despite the distressing regularity of major inquiries into aspects of crowd safety and
  control throughout this century there has been remarkably little systematic, scientific
M tudy of crowds and how to control them effectively. What knowledge does exist tends
^ to be ad hoc personal experience of police officers.

  2. The few studies that have been carried out tend to have focused on limited issues in
  haste for major inquiries, (e.g. the work of Scicon following the Ibrox Disaster Inquiry,
  the work of Canter et al for the Popplewell Inquiry).

  3. Clearly, then, a significant issue is to encourage the support of wide ranging studies
  of crowd behaviour by competent behavioural scientists.


  WHAT IS KNOWN

  4. Such studies can build upon the following areas in which there is some systematic
  knowledge.

         a)    Flow rates can be predicted in general terms.

         b)    Basic maximum capacities can be established as a consequence of
               assumptions about flow rates, but the densities used as calculations are for
               extreme circumstances not for the normal conditions.

         c)    Although often ignored, there is a general understanding of the difficulties
               that disabled people experience in crowds and how to design for these
               people.

         d)    There is some preliminary understanding of how to communicate with
               large crowds and of the processes that are likely to make crowds difficult
               to control.
  MATTERS REQUIRING URGENT CONSIDERATION

  5. Differential Ingress and Egress

  Current calculations usually take the capacity divided by exit unit widths in order to
  calculate crowd flows. This assumes people divide themselves evenly between available
  exits or entrances. They do not.

  6. Differential Densities

  Variations in crowd density are likely to be a natural product of various sociol-
  psychological processes. This should be planned for in capacity calculations and crowd
  management procedures.

0 7 . Crowd Characteristics

  The large differences between types of crowd needs to be systematised and allowed for,
  overtly, in management and planning. This will have direct implications for flow rates
  and densities.

  8. Waiting Times

  The Scicon study on crowd waiting in enclosed areas and possible turbulence, is by
  their own admission ambiguous and flawed. Yet it guides many regulations. The
  control of slow moving, static or waiting crowds needs urgent analysis.

  9. Communication with Crowds

  A set of clear guidelines on the most effective way to communicate with crowds under
  various circumstances need to be established. This should not be left to "common
  sense" and the personal style of the person who happens to be near a microphone, for
  example. Who should communicate, when, where and how all needs to be set down
  for varying circumstances.

  10. Information Systems

  The maintenance of consistency across all forms of communication and signposting is
  already indicated in your interim recommendations (e.g. recommendation nos. 22, 23
  and 24). What is involved in establishing a comprehensive consistency now needs to
  be elaborated.

  11. Training for Crowd Management

  Procedures need to be established as to the best ways to train police, club management,
  stewards etc to recognise and act on appropriate crowd cues. I have already had police
  forces in touch with me asking for help for example, in relation to recommendation 6,
  in recognition of crowd densities and dynamics.
12. Public Expectations and Attitudes

As considered in our book "Football in its Place", which has been sent to you, a focal
issue is the expectations that members of a crowd have about a public event. The role
of the police and club management in this are crucial. At present most actions support
a fortress attitude with expectations of anti-social behaviour. If there is not to be a
need for another inquiry in a few year's time this attitudinal/educational issue must be
addressed directly.



BRIEF RESUME OF PROFESSOR CANTER

Professor David Canter is Professor of Psychology and Head of the Department of
Psychology at the University of Surrey. He is internationally known for his work in
Environmental Psychology and his studies of human behaviour in fires and emergencies.
I
He is Fellow of the British Psychological Society and the American Psychological
Association and the British Institute of Management. He is the founding editor of the
Journal of Environmental Psychology.

He carried out a series of studies on major fires and other small domestic fires, for
many years for the Fire Research Station. As a result of this work produced a book,
published by Wiley in 1980 entitled "Fires and Human Behaviour". He has also
published a number of papers on this topic and given many presentations at national
and international conferences on the topic.

He was appointed as a technical adviser to the Popplewell Inquiry into Crowd Safety at
Sports Grounds and the King's Cross Inquiry.

He had produced 14 books and over 100 articles in technical and learned journals.




                                           3
         FA
         T J K w LocalAuthority
         BUILDING
                                  CITY        OF                LIVERPOOL
                                                L N. BUSH, F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E.. F.I.A.S.,
                                                CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR,
         CONTROL
                                                5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                Liverpool L3 2AJ.   Direct Line 225 3395
                                                               227 3911
                         APSU/LNB/LS             Telephone: 051X2QBCSE81          Ext:     o395
         Our ref:                                Facsimile: 0513 S O T W        225 3886
                                                 Date;   26th May, 1989
         Your ref:




                                                                         /iu
         The Secretary to the Hillsborough Inquiry,
         Room 662,
         50 Queen Anne's Gate,
                                                             1■ £
         London,
         SW1H 9AT
                                                           l      ?v4 |W <.U                  {    ^
         Dear Sir,                                          ^            JC        Cv_..

         Hillsborough Disaster

         I understand that Lord Justice Taylor wishes to receive submissions, in
         connection with the above, from experts in safety at football grounds,
         which might assist h i m in making recommendations to avoid a repeat of the
         above tragedy.   Accordingly, I am concerned to provide him with any
         assistance, advice, or infonnatior I can, as a result of my own experience,
         in the control, of such safety.   The City Go „cil, by which I am employed;
         has instructed me to assist the Inquiry and any of those legal experts
         concerned with it, in any way possible.

         I have discussed the Hillsborough tragedy with a local group of
         solicitors acting in the matter, which they call the Hillsborough
         Steering Committee.  The Chairperson of that Committee, Miss E.M. Steel
         of Messrs. Cuff Roberts North Kirk, Solicitors, of Liverpool, thought it
         imperative to produce a statement from me, some few days ago, to be
         placed before the Inquiry, before a certain deadline for witness
         statements expired.  You will therefore have had such a statement
         covering the matter generally, which I hope you will find helpful.   In
         making this further submission, I want to concentrate more on the kind
         and standards of safety precautions which I consider ought to be taken,
         that appear to me to be relevant to the causes of the many deaths at
         Hillsborough.

             urs faithfully,




                    Building Surveyor.




NBAABJ
  SUBMISSION OF LESLIE NORMAN BUSH




  1.     My qualifications as a Chartered Surveyor and Chartered Structural

         Engineer will be seen from the letter enclosing this submission. - I have

         been employed by Liverpool City Council for over 38 years, in the City

         Building Surveyor's Department, which is responsible for enforcing

         statutory standards of design and construction for buildings and other

         premises, both for general use and for those specific purposes which

         require a formal approval, certification or licence.    During the last 21

         years of that employment, I have been concerned personally with the

         suitability of such special buildings and premises.     That work has

  ^      included advising the City Justices on suitability for licensing premises

         under the Licensing Act 1964 and the Gaming Acts.    I also advise the

         Licensing Sub-Committee of the City Council, which licenses places of

         entertainment.




  2.     Through that last-mentioned Committee,   I presently have delegated to tne

         the City Council's duties set out in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act

         1975   including maintaining up-to-date Safety Certificates and all the
  f
         necessary monitoring of compliance and any enforcement necessary in

         respect of the two large and well-used First Division football grounds of

         Liverpool and Everton.   Prior to the City Council acquiring full respons­

         ibility for this matter, on the abolition of the Merseyside County Council

         in March 1986, I had been concerned wth both of those grounds since 1971,

         when at that time the clubs themselves were responsible for providing a

         form of Safety Certificate to the Football League, and had been encouraged

          to involve Local Authorities in that responsibility.    Thus when the Act of

          1975 was passed, and preparations were being made to certify those two

         grounds, arrangements were made with the County Solicitor, who was




NBAABE
delegated the responsibility by the County Council,              for my Department to

continue to take care of the design, construction and maintenance of

facilities in the interest of the safety of spectators.




I was not at the Hillsborough Ground on Saturday 15th April last, but

followed the events by radio and television from about 3.00 p.m. through

the remainder of that day, and ever since.              My Principal Assistant - Mr.

                   ~|- who has submitted evidence to the Inquiry through West

Midlands Police, was present, and on the following day, Sunday morning, we

discussed the disaster on the telephone, and he made arrangements with the

Police at Sheffield for us to visit the ground late that afternoon.               We

were shown to the ground by Superintendent Murray, who told me that he had

been in the Police. C o n t r o l R o o m ,   situated overlooking the Leppings Lane -

end of the ground.         I spent several hours looking round the relevant areas

to familiarise myself with the layout and facilities.               I have returned to

Hillsborough on two further occasions, on Wednesday 19th April and again

on Friday 19th May, with a party of City Councillors who were members of a

working party dealing wth the effects of the Hillsborough Disaster on the

local community.




Immediately before my second visit to the ground,              on the 19th April, I

joined in a meeting with Sheffield City Councillors and Officers, which

had been arranged to establish contact and to clarify some of the

questions which had arisen about the circumstances of the disaster, as far

as that was possible in the prevailing atmosphere at that date.               As a

result of those visits and the contact with Officers of Sheffield Council,

I have had prepared a diagrammatic drawing of the whole of the

Hillsborough Ground and a larger scale drawing of the relevant West End,


between the pitch and Leppings Lane.               A copy of both those drawings is
attached to this submission, and it is upon the information contained on

those that I base some of my observations which follow.




In addition to the above, I have discussed the disaster with a number of

eye witnesses,   including two others of my staff, apart from my

Assistant Mr.              One of those,                      was seated with

            in the North Stand when the disaster occurred, and the other,

                     was in one of the fateful enclosures at the West End,

but fortunately escaped serious injury by being helped and hauled up from

the back of the terrace,    into the seated area of the West Stand.




From the above knowledge and experience,       together with my understanding of

the pattern of events leading te m e       loss of life at Hillsborough; I feel

it may be useful to explain how the relevant safety factors have been

dealt with by me at the Anfield and Goodison Park football grounds.          At

the same time, I would comment on any significant differences between

those practices and the ones apparent at Hillsborough.




It seems absolutely clear that the prime cause of the deaths and injuries

on the two centre sections of terraces at the West End at Hillsborough was

the gross overcrowding of those areas.        I believe that the General Safety

Certificate for the ground permits a capacity of 1,100 spectators in each

of the two spaces concerned, and that that is based on the area available,

approximately in accordance with the recommendation of the Guide to Safety

at Sports Grounds, which is the Code of Practice produced by the Home

Office to assist in the administration of the 1975 Act.        That "Green

Guide" recommends a density of no more than 54 persons per 10 sq. metres


in standing areas.    It is possible to pack a crowd to a higher density

than that quite safely.     That has been done on terraces at Anfield and
                                        -    4 -




     Goodison Park to some advantage,   favoured by the Police, because it

     reduces movement within those areas, and thereby assists in preventing

     misbehaviour in or by the crowd.   A density of up to 60 per 10 sq. metres

     has been found reasonable and acceptable.      A greater density, up to 70,

     tends to lock the crowd together approaching a solid state, but does not

     in itself, subject to the existence of adequate and well-positioned crush

     barriers, cause injuries, even during the excitement and tendency towards

     swaying, caused by the events of the football match.      Any further

     increases in crowd density, especially where the crowd is subject to

     further pressure, due to lineable gaps in crush barriers, or the sudden

^    arrival of more spectators on the terrace could cause injury.      If that

     figure is considerably exceeded, as Hillsborough has proved, pressures on

     spectators could become so high as to cause death.




8.   No doubt it will be possible to count the approximate number of spectators

     on the two central West End enclosures concerned, using pictures produced

     from still photographs and video recordings of the disaster.       I expect

     that such a count will show that the crowd was packed at a density of well

     over 70 at the material time.   I understand that a considerable number of

     deaths were caused by crushing within the tunnel/gangway which led on to

     the two terraces concerned,   through the West Stand.     Meanwhile,   the

     density of spectators in the other three areas of standing terrace at the

     West End and the North-west corner, appeared to me, from television and

     press photographs,   to have been very much below the maximum recommended

     density of 54 per 10 sq. metres.       Here again, I expect that an approximate

      count of persons present on those other terraces at the relevant time will

     be made from photographs and video pictures,      for the benefit of the


      Inquiry.
It is fundamental to safety that the numbers permitted into each separate

enclosure at a football ground, are best controlled by being positively

counted by passing through a turnstile, which gives access only to one

enclosure.    The counting at each turnstile should be recorded at one or

more central control points, and all turnstiles connecting with any

particular enclosure should be aggregated at the central counter or

computer, so that an accurate record is kept of numbers entering the

enclosure during the filling of the ground.    That arrangement should

prevent any spectator from entering a different enclosure to that

allocated to him by his payment or ticket and from changing enclosures

during his stay at the ground.    This positively prevents overcrowding of

any area, and such arrangements exist in Liverpool at the Anfield Ground

and also for over 92% of Goodison Park.




Any departure from these entry arrangements should be permitted only on a

small scale, and in very carefully controlled circumstances.     It needs to

be accompanied by a completely adequate and experienced club stewarding

and Policing operation.     That operation needs to include the constant

monitoring of the packing of those terraces not subject to positive

control through turnstile counting.     Such an arrangement exists, in a

small way, at Goodison Park for the Visitors'    terrace, which has a total

capacity of 3,700 standing.     That terrace is divided into two pens, one

being about one third of the total area and the other being the remaining

two thirds.    For most matches during a season, only one or other of these

pens are open, and then a count of spectators passing through turnstiles

 is possible to control positively the numbers entering that area.    When

both parts of the terrace are in use, some balance of packing is ensured

 because there are five turnstiles opposite the largest portion, and three

 opposite the other part.   It is however possible for persons passing
                                                       - 6 -



            through either of these two batches of turnstiles to make their way to the

            part not immediately opposite to them.             To guard against that causing

            uneven packing,          it is necessary to have Crowd Stewards with a full

            understanding of their duties, which includes monitoring the packing of

            each part and communicating to Stewards and the Police,            on duty in the

            Concourse between the turnstiles and the Terrace, when the entrance to

            either of the two parts needs to be closed, either temporarily whilst

            uneven packing is remedied, or permanently when one of the parts is

            considered to be full.




  11.       It is clear to me that the preferred arrangement,           of linking turnstiles

  ^         exclusively to each separate enclosure, was not practised at the West End

                of Hillsborough.       There are clearly insufficient turnstiles for the

                standing terraces at that end-of the ground, w h i c h l willicomment upon

                further later.       Therefore there is a positive need at this ground, because

                of the large number of 10,100 standing spectators, permitted to choose any

                one of the five separate pens at the West End, after gaining common access

                to the open concourse at the rear of the West Stand,        to monitor, direct

                and control the numbers entering each of those separate enclosures.            That

                calls for a thoroughly organised and adequate number of Club Stewards,

                assisted by a similar force of in ground uniformed Police.         It appears

                that no such provision was made by the Club in liaison with the Police, or

                specified to be necessary in the General Safety Certificate, for which the

                Sheffield City Council are responsible.




   12       i Stewarding at football grounds is throughout, a most important factor in
        *   !
                ensuring the safety of spectators.        It is a matter of detailed need, which

                was once generally neglected by the majority of designated grounds'

            L manag e m e n t s .   The work of stewarding was often carried out by volunteers,




NBAABE
                                                 -   7 -




         insufficiently instructed and briefed about their duties, and frequently

         neglectful of them.      It was commonly considered to be a convenient way of

         obtaining a free view of the football.            It was clear to me following the

         Bradford disaster and the Popplewell Reports,           that stewarding^ought to be

         covered very thoroughly and written into Safety Certificates in total

         detail.   Every steward should be physically capable and adequately

         trained, with regular updating,       to perform his prescribed duties.




  13.    At the Anfield ground of Liverpool F.C., which has a total capacity           for

         45,685 spectators, Pages 13-21 inclusive of the General Safety Certificate

         are devoted to this subject.      A total of 116 Stewards are required, apart

  ^      from the Head Steward, solely for safety purposes (more are employed by

         the Club for other reasons).     There are Exit Stewards, Relief Exit

         Stewards, Crowd Stewards-and Safety Stewards, each-given a% jobe*            c;

         specification and regularly addressed by the Head Steward about their

         duties.   In addition,    two meetings a year are held, when they are

         addressed by, and their work is fruitfully discussed with, an officer of

         my own Department and representatives of the Police,           the Fire Authority

          and the St. John Ambulance Brigade.         The General Safety Certificate for

          Goodison Park - Everton F.C.     -    which has a capacity for 50,059

          spectators, similarly devotes Pages 15-24 inclusive to the matter of

          stewarding, and there is a total of 115 Stewards employed, apart from the

          Head Steward and Exits Controller.         Again,   the Stewards are divided into

          four categories and each Steward has a job specification and is assigned

          to a particular location or part of the ground.           Twice yearly meetings

          are also held at Everton.     I think it would be useful for Lord Justice

          Taylor to examine the Safety Certificates for these two grounds,           to see

          these details,   in order that he may compare them with the provision for

          stewarding which was specified in the General Safety Certificate for the




NBAABE
                                                - 8 -



           Hillsborough Ground.




  14.       Where there is a large standing terrace which is sub-divided into separate

           enclosures or pens, and entry into each pen is left to the choice of

           spectators, I earlier explained the great risk of unequal packing, which

           demands careful attention by the club and the certifying authority.      That

           need is not confined to sub-divided terraces.      It is possible to get some

           degree of unequal packing on any large terrace, and the problem is always

            in need of attention.    At Goodison Park there is a home supporters'

           undivided terrace with a capacity of 14,200, and at Anfield there is a

            similar terrace (Spion Kop) with a capacity of 21,500 standing.     Uneven

 ^          packing in these terraces has occurred from time to time, and has been

            traced back to such causes as the preference of spectators for certain

           .parts of the terrace, and also to the popular choice of turnstiles serving

            the various points of entry on to the terrace.     Although, on such a large

            undivided terrace,    there is no physical restriction to the redistribution

            of the crowd, there is a reluctance by spectators to move if they have

      r     located themselves in what they consider to be a choice viewing position.

            That can have an accumulative effect, so that the mere reluctance to move

            can cause overpacking some little distance away, which can become

            uncomfortable and aggravating, but is not very likely to be the cause

            of any injury.

              X_______


     15.   What those experiences have pointed to, is the need for diligent attention

            to all possible influences on the choice of position by those spectators,

            from their point of entry into the ground at a turnstile,     to their final

            viewing position.     I have looked at these infuences in the case of the

            West End of the Hillsborough Ground, and consider many of them to be

            obvious with little experience and therefore worthy of attention, which it




NBAABE
                                              -   9 -




         is now apparent they did not receive.




 16.     Persons entering the Hillsborough ground to stand on any of the West End

         terracing, have to pass through one of the group of seven turnstiles

         allocated for that purpose, nearest to the River Don boundary wall at the

         Leppings Lane Entrance.   They are unlikely to be familiar with the ground,

         because the West End terracing is habitually used by visiting supporters

         That was the case at the F.A. Cup semi-final tie on the 15th April last.

         Therefore,   they find themselves in a large concourse at the back of the

         West Stand, and the only route on to the terraces which can be seen from

         that position, and is clearly signposted to lead to the terracing, is the

 A       passageway through the centre     of the West Stand, which is marked as

         Gangway 2.    In fact the pitch   can be seen through that tunnel, although

         because the floor first rises slightly and then falls ..rapidly, at.a

         similar slope to the terrace beyond,       they are not able to see the state   of

         occupation of the terracing.      There is no other readily visible way on to

         the West End terrace from that point.




  47.    Gangway 1 at the south east corner of that yard has a small high-level

         sign fixed to a column,which reads "STANDING",       in approximately 6" high

         letters, which might be noticed by anyone entering through the turnstiles,

          if they paused to survey the area.       It is not likely to be seen by persons

          in a hurry, or in competiton with the clear indication of an entrance to

          the ground through the central tunnel previously mentioned.        On the left

          of persons entering through the relevant turnstiles is a comparatively new

          brick wall, which although it is provided with a gated opening, the gates

          in which were fully open on the day of the disaster, has no sign inviting

          spectators to move through that opening.       On the whole that wall tends to

          discourage spectators from moving into the Northern part of the concourse




NBAABE
                                               - 10-



           at the rear of the West Stand.    However, one needs to move well into that

           Northern part, before you could begin to realise that there is a gap

           between the West Stand and the refreshment bars in the far corner of the

           concourse, which might well lead to a viewing area.        There would still be

           no visible indication of that by signposting, until you had moved further

           North to explore the possibility and had reached the North end of the West

           Stand building.

 18.       To expect spectators, hurriedly entering the ground through one of the

           seven turnstiles allocated for the West End terraces,       to find and use

           gangways 1, 3 or 4, rather than gangway 2, without signposting or positive

           guidance from Stewards, especially shortly before the start of the match,

 ^         is not reasonable.    Considering that that was readily appreciable with

           little expertise,    it is surprising that no remedial provisions were made

           before a full-capacity match.     Such provisions, o u g h t .to have included

           clear signposting, accompanied by a number of Club Stewards monitoring the

           packing of the terraces from the pitch perimeter,       in radio contact with a

           generous number of Stewards at the rear of the West Stand, to guide and

           direct spectators accordingly.     The Stewards at the rear of the stand

           would need support from in ground uniformed Police,        in case spectators

           were not prepared to take direction from Club Stewards.         This arrangement

           would have ensured that the two central enclosures, which is an area which

            is always most popular because it is immediately behind the goal and

            generally first to be filled, were closed to entry when they were safely


            filled.




     19.    I suggested earlier,   that one of the contributory causes of the fatal

            over-packing of the two central enclosures of the West End terrace, was

            the speed with which this occurred, around the time of the kick-off.            It

            has been established by video recording,     that this was caused by the




NBAABE
                                                 -11 -



             opening of the shutter gate alongside the seven turnstiles admitting

             spectators to those terraces.    That brought a mass of spectators into the

             concourse at the rear, who were faced with the situation described above,

             which led them, logically,   to the central tunnel known as Gangway 2.        It

             goes without saying,   that the opening of exit gates to permit an

             uncontrolled and uncounted surge of spectators into any ground should

             never occur.   Entry through turnstiles only, and keeping exit gates

             closed, to prevent surging entry,   is absolutely fundamental to safety.

             The opening of that same gate earlier,      to eject ticketless intending
*
             spectators who had climbed over the wall, which I understand has been

             shown on the video recording, must be condemned for the same reason.

             However, at least the final opening of the gate may have been justified,
    +
             in the opinion of a Police Officer who was attempting to control the crowd

             outside the ground, b e c a u s e of.a combination of.a.?isk of injury from

             crushing, due to the density of that crowd, and also because the

             high boundary wall to the ground, adjacent to the gate was thought to be           >

             unstable and possibly in danger of collapse.




    •2 0 .   I noted on my last visit to the Hillsborough ground, on 19th May, that a

             very extensive length of that boundary wall, reaching from the gate in

              question, down almost to the South Stand, had been thoroughly propped and

              held by raking shores, bolted to the wall and bolted to the ground inside.

              That would suggest that this wall had been confirmed to be in a seriously

              and extensively dangerous structural condition.      Having regard to the

              construction of the wall along that full length, and to the fact that

              probably there have been no unusual forces applied to that wall

              accidentally in the recent past, one is bound to enquire when the wall was

              last previously examined at a routine safety check.       The General Safety

              Certificate for the ground will no doubt specify the maximum interval




NBAABE
                                                - 12-



           between such periodic examinations.     I think it is relevant to ask why the

           wall was not found to be dangerous t9 some extent before 15th April last,

           if it is accepted that its condition was indeed a contributory cause of

           the disaster.




  21.      Another contributory cause of the disaster was the crowd conditions

           which developed in the Leppings Lane recessed area outside the ground.

           The disorganised massing of Liverpool supporters at this point has been

           blamed on a number of factors, none of which were exceptional or

           unpredictable,    in all the circumstances before and immediately preceding

           the disaster.     The delays involved in getting the large number of

 ^         approximately 24,600 spectators into the ground through a total of only 23

           turnstiles,    in that funnel-shaped dead-end condition, ought to have been

           the starting point *or t h e design, of recommended approach: routes, or         v   - >•

           indeed for deciding whether the ground was suitable for a full capacity

           gate at all.     It is relevant to note that this situation was worsened, by

           a deliberate decision to restrict entry to this area and to 23 turnstiles

           and not to use 10 other turnstiles in Penistone Road North, which were

           normally allocated to North Stand spectators.




     22.   The matter of access to football grounds is very relevant to safety, and

           Paragraph 5 of the "Green Guide" is devoted to the subject, albeit fairly

            shortly.     The rate of entry through turnstiles does differ widely, and

            depends on what has to be done by, and the speed of individual turnstile

            operators.     Entry by payment which involves giving change, can slow the

            rate down to as low as 4 or 5 persons per minute.     There are other

            influences;    for turnstiles which admit only O.A.P's., or parent and child,

            which tend to slow the rate down, or conversely at normal matches, season

            ticket holders may be moved through at a very brisk rate.




NBAABE
                                               -   13-




  23.    In my experience,    the maximum rate quoted at the end of Paragraph 47 of

         the "Green Guide" of 750 persons per hour (12.5 per minute) is not often

         achievable.     Most clubs,   including the two in Liverpool, have

         experienced staff responsible for ticket sales and admission fees

         accounting, who are very knowledgeable in this aspect of ingress to

         grounds.   They are generally members of the permanent staff, and

         therefore, although Hillsborough is not a ground which regularly

         experiences full, or even high capacity attendances, I would have expected

         advice on this subject from the club to have been sought by the Police

         responsible for any arrangements made outside the ground.




  24.    Spectators will not arrive two hours before a match, unless pre-match

         entertainment is -provided.,.JFox- an all-ticket-match,    tihere is an apparent- ... ,-■■■

         guarantee of a space, and it can be expected that they will arrive mostly

         in the last hour to half an hour before the kick-off, unless attracted in

         some way to come earlier.       I have noted that the tickets for the relevant

         Hillsborough match advised spectators to be in their seats only 15 minutes

         before kick-off, but gave no indication of what time they needed to arrive

         at the ground in order to do that.        The maximum rates of flow through

         turnstiles, which varies, according to circumstances,       from say 4 to 10

         persons per minute is only achievable when there is a steady queue

         outside.      It is not sensible to expect that 2 hours, or even l£ hours,

         before the kick-off.      Thus in assessing the total number of spectators

         each turnstile can deal with at a full capacity match, you should not work

         on full possible flow for the whole of the period they are open.           For an

         all-ticket match, a reasonable compromise expectation for the number of

          turnstiles needed would be 1 for about every 600/750       spectators.




NBAABE
                                             -   14-




 25.     The 23 turnstiles provided at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough were

         divided and signposted for use into groups, 8 for the North Stand, 8 for

         the seated West Stand, and 7 only for the West End terraces (including the

         North West corner high level terrace).        That requires passage by a total

         of 1,250 persons, 563 persons and 1,443 persons per turnstile in each of

         those groups, respectively.     The first and last of these figures are

         clearly very much in excess of those desirable and could be expected to

         produce a serious need for extensive crowd control,         including orderly and

         carefully kept queues, outside the ground.        Alternatively,     the above might

         have brought a decision to provide pre-match entertainment, or the choice

         of a better venue at another football ground.




 26.     My understanding is that queueing was not part of the organisation outside

         the Hillsborough ground- on- this*-occasion.     Th^rsfore,* ,t^ie.,$eed. to,*.open,,. „

         gates to ease congestion and allow ticket holders into the ground for both

          the North Stand and the West End terraces, was to be expected.             No mention

         has been made of any opening of the shutter gate adjacent to the North

          Stand 8 turnstiles, but I should think that this gate must have been

          opened also,   to admit the numbers required before kick-off.          There has

          been no report that large numbers of North Stand spectators were not in

          their place by 3.00 p.m.     Such an opening of that gate, whilst most

          undesirable as part of any thorough organisation, would not attract the

          same risks of overcrowding and/or injury within the ground.




  27.     The pitch perimeter fencing,    in front of the West End terraces have been

          blamed for the magnitude of the disaster.        They were not, however,        the

          readily avoidable prime cause, or one of the contributory causes leading

          to it discussed in the foregoing.      At Hillsborough these fences were

          difficult to climb.    Persons pressed against them, and the concrete




NBAABE
                                                       -   15-

i   *




              retaining wall below, for their full height, by the crowd behind,          found it

              impossible, generally,     to pull themselves up the fence and escape that

              way.    Gates in that fence are small and minimal in size and number and

              never intended to afford rapid evacuation of numbers from the terraces.




    28.       Such fences went up at most grounds in the 1970*8,when bad behaviour at

              football matches saw many incursions onto the pitch.           There was

              understandable fear for the safety of players and match officials, and

              some cases of rival fans clashing.           It is not practicable for stewards and

              Police to prevent a pitch invasion once more than a few spectators leave

              an enclosure.     The F.A. and U.E.F.A. reacted by pressing clubs for pitch

              perimeter fencing and disciplining clubs where pitch invasions occurred.


    «         Some clubs did not erect such fences, but massively increased their in

              ground uniformed Police presence.




        29.   This problem was identified         in both Lord Wheatley's and Mr. Popplewell's

              reports of      1972 and 1985.     They accepted their need, as the lesser of   two

              evils, but      said they should have gates or access points for use in an

              emergency.       The last report    urged a standard design and specification be

              prepared for them by the F.A., but that Association declined the

               responsibility.     Sadly,   it would appear that the need for such fences, to

               contain fans in standing terraces, remains as strong today as it ever was.

               Events at football matches since Hillsborough, point to that fact.          My

               only further comment on this matter is that gaps of good width are to be

               preferred to closeable gates. They can be used to allow Police, or medical

                                               quickly, and to remove sick or injured persons

               out.    In case of moderate local overpacking (mentioned earlier), they can

               be used to redistribute numbers at a reasonable pace. A reasonable number

               of in ground Police can stem a mass expdus through such openings.




N B A A B E
                                              -    16-




 30.     I should just say that pitch invasions do not only come from terraces, but

         they are generally the most numerous and dangerous.           Many pitch invasions

         from seated areas are attributable: to the entry of irresponsible persons

         from outside the ground, when exit gates are opened at i time, or at some

         other period before full time.




 31.     There was a failure of parts of the crush barriers,installed in the

         southernmost of the two central sections at the West End,where deaths

         occurred at Hillsborough.     It is not possible to say whether that caused

         or contributed to any of the deaths, but such a failure is potentially

 ^       dangerous, and ought not to occur.        However,    the barrier may have been

         subjected to loads in excess of those prescribed in the "Green Guide", and

         I understand that the Club's Structural Engineer has a regular programme

         o£ testing of crush barrier strengths at Hillsborough.           Visual examination

         of the barriers in the two fateful enclosures,indicates that the majority

         of them were of considerable age and showed corrosion and repair at the

         base of the legs in many places.         However,    it is not possible to judge

          strength from that, and I have found that barriers have withstood the

          strenuous test specified in the "Green Guide", even when visual examinaton

          suggested excessive corrosion in the legs near the ground.           The layout of

          these barriers at Hillsborough was not totally in accordance with the

          recommendations of the "Green Guide".          The spaces behind some of them,to

          the back of the terrace and to the tunnel/gangway entrance point is

          excessive.   In addition,   the heights of the barriers vary, and some of




          them are slightly above or below the figures recommended in the "Green


          Guide".




NBAABE
A   r   •        >
                                                                       -   17-
    1   «   <*       *




                     32.   The safety of football grounds is a \joint operation between the club,            the

                           Local^Authority responsible for the issue o£ the Safety Certificate and

                           the Police, with the Fire Authority contributing to problems involving

                           fire risks.   The Local ^ B J O i o r it^

                           certification role,     to influence                      and leve-1-

                           to the matter.    In my experience, a responsible Club and the Police,

                           welcome a detailed and constant control by the Local Authority.

                           Therefore, nothing encourages good practice all round,better than a

                           carefully prepared and detailed Safety Certificate, accompanied by firm

                           enforcement of its terms and conditions.              I have not had the opportunity

                           to examine the General Safety Certificate held by the Sheffield Wednesday

                           Football Club, but I understand from my contact with Sheffield Council

                           Officers on my second visit to Hillsborough,             that it remains very much as

                           it was inherited from the South Yorkshire County Council in 1986, except

                           for any alterations resulting from uhe extension of the South (Spion "Kop)


                           terrace.




                     33.   Finally, I trust that it will not be considered presumptious of m e to make

                           a number of suggestions for recommendations to emerge from the Inquiry

                            into this disaster.      I set these out below




                            (a)   Certifying Local Authorities ought to be cautious about the General

                                  Safety Certificates which permit full capacities, where practice

                                  shows that those capacities are rarely achieved, because there is

                                  danger that the club's safety organisation will not remain at the

                                  high level needed to safely manage full attendances.




                            (b)   Safety Certificates should include a condition that they do not hold

                                  good, without review,       if the ground is to be used for a.match




            NBAABE
                                                      -   18-
r •     *
*   *   *




                        involving two visiting teams and an expected full capacity gate.




                 (c)    Any review undertaken under the last recommended condition should

                        include the three principal parties to safety, and must co-ordinate

                        the planning and control for overall safety, inside the ground with

                        that outside the ground.




                 (d)    The review   recommended by the last two     paragraphs should result ina

                        refusal to accept the unusual match concerned if all parties are not

                        able to be satisfied about the total safety of spectators, both

                        inside and outside the ground.




                 (e)    Stewarding, in all its aspects, should be very fully     specified and

                        conditioned in the Safety Certificate (This follows the principle

                        established in   Recommendation No. A12 of Chapter 6 of the ^ m a l

                        Report of Mr. Justice Popplewell in January 1986).     These provisions

                        in the Safety Certificate should have regard to grounds which are

                        habitually used for comparatively low attendances, and the number of

            ,            Stewards required is reduced on those many occasions.




                | (f)    In order to refresh the sense of responsibility for safety at

                         football grounds by those parties concerned with the Safety

                         Certificates, there should be an annual review of such Certificates

                         in the same way as licences for other places of public entertainment,

                         drinking etc.   That should involve a clear duty on the Local

                         Authority to inspect the premises annually, and amend anything that

                         is necessary on r e — issuing the Certificate.




                  (g)    There should also be a power for the certifying Local Authority to




        NBAABE
                                           -   19-




              revoke a Safety Certificate at any time when the management and

              appeal provisions set out in Sections 4 and 5 of the 1975 Act are not

              appropriate to the needs of immediate safety for any event proposed.




              (This and the previous recommendation is a repeat of the one

              contained at item C9 of the Final Report of Mr. Justice Popplewell in

              January 1986).




         Signed

                  L. N. Busu




         26th May,   1989




NBAABE
