Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528
50, Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1 H9AT


                                                                     25th July 1997
Dear Sir

Thank you most kindly for your recent letter concerning the above enquiry. My now surviving
direct family were not at the match on the 15th April 1989 and to that end we do not have any
direct new evidence to submit, nor can we assist you with witness statements BUT the following
information was give to us voluntarily by fans that were at the match with my daughter and others
that we met at the inquest, I must emphasise that this information was not in any way asked for.

1 The previous year when the same match had been held POLICE had checked tickets before the
fans arrived at the ground and those with out were turned away.-1989 this was not done

2 Police the previous year had formed fans into orderly que’s.-1989 this was not done

3 The Gates to the tunnel had been closed earlier the year before stopping the fans from entering .
 1989 this was not done

When my daughter talked about the I.D. scheme that was to be implemented her comments were
‘if there is going to be trouble at a match it was always outside the ground and if you arrived early
and entered the ground in sufficient time then you would be safe’she also stated that this scheme
would have delayed fans entering the ground and as she usually arrived in plenty of time she felt
safe once through the turnstile.
On this fateful day she had arrived at the ground quite early and took up her position on the terrace
with her friends ,that day fate played its part and others ,it appears did not.
We trust that you will unearth the truth and allow the bereaved families to put their faith back in
the British justice system .
May the 96 lives that were lost that day and the many that have suffered because of the events of
that day at last find some kind of peace.

Yours FaitMuH5T''~~}
        ^   \   > /




Mrs C.M.McEvoy
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 528

m         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 4347 Fax 2703


Mrs C M McEvov
                                                             Your reference:

                                                             Our reference:

                                                             Date:              7 August 1997




Thank you very much for your letter of 25 July to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

We are grateful to you for the points you have made in your letter, and Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith will take them into account.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\MCEVOY.032
