                                          cc   Mr Goddard

Mr F J Smith
F8



POLICE DEPARTMENT EVIDENCE TO TAYLOR INQUIRY

1. Thank you for sending me a copy of your note of 17 May
covering draft evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.
Purpose

2. We need to have a very clear view of our purpose in this
exercise. What are we trying to achieve? What ground do we want
to cover? How far do we want to cover factual matters and
policy? Where do we draw the dividing line with ACPO's evidence
(a matter on which we will need close liaison with them)?
3. The starting point    (thought not necessarily our stopping
point) is the terms of   the request from Mr Whalley. He should at
least have articulated   the ground the inquiry wants covered, even
if we go wider than he   put it on paper - in my view he should
have?

4. Subject to the terms of Mr Whalley's request, it seems to me
we will need to cover:

     (i)     the law as it bears on Police Department interests
              (? including also the general law as it bears on
             crowd control etc)
     (ii)    relevant facts eg incidence of violence
     (iii)   relevant historical background
     (iv)    publicly declared aims of Government policy.
5. Our purpose is to offer Taylor the background information
which will help him in his inquiry, in so far as that background
is proper to our role, and also (if we wish) to lead him on any
matters of interpretation where we think that would be helpful.
This second aspect is much more difficult; may not arise; but if
it does will require careful planning.
The draft

6. Against this background I have the following comments on the
draft you circulated.

7. On the incidence of hooliganism: drop first sentence (we
should be more deadpan); what can be said of a statistical or
impressionistic kind about associated violence eg on trains, in
more distant parts of towns where matches are held, drunkenness
offences etc; I do not think the section on police resources fits
here under incidence - it should go with whatever statement we
make on this subject but here is not full enough for that; in the
same spirit, I do not think the final paragraph is right. It is
too topical, and does not really give a sufficiently broad
picture of hooliganism. I am wary too of the opening sentence of
this paragraph; if we need to say that, it does not come with
incidence, which should be factual, but in a wider piece on the
Government's views.
 8. On the law, I have no comments on disorder, alcohol and
 exclusion, subject to how they are worked up. As I say above, I
think there may need to be some statement (however brief) on the
jgeneral powers available to the police to give a rounded picture
of the measures at their disposal. But I do not think the
section on .ticket touts fits here, or at least not quite like
this. The legal statement should be deadpan (ie a worked up
middle paragraph). The first paragraph is a statement of the
problem; the final is a statement of opinion about the nature of
the law. If we have a clear objective to press for (with
Ministerial agreement) that is one thing, but I do not think we
should make too casual a statement. If we want to propose a
change in the law, or seek a different solution, that must be
carefully worked up. I am also hesitant about the final
paragraph on forgeries - again I think it is too topical.
9. The section on practical arrangements misses the question of
the dividing line with the police, both as a matter of law and
role and as regards the ACPO evidence. I am not sure of the
position myself. I suspect the section should start with a clear
statement of police responsibilities for law enforcement, and
that it should then be confined to things the Home Office has
itself properly done eg advice (whose is the Green Guide?);
position on costs; mutual aid aspects; NFIU. But I am less clear
about how far we (ie not ACPO) should go into intelligence
sharing etc.   If we have fostered co-operation etc, we can say
so, making clear we only advise. I am also hesitant about our
including the final paragraph on investigations - better from
ACPO perhaps. As to perimeter fences, we must obviously be
extremely careful. Is this for the Home Office, or for the
Police Department? Where has the push
 come from on the installation of fences?
10. I wonder too if we need bother about overseas matches.
In part this will depend on Mr Whalley's request. I realise it
is background to Part II of the Bill (which needs to be covered)
but beyond that (covered in a brief statement) it does not seem
relevant to Taylor.

11. As to other things, I think we should have at an early point
a clear statement of the Home Secretary's functions, which could
link with, but goes wider than, your opening words on the
Government's aims. Should this piece also cover role of HMIC?
Again this takes us to the ACPO evidence. And I think we' need to
be clear about the use of resources, to which I refer above.
A comprehensive statement for England and Wales is relevant to
Taylor, and could come in a section dealing also with
responsibility for meeting costs, mutual aid if relevant.
Conclusion

12. I am of course at your disposal if Mr Goddard and you would
like a word at any point in the further preparation of the
evidence. I should in any case be glad to know how things stand
with ACPO.




                                       S W BOYS SMITH


Police Department
22 May 1989
