  S o u th Yorkshire
  POLICE
  JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




C o m p l i m e n t s


 Ian Daincs B.A. (Hons.), Dip Ed.
 Assistant Chief Constable
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield S3 8LY                   Direct Line:
 Tel: 0114 276 8522
Y/Ref. ACC/ID/NMH
SYP                                                      Gibraltar.
                                                           23/7/97

E)sar Mr. Dairies,

Thank you for your reply dated 16/7/97 to my letter dated 4/7/97 and your thanks
expressed in it.

I have absolutely no objection to your forwarding my correspondence or a copy
thereof to Justice Stuart-Smith. and his team of staff and I thank you for your
courtesy in asking my permission before so doing.

Yours sincerely
THE METHODIST CHURCH
         (Scotland District)

  Rev K e nneth R. Brown M.A.. M.Phll.
      {Sup ernum erary Minister)




                                                                                  25 July 97

                                         Your l ie f   ACC/ID/NIIH   1 6 J u ly
       Dear Sir,
                      Thank you for your reply to my copy to you of the letter to the
                     1101/Hi SLC23TA2Y.
                      I fully understand that you are unable to comment                  - indeed it would
                not be right, and put you in an invidious position,but I                       thought it
       correct to let you have a copy of the letter.

                      I have a cutting of the note in the STAR, to which I have taken
                      objection and have referred to the PSESS COMPLAINTS COLEjlSSION.
                      I enclose copies for your interest.
                The Sheffield Hillsborough MP kindly furnished me vdth a Fnotocopy
       of the HOUSE OF C01&I0NS discussion on the announcement of the inquiry.
       It is very important and revealing.       If you do not have access to thisI can
       send y$u a photostat.


                I have no objection to you submit any copies of this correspondence to
       the Lord Justice, but I did send a copy of my letter to the Home Secretary for
       this purpose.

                              Your Officers do have my concern and my prayers,

                                                 Yours sincerely




        The Assistant Chief Constable
        Sheffield
THE METHODIST CHURCH
         (Scotland District)

  R e v K en neth R. Brown M.A.. M.fhll.
        (S u p e rn u m era ry Minister)




                                                                     14 July 97



         The Editor,
                Dear Sir.
                                  re: thejlew Enquiry the Hillsborough Disaster

                                 I offered you the courtesy of a copy of ray letter to the
                                 HOME SECRETARY.
                                 Your report on this (Star p2 7 July) is objectionable and
                                 reprehensible.
                                 You deliberately introduced a note of hostility and aggravation,
                                 which was NOT present in my letter. Nor was such intended.
                                  I made WO 'thinly veiled attack' on anyone 1
                                  I did NOT mention 'Liverpool'.

         My main purpose was to appsal to the people of Hillsborough to come forward and
         offer information to the new enquiry„ You should note that in the HOUSE one
         Member (from Merseyside) said "in the previous enquiry the feelings of
         Hillsborough families were shamefully neglected”.
          I know that many people in Hillsborough are deeply shaken and concerned, and my
          plea for them to come forward is in line with the same plea by the HOLE SECRETARY
          in the HOUSE.   Your paper should support them and have their interests at heart.
          In the discussion in, the HOUSE one member asked:   "Will that review look at the
          events that took place between 3*15 and 5 »30pm?"
          For the enquiry to be JUS!2, it must be comprehensive - therefore I am confident
          that Hillsborough people, and all of us require the question to be investigated
          and answers given to: "Y/hat took place BEFORE 3 •15pm?"

          I HAVE REFERRED THE MATTJR TO THE             PRESS COMPLAINTS CQMiHSSION.


                                                Yours faithfully,*




          The Editor
          The SHEFFIELD STAR

           Copy to:         Press Complaints Commission.
                            M.P.* Sheffield Hillsborough
            4. : • jp* •

TKe S ta r / Monday, July 7, 19&7



       Minister
       criticises
       fans
        A FORMER Sheffield
        m in is te r has m ade a
        thinly veiled attack on
        th e     b e h a v io u r    of
        L iverpool fans in the
        hour        before        the
        Hillsborough disaster.
           The Rev K enneth
        Brown; an ex-minister of
        H illsb o ro u g h T r i n i t j ^ ^
        Methodist Church, says
        fans should not turn up to
        matches without tickets
        or drink before the game
        in a pub several miles
        away from the ground.
           Mr Brown adds sup­
        porters should be patient
        while queueing to get into
        a ground. He calls his
        comments the three prin­
        ciples understood for fans
        atte n d in g a sp o rtin g
        event.
           The minister - a former
        chaplain to the police
        mounted and dog section
        - also says the new
         inquiry into the 1989 dis­
        a s te r, in w hich 96
        L iverpool fans died,
        should* focus on who
         caused the event.
           His remarks come after
         a priest who gave the last
         rites to fans on the pitch
         criticised police reaction.
