From:       Paul Pugh                       cc Peter Edmundson
                                                                                  ©
            Head of Operational Policing
            Policy Unit
            Room 539
            Queen Anne’s Gate
            ® 0171-273-3141
            30 July 1997




Chris Bone o/r


HILLSBOROUGH: SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE EVIDENCE


An issue has been brought to our attention by South Yorkshire Police which you will
want to pursue.

2.     I understand that Richard Wells, the chief constable, has recently discovered
information of which he was not previously aware. Some of the original statements
made by police officers at the time were apparently amended or edited before they
w ere submitted to the Taylor Inquiry. It is not known at this stage by whom they
w ere edited. Both the original versions and the amended versions as submitted to
the Inquiry have been secured by the assistant chief constable dealing with matters
relating to Hillsborough. W e have been given to understand that the changes which
they have identified so far relate to personal comments about other officers which
were thought at the time to be gratuitous. Even if the amendments were of no
consequence, however, it is clearly a serious matter which the Scrutiny should
consider. It raises questions both about potential new evidence and about potential
disciplinary matters.    I suggest you should make early contact with the A CC
concerned about this issue. I gather that they are preparing a full analysis of the
amendments for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to consider, but he may well want to see
the original documents for himself.

3.     All this has come to us indirectly. Richard Wells initially mentioned it to David
O ’Dowd, HMCIC.        He discussed it with John Stevens, the relevant HMI who
discussed it with Stephen Boys Smith, who discussed it with me. Mr Michael is also
aware of the position from a discussion with John Stevens. I have told Mr Michael’s
office that the Scrutiny will want to look into this.




                                       PAUL PUGH


f:\oppu\hou\minute\pp0320pd.doc
