                                               cc   Miss Goose
                                                    Ms Rogerson*
                                               *w/o enc




  Mr Goddard




  HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE INQUIRY INTO THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL
  HOOLIGANISM: GOVERNMENT RESPONSE




^^Thank you for your note of 15 February to Miss Goose and others.

  I attach a draft contribution on the recommendation on attendance
  centre orders, number 44 on your list.

  I understand that the RPU will be taking the lead on number 45.




                                               G SUTTON
                                               28 February 1991



  C1 Division



  Enc




  DS238
HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE

REPORT ON POLICING OF FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM



Attendance Centre Orders (paragraph 100)


The Government has reconsidered the Taylor report recommendation
for extending the scope of attendance centre orders in the light
of the Committee's comments.     The Government's evidence to the
Committee describes the practical difficulties that would be
involved.     The Government remains of the view that these are such
as to preclude the extension of the arrangements as proposed in
the report.


The Government believes that attendance centre orders continue to
have an important place in the range of sentencing disposals for
young offenders under 21.     Home Office Circular 69/1990 about
football exclusion orders, reminded courts and others that
attendance centre orders might often be the right sentence to
accompany exclusion orders.    The Government keeps the size of the
attendance centre network under review.     In considering the case
for establishing new centres, the Government has to have regard to
their viability bearing in mind the use that is likely to be made
of them by the local courts.     The number of young offenders
convicted by the courts has sharply declined in recent years, and
the Government does not believe that an expansion of the network
is justified.


The attendance centre network is managed by the Home Office.
Centres are run mainly, but not exclusively, by serving or retired
police officers.     In every case, whilst working at the centres,
staff serve in a personal capacity and not as representatives of
the police.     The present arrangements put no operational demands
on the police, and the Government believes they work well.



DS238
