MEMORANDUM


From: CHRIS BONE
      Room 1106
      8 2512


Date: 4 September 1997

To:      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




1 promised a note of my visit to South Yorkshire Police yesterday.

2.     I spent the day (from 10 till 5) with Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines and PC
Greenway at the Discipline & Complaints Department at Heeley, just outside Sheffield. The
Chief Constable, Richard Wells, has put ACC Daines in charge of all aspects of the
Hillsborough business. PC Greenway runs the force’s extensive Hillsborough archive, which
they keep at Heeley (and was one of the officers on duty on the day).


Disclosure

3.     I probed South Yorkshire’s policy on disclosing evidence to the Family Support
Group and others who want to see it. As you know they say they let people have statements
which they themselves have made or which were made by somebody else if the person
concerned has agreed to that. They also let people have things which are in ‘the public
domain’. I wanted to know what they meant by that.

4.      Their answer was that in looking after the Hillsborough archive they are, among other
things, acting as Coroners Officers. The Coroners Rules (Rule 57) say that la coroner shall
... supply to any ... properly interested person ...a copy o f any report o f a post mortem
examination .... or o f any notes o f evidence ... or o f any document put in evidence at an
inquest’. So if a document was part of the evidence at a particular Hillsborough victim’s
inquest the police allow relatives and so on to have a copy - it is ‘in the public domain’.

5.      I asked specifically about the position on disclosing statements made by police
officers. The reply was that where a police officer - or anybody else - made a statement
concerning a particular victim, his statement is only part of the evidence at the inquest if the
person who made it did not give oral evidence. Relatives can obviously look at the inquest
transcript. But South Yorkshire take the view that a written statement by a police officer
who gave oral evidence is not ‘in the public domain’ and they will only let relatives see it if
the officer himself agrees to that.




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO8.DOC
 6.      This argument seems fair enough as far as statements by spectators and other
members of the public are concerned - including for example off-duty doctors who treated
victims. But seems pretty odd that a police officer who was on duty at the ground at public
expense, and who was then paid further public money to make a statement about what he saw
and did there, should have a personal veto over whether people who have a proper need to see
his statement should be able to do so. I put this to Mr Daines but I don’t think there was
much of an answer. All he would say was that the notion had not been challenged in the
Courts.

7.      This will not do much to allay the suspicions of those who believe that some material
in police statements is being deliberately held back.


Changes to police statements

8.      We spoke on Monday about the alterations made to some original police statements
before they went to Lord Justice Taylor and the Inquests. I discussed this with South
Yorkshire and looked at examples.

9.      All officers on duty on the day completed a statement. Their original statements,
mostly hand-written or crudely typed, were then typed up, without alteration, by a typing pool
and sent to statement readers. These officers, part of the West Midlands police investigation
team, cross-referenced them and decided on what further action they called for - typically that
people mentioned in them should themselves make a statement if they had not done so
already.

10.     This team also crossed through parts of the typed-up versions of some statements if
they thought that what was said was an expression of opinion not germane to determining
what had happened on the day. It is clear from what I saw yesterday that this did not happen
in every case. PC Greenway showed me a box which he said held all the altered statements -
there are about 100 of them as against the 1,7^0 or so officers who made statements

11.    It is not particularly clear what counted as an ‘expression of opinion’ or determined
whether it would be useful to Taylor or the inquests. Mr Daines’s letter to you cited a
statement which contained rude remarks about Special Constables. Perhaps it was fair
enough to cut those out. I found some similar examples.

12.      On the other hand, I also found in PC Greenway’s box the original handwritten
version of the statement by PC Buxton, one of the key people on the day (he was in the police
Landrover on Leppings Lane and made Tannoy announcements to the crowd). He says that
after the disaster had happened he felt relieved when Chief Superintendent Mole, the man
who had run the 1988 semi-final, arrived to help - he felt that somebody would now take
control.

13.    This comment was removed from PC Buxton’s statement as it went to Taylor.
Normally PC Buxton’s view on something like that would not matter very much. But the
replacement of experienced Mole by inexperienced Duckenfield was an issue for Taylor, and
as you know we are likely to hear more about it from Professor Scraton’s group. I am not




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO8.DOC
 sure that the reaction of an experienced and capable PC has no value as evidence on the issue.

 14.      I think we must take this further by work in the police archive. We need to

         a)       check that there are no altered statements which are NOT in the box, and

         b)       assess whether any of the alterations could have had evidential value.

15.     There is also the point - which comes out of ACC Mervyn Jones’ 7 June 1989 letter to
the Treasury solicitors (in the bundle I gave you on Monday) that the final versions of police
statements also reflected ‘appropriate legal advice Mr Daines told me he did not know
what that meant. We also need to find out what Taylor and the Coroner knew about these
altered statements. These things too might require work in the police archive. Mr Daines
suggested the police might take this forward themselves - 1 think we should hold on this offer
for the moment, since we may get more in the files of Taylor’s Inquiry and through
discussion with Dr Popper.


Other points

 16.    We discussed the missing tapes - you will remember there are two of these, showing
pictures shot from Sheffield Wednesday’s own CCTV cameras, which were taken from the
ground the night after the match and according to the police have not been seen since (though
the Granada TV people say they have turned up).

 17.    The police version is that one was from a camera pointed at a brick wall - the other
showed the inside of some of the turnstiles at Leppings Lane. Only club people had the keys
to the room from which they disappeared. Yesterday, I heard the theory that it may have
been somebody from the club who had taken them, because they showed something at the
turnstile which the club didn’t want brought into the open following the disaster. That
something may have been turnstile operators letting people in for cash payment.

18.    The police are concerned that you interview Dr Ed Walker and deal with him in your
report. He has got hopes up among the families that they can prove the police left people to
die who could and should have lived. He has said as much in articles in medical journals
published at the start of this year (which I do not recall hearing of before, but will trace).
This loose end must be nailed down one way or another.

19.     The police want the chance to comment on the ‘new evidence’ put to you by the
Support Group. I said that we had to be careful about allowing people to comment on each
others’ material, and then no doubt comment on the comments. If we did that the exercise
would take for ever. This was not a formal legal process. I think that the key to this is what
is said in the Support Group (and possibly Scraton’s) material. If they do come up with what
seem to be new angles, it would make sense to seek South Yorkshire’s help in assessing
whether they were actually new or not. I said we would think about this.

20.    The Coroner’s ‘body files’ - the material about each victim on the basis of which Dr
Popper ran the Inquests - do not contain everything which the police have got about the




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO8.DOC
 person concerned. Most or all victims have material which is left out of the files. The
 police say Dr Popper made the selection. So far as I can see the material omitted is not
 important, but I think we should check that this is so in all cases and ask Dr Popper on what
 basis he made the choice.

 21.     I had not realised before that there is still one person injured at Hillsborough, a Mr
 Devine, who never woke up and is in a persistent vegetative state. The police said he was
 being looked after at home in Liverpool.

 22.    The Family Support Group have a £1/2 million fighting fund, mainly from a pop
 concert at Liverpool Football Ground.


 Police archive

 23.     I spent a lot of time in South Yorkshire’s archive. They have a locked room with
 Hillsborough material floor to ceiling round all four walls and in the middle. This contains
 all the material from the West Midlands police investigation, including all the original
 statements by police and everybody else, and the initial questionnaires on which many of
 them were based. There is a huge amount of photographic and other material. Most of what
 they have got is thoroughly cross-referenced by computer (the Home Office HOLMES
 system). They gave me a demonstration, which impressed.

24.   They are evidently making a major effort to appear helpful. That, and the fact that I
was accompanied all day by their Assistant Chief Constable, seems to me to be an indication
of how seriously they are taking your scrutiny.

25.      It would be worth your visiting this archive when you go to Sheffield.




CHRIS BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO8.DOC
