                             P U B L I C       E N Q U I R Y

                I N 0* O         T H E     D I S A S T E R             A T

    H I L L S        B O R O tJ G H         F O O T B A L T              S T A D I U M

                     O N        1 5 tli    A    P S   I L         '<8 9




                ;> 0 U T H         Y O R K S H Z R il           P O I I J ts

                                   D O C U M E N T S

                                    V O L U M E        1




H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s
       S O L I C I T O R S


                                                            EMPIRE HOUSE 10 PICCADILLY BRADFORD B D 1 3LR
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE DOCUMENTS

           INDEX TO VOLUMES 1 AND 7




 SYP DOCUMENT 1     ALBUM OF PHOTOGRAPHS



 SYP DOCUMENT 2     PLAN OF WEST STAND AREA



SYP DOCUMENT 3      A E R I A L PHOTOGRAPH



SYP DOCUMENT 4      DE-BRIEFING MINUTES

                    11TH APRIL 1981



SYP DOCUMENT 5      LETTER 5TH JUNE 1981



SYP DOCUMENT 6      REPORT OF CHIEF

                    SUPERINTENDANT HEROLD

                    30TH APRIL 1981



SYP DOCUMENT 7     REPORT OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                   COUNTY COUNCIL SEPTEMBER 1981

                   AND CORRESPONDENCE RELATING

                   TO SAME



SYP DOCUMENT 8     REPORT OF CHIEF SUPERINTENDANT

                   HEROLD 18TH AUGUST 1981
 SYP DOCUMENT 9      BUNDLE CORRESPONDENCE



 SYP DOCUMENT 10     ALBUM OF PHOTOGRAPHS



 SYP DOCUMENT 11    'STANDARD INSTRUCTIONS FOR

                    THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL

                    MATCHES'



 SYP DOCUMENT 12    'ACPO SUB COMMITTEE ON

                    HOOLIGANISM AT SPORTING EVENTS

                    GUIDE TO POLICING FOOTBALL'



SYP DOCUMENT 13     OPERATIONAL OR D E R 1988



SYP DOCUMENT 14     OPERATIONAL ORDER 1989



SYP DOCUMENT 15     REPORT OF INSPECTOR SEWELL

                    9TH AUGUST 1988



SYP DOCUMENT 16     DE-BRIEFING MINUTES 1988



SYP DOCUMENT 17    ROAD TRAFFIC DIVISION

                   OPERATIONAL ORDER



SYP DOCUMENT 18    'D' DIVISION

                   OPERATIONAL ORDER
SYP DOCUMENT      19    PUBLICITY REGARDING

                         TIME OF ARRIVAL



SYP DOCUMENT      20    MATCH SUMMARY 1988



SYP DOCUMENT      21    OPERATIONAL ORDER

                        14TH JANUARY 1989



SYP DOCUMENT 22        'INSTRUCTIONS FOR

                        MATCH DAY STAFF'



SYP DOCUMENT 23        'INSTRUCTIONS TO STEWARDS'



SYP DOCUMENT 24         M AJOR INCIDENT MANUAL
                                             Leppings Lane




                                            ^        f ''   ,   . N




                          f t




                        - Gents-ToHets— —   • -I - - - -Y*E.B
  Toilets




WEST                    STAND


                                                                      I



            Scale HOC
                     %




ft" I •




          I




              *   -fej-
                                   MINUTES OF THE                       ?
                         DE-BRIEFING FOR FA CUP SEMI-FINAL              I
          BETWEEN •JE02TENKAM HOTSPUR FC AND WOLVERHAMPTON WANDERERS F c \
                          EELD AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD


  Present:

 Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), Mr R J Goslin -      Chairman
 Chief Superintendent Herold, 'F' Division
 Acting Chief Superintendent Thompson, Traffic Division
 Superintendent Chapman, FI Sub-Division
 Acting Superintendent Ruddy, Operations Division
 Chief Inspector Smith, ’F' Division
 Inspector Greenwood)
 Inspector Calvert )
 Inspector Svkes    )~ 'F Division
                    )
                   -   Secretary


 The Chairman opened the meeting by stating its intention of assessing the
 planning, action and incidents relating to the FA Cup Semi-Final between
        am Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers held at Hillsboroucrh on
 Saturday 11 April 1981.

 Certain problems had occurred but in his and the Chief Constable's opinion
 we had acted correctly. One letter of complaint had been received from a member
 of the public as well as one letter praising the police action in a danaerous
 situation. ^Chief Superintendent Herold mentioned that other letters,
 congratulating the police on their actions had also been received.

 Mr Goslin said that it was his decision to remove spectators from the Leooincrs
 Lane end of the ground to the other side in order to ease a dangerous situation
 w eie serious injuries or even fatalities were a real possibility. He then
 read the letter of complaint, which contained an allegation that the police
  erded more and more people into the Lappings Lane enclosure when it was obvious
 that it was full.

The Chairman invited views on this point. Superintendent Chaoman said that the
entrances to Leppings Lane were controlled to ensure an even distribution of
fans. However, as .the gorund filled up the usual packing problems occurred.
There was space in the centre of the enclosure but fans refused to move over
and fill it. Police officers were placed into the crowd to ensure that the
best use was made of the available space. The Mounted Department also assisted
at tne-rear of the crowd to prevent more people entering that part of the
ground.

Chief Superintendent Herold pointed out: that the problem was exacerbated by a
series of incidents which culminated in the late arrival of a large number of
fans. This meant that instead of arriving over a period, they all-arrived
together very close to kick-off time.

At 11.25 am an accident occurred on the Ml Motorway involving 13 cars," causing
two of the three lanes to be closed down.for one and a half hours. Just north
of this, and at about the same time, a PSV broke down. Passenoers alighted from

                                                                 Continued/
    7                                        - 2 -


         it and caused problems on the motorway. The pontoon bridges and extensive
         roadworks on the motorway in the Derbyshire Police Area also created delays.
        This 90 minute delay resulted in a sudden flood of vehicles, all of them
        •Spurs supporters, into Sheffield. Acting Chief Superintendent Thompson took
        up this point and said that he accepted that the traffic route, designed to
        divide, the football supporters from the city centre shoppers, was too tortuous,
        although this may not have proved a problem had there been a steady flow of
        spectators rather than the sudden influx caused by the incidents described by
        Mr Herold.

        The Chairman then sought the views of the meeting over the crushing incidents
        when several spectators were injured and which necessitated the removal of
        some spectators from the Leppings Lane enclosure.

        Mr Herold said that the capacity for the Leppings Lane enclosure, stated in
        the certificate issued under the Safety of SportsGrounds Act, is 10,100.
        This must, of necessity, contain a safety margin. The actual turnstile
        readings was 10,435 to which must be added the 70 Spurs supporters who had

o       managed to obtain tickets which put them amongst the Wolves supporters. These
        had been moved to Leppings Lane from the Kop for their own safety. This made
        a total of 405 spectators over the authorised limit. Inspector Calvert pointed
        out that this created a similar situation to last year when about 400 forged
        tickets were printed for the Leppings Lane end, although the same problem was
        •not experienced then.

        Mr Herold had already referred to the late arrival of a large number of
        spectators who were still waiting to enter the Leppings Lane enclosure when
        the match started. The flashpoint occurred when Tottenham scored after only
        three minutes. The spectators just entering pushed forward to see what was
        happening and caused a crush, which resulted in the injuries. Inspector
        Greenwood also mentioned that there had been two or three fights, albeit of
        a minor nature, at the same time. This had resulted in the order from Mr Goslin
        to open the gates at the front of Leppings Lane in order to release some
        spectators onto the pitch surround. This was done by opening the gates,
        releasing a few spectators and then closing them to allow a steady flow. This
        was difficult to maintain because' as soon as pressure was relieved at the
        front the crush from the back- filled the void.
o       The lack of a reserve serial between the South Stand and the Leppings Lane
        stand (where one has normally been situated) caused a few minutes delay in
        the -deployment of officers to police this situation but this problem was soon
        overcome. Superintendent Chapman stressed that there was still room in the
        centre of the Leppings Lane enclosure although it was quite full. This was
        only to be expected when there was a capacity crowd, but the refusal of
        spectators to fill spaces had caused difficulties elsewhere in the enclosure.

        The discussion progressed to the construction of the Leppings Lane enclosure.
        Mr Goslin felt that it was inadequate and required more divisions .so that
        spectators ax-e not in such a solid mass. He also felt that the limit of
        10,100 was tocr high, although Superintendent Chapman disagreed with this.
        The Chairman disagreed with Mr Herold's suggestion of a-6 ft to 8 ft wide
        channel down the centre of the enclosure to divide spectators and segregate
        opposing fans on the grounds that such a small segregation gap only encouraged
        opposing spectators to throw articles at each other and at police officers
        in the middle. Inspector Calvert expressed concern about the central


                                                                       Continued/.....
 entrance to the Leppings Lane area because it always causes delays and
 blockages.  It would benefit from reconstruction.

.The Chairman said that talks would take place with Sheffield Wednesday
 Football Club on the ground capacities and for any reconstruction thought to
 be necessary.

 The discussion progressed to the fans who ran onto the pitch during the half
 time interval.

 Mr.Herold said that the trouble stemmed from the front central gate being
 opened from where about 150 young fans were led onto the pitch surround.
 These were the ones who   eventually ran onto the pitch    although at thetime
 it was necessary for the gate to be opened to relieve crowd pressure. The
 match referee, Clive Thomas, had said that he was unable to start the match
 when he wanted to. This was, however, based on a five minute half-time
 interval and not on the normal ten minute one. It was unfair to suggest
 that the match was held up as a result of the fans on      the pitch.

Mr Goslin said that he may have made a wrong decision       at half-time totry
and get the fans from the pitch surround onto the Kop. They had not been
 causing any trouble where they were, yet the decision to move them onto the
 Kbp precipitated a minor pitch invasion. The half-time interval was, on
 reflection, insufficient to carry out the necessary manoeuvre. Some of the
people who were being shepherded into the Kop refused to go in, resulting in
a minor 'break-out' which was quickly controlled. Mr Herold said that it was
apparent, for future reference, that when people have to be moved from the
Kop the area behind the hoardings is an ideal position to put them into. Chief
Inspector Smith also pointed out that 50—100 fans had been successfully removed
from the pitch and placed into the centre of the Kop. Mr Herold said that
this situation prompted the only criticism of the police by the club in that
we seemed to be helping fans to climb over the railings. Inspector Sykes
replied to this criticism by saying that only the fans who had become stuck
whilst attempting to climb over the railings to avoid the crush had been
helped by police officers so they did not injure themselves. The other fans
were released, in small groups through a police controlled gate.

One problem which was totally unnecessary was that caused by the sale of
unwanted tickets by Wolverhampton Wanderers direct to Tottenham Hotspur. This
is contrary to FA directions and neither the FA, Sheffield Wednesday FC nor
the police were told of this decision. This made a nonsense of the
segregation arrangements and was a contributing factor to the difficulties
which occurred. Discussions were to take place about this situation.

The Chairman then asked for any comments or criticisms which could prove
useful for future occasions. The following points were raised:

Acting Chief Superintendent Thompson

The route for traffic from the motorway was too tortuous and the more direct
route, the Parkway, should be considered in the future.; Chief Superintendent
Herold pointed out that this would bring the fans through the city centre
and into -direct conflict with the bus routes for walking spectators.




                                                              Continued/
 Mr Thompson also relayed criticisms that officers outside the ground had
 made no attempt to direct traffic at blocked up junctions. This cricitism
• was not accepted because with the size of the crowd some delay must be
 accepted and anticipated.

 Superintendent Chapman

 The absence of a reserve serial between the South Stand and West Stand caused
 a slight delay in the deployment of officers to the disorder situation and
 there should be a reserve stationed there in future.

 There should be female officers available at the turnstiles to assist in any
 necessary searches. There was a marked absence of female officers-at the
 gates.

 The back to back radios are not useful in the situation when there is
 extensive media coverage at the ground. There is a high degree of inter­
 ference.

 Acting Superintendent Ruddy

 The communications had proved successful with three channels being used
  (1, 2 and 4). The splitting of the ground control and the public order control
 meant that the caravan for public order control need no longer be situated
 inside the ground and could be moved about outside for optimum reception.

 Mr Ruddy also pointed out that the supervisory officers from foreign
 forces had made many complimentary remarks about the planning, organisation
 and operational aspects of this event. He felt that we were being over
 critical of ourselves.

 Inspector Calvert

Mr Calvert suggested the inclusion of a de-brief chart so that the comments
of any officers at the ground could be included for discussion.

Inspector Sykes

On this occasion officers from foreign forces had been employed on duties
inside the ground. Mr .Sykes felt that this should be the duty of the regular
officers ('F ' Division) who are familiar with the territory.

Mr Herold pointed out that the reverse situation had applied last year and
there were still difficulties. In fact, the local knowledge of the visiting
officers who were inside had helped to overcome situations, which our own
policemen may not have been able to deal with easily. There are also
logistical difficulties with the deployment of foreign officers outside the
ground.




Difficulties were experienced because officers from foreign forces had not
read or understood the correspondence sent to them. Despite having maps and
being taken on a tour of the ground, some had gone to a different part of



                                                               Continued/.
                                         - 5 -


    the ground to where they had been deployed. This could have hadserious
    consequences whpn assistance was urgently needed.'

    •The local call signs (eg Sierra 5 - Sergeant) should be stressed to visiting
     officers as the lack of this knowledge could lead to confusion.

    There had been too many people inside the control room a maximum    of nine
    persons during the critical stages in a room designed for three, and this
        shown that the ventilation was inadequate. On this point Superintendent
    Chapman said that the number of senior officers in the control room at this
    time had caused confusion because on occasions conflicting instructions had
    been given and the control room staff did not know which particular
    instruction to accept and relay.

    The Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) agreed to consider all the points
    raised for future occasions and thanked all present for their attendance.

    The me.eting closed at 7.20 pm.

O
                                                             5 June 1 9 SI

 -- — .Ic-Jee i'sc
 C...iirr.an
 ^r.erfield Wednesday Football Club Linitac
 -illsbcrcu-vh
 Sheffield £6 !«••?



 Cear Mr McGee

 * ac.cnowledge receipt of your letter of 20 ' - ' a y .     t t'-ar?. ,-ou 5cr u.„CT
 cc.v^lirentary re~=r::s ir. the rer.ultiniate r ^ . n c r - a r . i vholsheartezl--
 a-sree vith you that 'ey learning from our erarie-scas both th« cl’Ib~ar-
 th^pciios sncul-i >e sole to ir^rove their rerrcrr.ar.c*, particularly
 -- tr.at rerrcrr.ar.c-3 is ieokoJ at dispassionately ’.-.cl ccr.structivelv!

■**" lc‘t“,srs c " cc:a.>iai:.c          racsivec and those Irot,-. -c-rlirientas" anr
              ’
              f :i=h 1 hav“ --caiv--i ar-'e establishes' beycv-T ^oufct that the
         actio., ir* 1-ittin . scactiters cr» tc           t r t c l n e t or.lv
nac-rssary out was vitil to -void further s«Jrio»:r in                 ?s sr. \ "ossiblv
       --rs*        tnij -;2 ::c-cr r.-.v only critiois:; of — • -r^r.icr officers is
xcr not oi-enin-- tn= /atas earlier thus avoi.Iinc t::.* em-.r^-incr' -easurr
c~ ^--C'-'-r.c- zr.u .-;:3l..-i;.v £ .abaters to cli~b ova:: the j-.-r.ca. Thir t v s
    '-=--310.1 -‘CVcVer ir. often necessary ir. o.-er-ti-r:i?l situations anY
-Itr.tu-rn it r.ay Ice.: 'ur.ci.-ry1, the- needs of the ccccrion dor-an:*. instant
^ctior. irresSi-rctiV;^:              it r>av arpesr tc the '-»r>-Ioc::=^r' I 'lo not
             t.-ic --V i     r-ctisn vni cr. r.’-uira-     2n.*»l"v*i5      %,-archiH'?
exa^iiiation si-.cul-*   i:s r:--.nr;i to w hy sue'' 2        -      action -,*as a v - .
ricc:33?r;.

Cur analysis     o i   -.;h a t   ••   j   is :


       -ic.’.ots iutor..- . .or ..‘oivorr.atr*ter. var.rerer" ’ jy •;r r w r s were sol i
      '"c •‘Ottar.lias;    ;.ortars after ."civ-irharit-ton . : ,*.otifi t«.. To tter.hr.:-
      ..nat tney aa-i ic: ^i.— os-j of t:;t»ir alio-tati-^r.. f..>:i-- var*
      irresponsible in t-Vat it was likely to crar.cs ■■.uhlic iisorCer
      oroule-s tiiroum tr.e ni::in7 of or.posin? su— ortcr-??'" (ITua-Tth*
     wore ’irresconsisic' -ecause ever/one in foot, a 11 administration
      shoulu be able to .•r-;.iraciate tl*a probler-s bein.-r created for vour
     c^.ub and for tna ;.Oii:s ay the indiscriminate sala of tickets.                   It'
     it was £«lt that the tickets had to be offers 1 "or sale at
     ■rc-cen-n-^i* then hoar, of us snould have bean inicri'i of what had
     oeen done.       I a;a writing to the Football Association on this subject.)

..   ITie Leppings Lane end is not constructed to aive niaxirtun aid to the
     packing and control of the crowd and the accepted erova caracitv i^
     such that there is no safety cargin.

     Uoth the policc and the club stewards directed, ir. gcod faith,
     Tottenhan Hotspur supporters to the Lepoina-s Lane end and
     axacerbated the problems o f a capacity crowd at one end, unnecessarily
     leaving too nuch roca for raoveraent at the other end.

                                                                               continued
  E G McGee Esq                        - 2 -                   5 June 19c


   I accept that we should now be discussing the semi-final operation
  have asked Mr Goslin and Chief Superintendent Kerold to arrange ar
  meeting with Mr England./ I consider it advisable for the Safety a
 ~-r ~'u*Ui v_c.i-iii.ccee or the South Yorkshire County Council to visit t
  ^®±-?ings Lane end to discuss the problems encountered at the semi-
  with aj_view to taking farther preventive eeasuras.        1 do net wish
  spectators again climbing over the fence and it is therefore ii~c-
  tnat^Lhe construction of barriers and the arrangements of the crcv:
  t2ie Scopings Lane end should be looked at critically to ensure tha.
 -oiica anc the stawarcs are able to control and maintain order rr.or
 effectively within the terrace.          I am in favour of a free zone cr.
  '*“rraces -enind tne goal to wnicn spectators can be moved in an err

 although we must learn lessons from the semi-final, we should at t.
  <_i^.e get the whole natter into perspective. Considering that we h
 crowa of 50,000 and wo were faced with problems essentially not cr
 o.-.’n making, i.e. the irresponsible sale of tickets, the emergenc"
 ta^en-^oy the police did prevent a disaster without interfering wit
 gc;._e to the extent that play had to be stopped. There were some
 uisappointed ticket-holders who did not see the came, and althouc'-
 then were unfortunately delayed by traffic hold-ups and a raotcrvav
 accident, others x am s u m did net start their jour-ey early ence’:.
 compensate z o r tne p ossibilif- cf delay wnich should have been ar.t_
 "hen large numcers o: vehicles and pedestrians ?.r--» •J-sscenuing on a
 af°**         maucer of cemyiair.ts, although toe many, :o not indicat
 .vV.Oissaio concern:;a       j.-r actions.

*J* haVG uadarca&en cus ovn    debriefing and as usual are verv c-it<c
ourselves for not avoiding     the problems of sen,.!-- a number cf Tct
supporters to the Lepp ir.es   Lane end, and r am told that cnl” 7C o:
->5C spectators who en-ersd    the Le;.pir.es bane    over and above

taccac at r.alj: time to trans.'-sr the "cttai-ham   :?.-;rtars be tho f
■'Tt!     _nxnasig.\t. « ."noeuvre v.iich should ret have been at*ce:.;r .
.\ucitionaily, again -..-ith hindsight, wo feel tb^t cur Lraffic ;rr
can be improved an.      is .-ill b.^ -lonu.

I have tried to 1- u^-crucaive        .-.i= letter. I heve not attar.:
!!e::.f2irCf '•rc--                    Cf ensuri:.- th- =id =ty of s
a!" -i-l^c-rougr., .._t I r^gar- this tc be a -oir.t venture and su-.:-#
wnen we co get prohl--, as inevitably we --ill, v.v shculd stand'tc
aac retrain from !.laming one another esr.eciall" ’.efcre     ' ‘•he   -
been marshalled.

I hope wc can new cvn-entratt- our *n-ieavourj upon m-king the I?31,
season t r o u b l e - f o r si-occators, the club, and the outside pubi.
-u\ing taxen cogmci:nci* ci cur previous er-TT?eriences•

'ours sincerely
Chief Sup<5rintandant Herold,       Division                    F/P— /DR

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) EQs                       F
                                                                30 April 1981

              »   SiHX -\FZI<.AX*

 In accordance with-~ycur instructions, and due to your fully ccmitted
 diary this weak, I can report that I set with tha Club Secretary cf
 Shaffiald V72cnas-de.yy■Mr. E2ic England, prior to the natch vith Grinsby
 on Tuasday, 23 April 1021. >7e discussad our actions at the Sani-final
 and I Ir.-o m e d hia that the Chief Cons tabla would be reporting
 indapandantly cur position to the Football Association. In his report
 to tha F.A. ,tir.-England .is going to include that fact.

 I have acquaint ad him with all cur efforts to cove the 'Spurs fans
 Into tha las3 dansely packed central part of the tarracing and of tha
 usa of tha. public addrass systan, etc.

  Kr. England now tails ;za that daapita his earlier belief that the
 •referee, Clive Thomas, .was going to report adversely to the Football
• Association, in fact, he doss not now know whether Thcsas will do so or
  not. Certainly, tha F.A.orzicials were present and sav what occurred
  thenselvas and will, I think, Understand the position vhsn they raceiva
  the reports fron tha .Club and the Chief Constable.     ......

 I have inferred Kr. England that our consensus view is that tha 10,ICO
 crowd figure specified in the Safety Certificate is hoo high. Under­
 standably, he fafutas this and defands tha position by stating that the
 f o m e r capacity, prior to tha iEplecsntaticn of the Safety Of Sports
 Grounds-Actrat Hillsborough in Decsnber 1973, was 11.100, and that on a
 nunbar_2of occasions in previous all-ticket satches tha terracing has
 accc=--adated that nur.bar. Certainly, at tha 1900 Seni-fir.nl, when wa
 again had a capacity crowd of 50,174, we also had scsne hundreds of
 forged tickets, all for tha Loppings Lana end, and apart fran cna very
 ninor crushing of spectators there was no problen.

    -   England has been acquainted with our view that the Leppings Lane
 terracing should be sectioned ’virticaily' front to back to produce
 pans to enable =ore accurate crowd control and pravant sidaways cove-
 saat and he is. already activaly-'considaring this. Ha has also con­
 sidered using turnstiles 1-4 for cna part of tha tarracing and 5-5
 ror anothar 'part and controlling tha crowd entering through those turn­
 stiles by tha. placing cf safaty barriers in that open, araa between tha
 Lepping3 Lana turnstiles and tha back of the West St and/tarracing. "I
 agree with hin that for aost natchas that would possibly work but have
 grave reservations as—to its efficacy for tha potannially troublesome
 gaues. Addl ti.cnaJ.ly, to inplardent it he would have to find soma way
 for spectators to enter tha 3est Stand without crossing the other
 corridors cf supporters.

 Mr. England•accepts the prcblen with the tickets and, quite properly, •
  says that is a natter over which ha and tha Hillsborough Club ..
 ofricial3 had no control whatever. 'Spurs played Coventry cn tha Saturday
 before Wolves sold their ticket allocation on 'open sale*. .We do not
 know if soae stayed overnight or travelled on the Sunday to-tha Wolves •
•Club, but certainly.tha 'Spurs Club knav full, well fron tha* tin*     ;
varda-that-substantial nurbar3 of their supporters had purchased tickets
 ^-cr tha Wolves* end._ They did not tall us or Sheffield Wednesday.     >.
 SUBJECT:..    "SEMI-FHiSL '

T^S>.
    KirU '"”3 xscor^a“ '-D7                Iare incorrect vhan vs state
            sale by Kclverhanpton Wandersrs was Centra/ to '■cotball
Association directions.- T n - e were no such direction^, but en
agree=en_ between, tha r.A., the participating clubs and Sheffield
Wednesday, as to the ticket allocation, was quite clearly circurrranted.
Hr. England is-reco=snding to the P.A. that in future they should
give directions to participating clubs that they will not act in this
way and ^ast retain, or return, any unsold tickets and not put then on
open sale as Wolves.had done cn this occasion.

No other points of. any great importance were discussed but you should
be aware that'I-have-conceded to Hr. England that with hindsight ve
accept that our attempt to cove the 'Spurs fans frcs the perircete>-
              ,'~°P ’ d;2r±n9 ths limited period at half tine wan,.perhaos „
    a _3ed\ 1 kave told Hr. England that no police officsr encouraged
fans to clirsb the.-fence and, despits his opinion, all we dad was to
assist those who did so and became stuck or injured in the process.

I have also informed Hr. England of the Chief Constable’s concern at
the attitude of senior nenbars of the Hillsborough Club to you and tha
Chief Constable and of the±± apparent lack of co-operation and support.

I recc=>end that a report, setting out the Police position in this
case, new be compiled and forwarded under the Chief Constable’s
signature for the information of the Football Association.




Chief Superintendent



N.B.   (1)     I also recommend•that a copy of the Chief Constable’s •
               report to the F.A. ba forwardsd to the South Yorkshire
             'County Council in answer to the letter da tad 22 April 1981
              •frraa the Chief Executive (attached).

       (2) -Since dictating the foregoing I have r&caiwed frca Hr
            England
              :"    a critical letter
                                   ™ — frcs: u|_______________\t C  aL 'Spurs
            supporter, who was denied access to the ground although in
           possession of a perfectly genuine ticket. Hr. England has
           replied to ^                [to      ef f gcrZ that he will forward
           that gentleman s letter to me for cas=a«nt and I have drafted
           a letter of reply to hia, which X have attached hereto and
           which is ready for despatch, subject to your approval. You
           v i H soe that X have been extrenely frank in pointing out to
          —              _what becurred because clearly
                                                      -        he Is nursing a
          -justiciable sense o f gr ie van ce . My only quary is vhathax
          y°u-vish «>hat letter to be despatched before we have femaily
           co=aunica±ed with, the F . A . or whether you would vish to reply
          to hia along the lines, "Your connent3 have b e e n ‘noted ’and
          ** vill contact you again after the Batters you jraiae.haye
        — besn.investigated"?                                            •   —
South Y orkshire Police
            MINUTE SHEET

            Subject   -^§^...P^...? pQ?5?...®?P^s„act ...1975...-..swp.c.




            Please rind attached copy correspondence dated 8 September 1981
            from South Yorkshire County Council and 2 Sentember 1981 from
            Eastwood and Partners, together with plans showing details of
            new radial fences on West Terrace and details of new security
            gates (sheets 1 and 2).

            X understand Superintendent O'Neill is representing the division
            at the meeting at 9.30 am on Friday, 11 September 1981.




            Superintendent
            OPS 2WS/SM


            Enc

   -   2-
   Chief Superintendent Herold,        *F' Division

   I attended this meeting, together with Superintendent Chapman and
   Chief Inspector Stuart of Operations Division.

   Members of the Fire Service and Buildings Department were in
   attendance and the only reservations expressed were by the Fire
   Service, who indicated that the security gates - which will be
   open during football matches - should not in any way restrict the
   egress routes, which they feel are of minimum width as it is.

   The Buildings representative indicated he would seek further
   information regarding the construction materials to be used but
   this would pose no problem.




  Superintendent
  11.9.81
^     f A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                          BOWMAKER HOUSE
                        Consulting          Engineers                                         1-                                          23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                                          Sh e f f ie l d s n sa s
      W . E a s tw o o d             8 . E n g , P h .D . F.Eng.. F.I.C.E.
                                     F.I.Struet.E. F .G .S . M .Cons.E.                                                                   n’e l.:   (0 7 4 2 )   583871
      A.     A. W ood                B .E /is. P h .D . C .E n g . F.I.C.E.
                                     F .I.Suuct.E . M .I.W .E.S. M .Cons.E
      A.    G. B u r d e tt         G .M . B .Sc.(Eiig). C.Eng., M.I.C.&.

      R. C. A . E a s tw o o d      B.Sc., C.Eng„ M .l.C .E. M .I.S trjc tE .
      Associates:
      G e o f fr e y S p ir         C . £ n j . , M .I.C .E ., M .I.M e c h .E .
      C. S. G re a v e s            B .E n j ., C .E n g ., M .l.C .E ., M .I.S tr-.-c:.E .
      A. J . C lo u g h            B ^ . . C . E n j . , M .C .I.B .S .,.M .I.M e c h .E .
                                                                                                                   Our R e f :    W E / J A S / P B / 3 563
      J . A. S t r a n g e         C .E n c .. M .L S c ru c t.E .
                                                                                                                   Your R e f :
      Cansultcnt:
      A. L. P e r c y              M .T e c h .(H o n -), B.Sc., C . E n j . . F .I.C .E .,
                                   F .I.S c ru c t.E ., F .I . M u n .r ., M .R .T . r .l .




      S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C ounty C o u n c i l                                                                           o c  +
      C o u n t y Hall,                                 ’                                                                         2 September,                   1981
      B A RNSLEY, S. Yorks.
      S70 2TN.


                the      attention of Sir. D.                                                Vaughan.


      Dear Mr.                Vaughan,

                                 S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football Clu b L t d .
                                    R adial Fences                                           at Leppings Lane End

                    We have been i n s t r u c t e d by the Club to organise the
     i n s t a l l a t i o n of two r a d i a l                                      fences on the terrace at the
     Leppings             lane end of the ground.

                  It    is intended that these fences                                                     are so positioned
     that         they divide this s e c t i o n of the terrace into
     a p p r o x i m a t e l y three equal areas^                                                  each served by its own
     entrance.

               By d i v i d i n g the-terrace more control over supporters
    s h o u l d result.                  A v i s i t i n g team with only a few followers
    will be             a l located one section,                                               with the other            two sections
    r e t a i n e d by the home supporters.

               Larger           cont ingents of v i s i t i n g spectators could be
    a c c o m m o d a t e d in two or all three areas as their numbers
    dictate.

              A      1. 15 metre wide                                gate is proposed at the rear of
    each fence                to give access for maintenance and also policing
    d u r i n g a game.               The gate co u l d be                                         left open,        but fastened
    back,         to connect              the areas d u r i n g a game if adjacent ones


                                                               Registered in E ng lan d -            No. 1134531
                                                                                                  SHEET



EA STW O O D & PARTNERS




   are       accu p i e d by s u p p o r t e r s of the same team.         When e s t a b l i s h i n g
   the height we have c o n s i d e r e d that the views                 to the corner
   flags s h o u l d not be r e s t r i c t e d any further than they are at
   present by the p e r i m e t e r            fence.   We therefore propose            that    the
   top of        the fence s h o u l d be app roximately          1680mm above          the
   terrace.

              This m ay not      p r e ven t   the odd spectator c l i m b i n g the fence
   but s h o u l d e l i m i n a t e   a mass in vasion from one area to the other.
   F e nces     this height       appear       to w o r k successfully at St.           James's
   Park,       the home of N e w c a s t l e United.

              We w o u l d be p l e a s e d if this specific point can be discussed
  within        the W o r k i n g Pa r t y and your comments f orwar ded to us.

              Also to be i n c l u d e d in the same contract are some gates                       at'
   va r ious      locations      a r o u n d the north stand.         N o w the g y m n a s i u m is
  o p e n to the general pu blic sec urity to ether parts of the g r ound
  must be maintained.                  It    is proposed that gates are p r o v i d e d at
  the        top of the ra m p s       at both ends of the stand with ad d i t i o n a l
  gates        at g round floor         level at the Penistone Roa d end of the
  stand.         A s e p a r a t e gate will be placed b ehind the west r a m p to
  prevent        people    going r o u n d the rear of the g y m n a s i u m towards
  L e p p i n g s Lane.

         •        S i x copies of our d r a wing 3563/1 together with two copies
  of our drawings 3 563/2                   and 3   (for refer ence    only)    are enclosed.



                                                          Yours sincerely,




  c.c.       Mr. E. England,
             S.W.F.C. Ltd.
                 South Yorkshire Police
T o r­            MINUTE SHEET                   15 Sept 1981

ch Supt Herold
                  Subj«<* SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 _
F Division                SWFC




                 Sir

                 Please find attached for your information
                 copies of minutes of the meeting held at
                 Division Street Fire Station, Sheffield, on
                 11 September 19S1 and copy of letter dated
                 14 September 1981 to Eastwood and Partners
                 from South Yorkshire County Council.




                 Superintend ent
                 OPS IWS/SM

                 Enc




  ,   \
                                                           <£> P 1

  South YorkshireCounty Council
 F. A . M a lle tt . LL.B.,   C h ie f E xecutive                       C o u n ty Hall
                                                                        B arnsley
 J .C .H a rris , M .A ., LL.B., (C a n ta b ), C ou n ty Secretary     S o u th Yorkshire S 7 0 2 T N
 D e p a rtm e n t of A d m in is tra tio n                             Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                        ( S T D 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                        Telex: 54 7 6 7 5


 O u r Ref:    DV/SY/583/5                 V o u rR e f;   WE/KH/3563   D a te :   14th September, 1981.



 Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

 Referring to your letter of 9th September, the Officer Working Party
 (Sheffield District) has considered the proposals referred to in your
 letter of 2nc September and accompanying plans.

 1.      Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst welcoming the increased control on the Terrace which should
result, concern was expressed as to the problems which could occur with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or at the entry/
exit gates. However, it was felt that only experience would show
whether this would prove to be a reality and, if realised, whether the
problem was of. such a small scale that it could be easily coped with by
the police.

Accordingly, the Officer Working Party at this stage sees no objection
to the proposals to instal two 1680 mm high radial barriers, with 1.15
metre gates at the rear, on the West Terrace, subject to:-

 (a)    the further calculations required by the Building Authority being
        satisfactory (Mr. Sheriff to contact you direct);

(b)     confirmation that adequate headroom will be available at the rear
        of the Terrace after installation of the barriers and gates, and

(c)     the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being under police
        control.’

2.      Security Gates around North Stand

The Officer Working Party fully recognises the Club's need to provide
security for the remainder of the stadium wher. only the gymnasium is in
use.

Provided that the gates and/or their supports, hinges, etc. do not
impinge on the existing critical ramp widths and the gates are secured
in the .fully open position on match days, the Officer Working Party
sees no objection to the erection of security gates around the North Stand

Dr. W. Eastwood,                                               ^
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
Bowmaker House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield,
C*-\TTt-Vi VofVcVi7                                         — I
 Dr. W. Eastwood                - 2 -                 14th September,   1981.
                                         •i


 3.    Other Matters

 Two other matters were also raised by the Officer Working Party relating
 to the Police and First Aid Facilities and the siting of certain of the
 Lottery Ticket Boxes.

 (a)   Police and First Aid Facilities

       It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first
       aid facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim
       basis on the understanding that the Club would provide purpose built
       replacement facilities in the 1980 close season.

       It is appreciated that discussions on the detailed requirements are
       still continuing, but it is f£lt that the Club should be asked to give
       a firm indication when the new police and first aid facilities are to'
       be provided.
 (b)   Lottery Ticket Boxes

       Concern was expressed as to the blocked egress which could result if
       the timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps
       were to be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately

       The Officer Working Party felt that the Club should be requested to
       re-site the boxes in a less critical position.

I attach an additional copy of this letter for your use.

                                        Yours faithfully,




                                        Chief Executive.
                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT   1975

                      Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party
                      (Sheffield District), held at the Division Street
                      Fire Station, Sheffield, on 11th September 1981


  PRESENT:       D.  Chapman (South Yorkshire Police)
                 S.  A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                 P.  Garner (South Yorkshire Police)
                 D. Horner (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                 W. O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
                 J. Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                    fThe^iff       of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                 T. w. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
                 D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

 _L;     Purpose of Meeting

 The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
 and_pIans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the“
 ofeR^d?i? £eQneSday Foo"baTU         Ltd. relating to the proposederection
 of Radial Barriers on the West Terrace for crowd control purposes and *
 Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand now that the
 g/iL-idSluni was open to the general public.

 2 •         Racial Barriers on West Terrace

Whiist_there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance, the
 orbing Party felt tnat increased control on the Terrace should result
      5he Pr°P°sals. For instance there could well be problems with
                      at th?,re^ °f the West Stand and/or the final exit
gates, but t,.e police consicerea that they could cope with any problems
or this nature.                                                   - “ ~

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear of
the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the use of the
existing gates m the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
16T.aC£  •




It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room wnicn would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and gates be installed.


                    thai M,
                          r-‘ Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
t-,o '16Q 0 ~ " h tCer °rkJ-n= Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
™                     raulSl barriers> ^ t h 1.15 metre wide gates at the rear,
    tne West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

       (i)        the further calculations required by the Building
                   Authority being satisfactory;

       (ii)       confirmation that adequate headroom will be
                  available at the rear of the Terrace, and

       (iii)      the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being
                  under police control.
3 .____Security Gates around North Stand

Now^that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
erect security gates at the top of -the ramps at both ends of the North
Stand, with additional gates at ground floor level at the Penis tone Road
end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West
Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Leppingp Lane.          •

These gates would.be fastened when the gymnasium only was in use so as to
provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they
would be secured in the fully open position to allow unrestricted access.'

IT WAS AGREED that Hr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of security
gates around the North Stand, subject to* the gates and/or their supports, '
hinges, etc not impinging'on the existing critical ramp widths, and to the
gates being secured in the fully open position on match days.

4 .____ Police and First Aid Facilities

It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim basis.
The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
position to the existing timbered facili-ties during the 1980 close
season. Whilst some progress had been made in discussing details of the
facilities, no firm indication had yet been given as to when they would
actually be provided.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr..D. Vaughan should press the Club and/or its
Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new police and first
aid facilities are to?b-e provided.

5■    Lottery Ticket Boxes

Attention was drawn to the blocked egress which could result if the
timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps were, to
be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately,

IT WAS AGPJiED that Mr. Vaughan should draw the Club's attention to the.
desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes.
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                   Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party
                   (Sheffield District); held at the Division Street
                   Fire Station, Sheffield, on 11th September 1981


 PRESENT:     D.   Chapman (South Yorkshire Police)
              B.   A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              P.   Garner (South Yorkshire Police)
              D.   H o m e r (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              W.   O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
              J.   Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              T.   W. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
              D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

 1.____Purpose of Meeting

The_ purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
and plans suDmitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to the proposed erection
of Radial Barriers on the West Terrace for crowd control purposes and
Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand now that the
gymnasium was open to the general public.

2 .___ Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance, the
Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final exit
gates, but the police considered that they could cope with any problems
of this nature.

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear of
the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the use of the
existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
Terrace.

It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and 'gates be installed.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Worthing Party sees no objection to the proposals to insta
two 1 6 5 0 = high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre wide gates at the rear,
on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

      (i)-     the further calculations required by the Building
                Authority being satisfactory;

      (ii)     confirmation that adequate headroom will be
                available at the rear of the Terrace, and

      (iii)     the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being
               under police control.
•   ■



        3 .____Security Gates around North Stand

        Now _that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
        erect security gates at the top of -the ramps at both ends of the North
        Stand, with additional gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road
        end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West
        Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
        Leppingp Lane.              , ■

        These gates would .be fastened when the gymnasium only was ir. use so as to
        provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they,
        would be secured in the fully open pos-ition to allow unrestricted access.'

        IT WAS AGREED that Hr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
        that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of security
        gates around the North Stand, subject to* the gates and/or their supports, '
        hinges, etc not impinging'on the existing critical ramp widths, and to the
        gates being secured in the fully open position on match days.

        4 .____ Police and First Aid Facilities

        It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
        facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim basis’.
        The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
        position to the existing timbered facilities during the 1980 close
        season. Whilst some progress had been made in discussing details of the
        facilities, no firm indication had yet been given as to when they would
        actually be provided.

        IT WAS AGREED that Mr,.D. Vaughan should press the Club and/or its
        Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new police and first
        aid facilities are to-:-he provided.

        5 .   Lottery Ticket Boxes

        Attention was drawn to the blocked egresswhich could result if the
        timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps were, to
        be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately.

        IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should draw the Club's attention to the
        desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes.
I    •
 I
               The Chief Executive                                        D V /H H /5 3 3 /5
               South Yorkshire County Council
                                                                          F/RH/DR
               County Hail
               BARNSLEY                                                   13 January 1982
               South Yorkshire
               S70 2TN



               Dear Sir

               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOT3ALL CLUB LTD

               I refer to your letter of 23 December 1981 and to the letter from Messrs.
               Eastwood & Partners - the Club’s consulting engineers - relating to their
               proposals to erect a pair of security gates at the base of the two staircases
               at the rear of the West Stand at the ground. From a policing point of view I
               see no problem whatever concerning the erection of these gates, subject of
               course to then being secured in a fully open position during the time the
               public parts of the ground are occupied when matches are being played.

               Dealing now with the radial fences which have recently been installed on the
               Leppings Lane terracing, I can confirm that the fences are working particularly
               well and proving to be most satisfactory in effecting the segregation of
               opposing groups of fans. Since the fences were put up there has been no
               fixture at the ground of sufficient interest to result in that entire section
               of terracing being given to one group of fans and so I an unable to comment in
               that respect, but I see no problems whatever.

               However, there are one or too points concerning the actual construction of the
               fencing which give cause for concern from a police point of view. In some
               places the existing barrier rails harve been extended up to and completely
               through the new radial fences at a height of 4'6" or so from the ground,
              .making it very easy for fans to climb from one pen to another. In other
              places the existing barrier rails have been cut off short of the radial
               fences, leaving what the police consider to be dangerous pieces protruding
               into some of the gangways. This matter has been drawn to the attention of the
              Club Secretary, who has been advised of my intention to bring it to your
              notice. I would point out that Mr. England totally agrees with police
              observations regarding the construction of the radial fences but I understand
               from him that it is being suggested that any alterations could conceivably
              result in a reduction in the capacity of the Leppings Lane terracing. I am
              not aware of the thinking behind that but for my part see no reason why that
              should be.

         I    0     ^ .4: C.                                           Me
             Ur.          4>   i       i 8jA r f ; : 3 2
■   •
        2

        The Chisf Executive
        South Yorkshire County Council

        18 January 1982


        SAFETY OF SPORT? G?.CUTO? ACT, 1575
        SEEZTTZHIiD Vnzr^iZSDT'-.'I FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

        I apoicgiae for the delay in replying to you but I an sure you will appreciate
        that the recenc bad weather has necessitated the coac-jlicition of a ^urb®- o~
        matches at the ground which would cerhans have provided -jro-t-r ei-'-rie— ~
        the handling of spectator? within the new pens - particularly the Mtch"on “**
        Boxing Day.

        Yours fai




        Chief Superintendent




                                      V
       South •• Yorkshire Countvw* Counci
       F. A . M a llo tt . LL.B..   C h ie f Executive                       Ccunt> Ha!!
                                                                             Barnsley
       J .C . H arris , M .A ., LL .B .,(C an tab ), County S ecretary       South Yorkshire £70 2 1 '
       D e p a rtm e n t of A d m in istratio n                              Telephone: Barn? ey
                                                                             ( S T D C226) 861-
                                                                             Telex: r>47675


       Our Ref:                                 Your Ref:                    D a te ;
       DV/MH/583/5                               OPS/TS                      23rd Heceir.be; , 19£




 Dear Sir,

 Safety o f Sports Grounds Act, 1975
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

 I attach a copy of a letter dated 14th December and plan f’
                                                           .'om
 Messrs. Eastvood & Partners (the Club's Consultants) relating
 to the proposed erection of pairs of gates at the bottom of the
 two staircases at the rear of the West Stand at the Hillsborough
 Stadium.

 Perhaps you will let me have your comments on the proposal from
 a policing point of view, as well as confirming that the rndial
 fences and security gates already installed are proving to be
 satisfactory.

 An additional copy of this letter and enclosures is attach'd for
 Divisional use.

                                                         Yours faithfully,




                                                     Chief Executive




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD,
S3 8LY.
   E A S T W O O D 8- PART NERS                                                                                                 BOWMAKER              HOUSE
                   Consulting            Engineers                                                                             2 3 K IN G F iE L D R O A D

   W . E a s tw o o d                                                                                                          S H E F FIE LD S 1 1 9AS
                                  B.Eng.. P h D , F.Eng.. F.I.C.E,
                                  F .i.S tr u c t.E . F .G .S , M .C ons.E .                                                   T e l.:   (0 7 4 2 )   583 87 1
  A. A. W ood                     B .E n g . Ph.D.. C .E n g , F.I.C.E,
                                  F.l S tru c t. E , M .l.W E.S.. M .C o n s E
  A . G. B u rd e tt             G M „ B .S c .(E n g ), C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.

  R. C. A. E a s tw o o d        B.S c.. C .E n g , M.I.C.E.. M .I.Stru c: E.
  JU saootes :
   G e o ffre y S p ir          C . E n g . , M .I .C .E .. M .I .M « c h .E .

  C. S. G re a v e s             B . E n t . . C . E n j , M .I .C .E ., M .I . S t r u c t . E.

  A. J . C lo u g h             B > . . C . E n j . . M . C .I .B .S .. M .I . M « e h . E .
                                                                                                              Our.BeU— KE/JAS / S R / 3 5 6 3
  J . A. S tr a n g e           C . E n j . . M .I.S tru ci-E.
                                                                                                              Your Ref :                         j
  Consultant:
  A. L. P ercy                  M .T « c h .(H o n .l. B.Sc.. C . E n t . . F.I.C.E.
                                F.l .S tr u c t. E - . F.I.M u n.E .. M .A .T .P I.
                                                                                                                  ISDtCMi
                                                                                                                    hall.          ---
                                                                                                                  W*EKir;t '70 2 ix


  South Yorkshire County Council                                                                                            14 December,              1981
  County Hall,
  Barnsley,
  South Yorkshire.
  S70 2TN


  For        the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

  Dear Mr.               Vaughan,

                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                         Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End
                                          and Security Gates

                 The work on the radial fences and security gates
 indicated on our drawings 3563/1-3 which we sent                                                                          to you on
• 2 S e ptember 1981,                             is now su? .-:.t: vc -..uJ '                              mcl
                 Three     first team home games have been played since the
 fences were erected.                                             We have not heard any formal comments
 from the Working Party about the oper ation of the fences and
 their a ccess gates but we understand that representatives of the
 South Y o r kshire Police have inspected the work and they are
s a t i s f i e d wi t h the new arrangements.
                 To increase security it is proposed that pairs of gates
are       installed at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of
the West             Stand.               Two copies v r                                           ur drawing 3563/4 are enclosed
s h o w i n g details of the gates.




                                                                                                   Yours sincerely,



                                                            Reoi$tered1n*Engian3 - N o T T i3 4 5 3 1 '
                   -       .7             i
   South Yorkshire County Counci
  F. A . M a l le t t . L L .B .,   C h ie f Executive                     C o u n ty Ha!!
                                                                           Barnsley
  J .C . H a rris , M .A ., LL.B., (C a n ta b ), C ounty S ecretary.      S ou th Yorkshire S 70 2 T N
  D e p a r t m e n t of A dm in istratio n                                Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                           ( S T D 0 2 2 6 ) 85141
                                                                           Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5


  Our Ref:        DV/SY/583/5                   Vou.-Ref: WE/JAS/SR/3563   D a te :   20th Januarv, 1982.


 Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

  In reply to your letter dated 14th December, 1981, I understand that
  the Building Authority has contacted your office direct for clarification
. on a small number of points regarding the proposed installation of pairs
  of gates at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of the West
  Stand.  Subject to the satisfactory resolution of these points and, of
  course, to the gates being secured in the fully open position during the
  time the public parts of the stadium are occupied when matches are
  being played, the Officer Working Party has no objection to the proposals.

 As regards the radial fences installed on the West Terrace and the
 security gates around the North Stand, the Officer Working Party wishes
 to make the following comments

 (a)           Radial Barriers on West Terrace

 The matches played at the stadium since -the installation of the barriers
 confirm that they appear to be working well and satisfactorily effect the
 segregation of opposing groups of fans. However, the entire section of
 the Terrace has yet to be given to one group of fans.

The Police inform me that, on installation of the new radial barriers,
the existing crush barriers have been extended in some places up to and
completely through the new. radial barriers at a height of 4'6" or so
from the ground. The effect is to make it very easy for fans to climb
from one pen to another.   In other places the existing crush barrier
rails have been cut off short of the radial barriers in a manner which
leaves dangerous pieces protruding into some of the gangways.

(b)           Security Gates around the North Stand

You will recall that my                        letter of 14th September, 1981 stated that,
provided that the gates                        and/or their supports, hinges, etc., do not
impinge on the existing                        critical ramp widths, the Officer Working Party
saw no objection to the                        erection of the security gates.

I am informed that the manner in which the gates have been installed
has resulted in each gate's hinge impinging at least 7j" into the width
of Che ramp. This means that there is a 15" reduction in width of the
Dr. W. Eastwood,                                             ~^
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
♦
    Dr. W. Eastwood                 —9 —
                                                              20th January,   1982.



    means of escape on each ramp.

    As the Annual winter inspection of the-Hillsborough Stadium is due
    to take place anytime around now, I would suggest the opportunity be
    taken to discuss these matters at the inspection.

    Perhaps you would contact Mr. D. Vaughan of my staff (extension 422)
    so that the necessary arrangements may be made.

    An additional copy of this letter is attached for your use.

                                           Yours faithfully,



                                                 A . nAx.tsnr


                                           Chief Executive.
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                  Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                      Sheffield on 4th February, 1982


PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

           E. England          (Secretary)
           Dr . W. Eastwood    (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
           J. S trange         (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           Ms   . J. Barker       (South Yorkshire Police)
           R.    Hero Id          (South Yorkshire Police)
           D.    Horner           (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           M.    Johnson          (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D.    Sheriff          (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                   Council)
           D. Sumner              (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                   Council)
           D. I . Vaughan         (South Yorkshire County Council)
           F. Waterhouse          (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1 .____Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to discuss»£he apparent difference of opinion
on certain aspects of the radial barriers installed on the West Terrace
and the security gates at the top of the North stand ramps, as well as to
carry out the usual winter inspection of the Stadium.

2 .____Ground Inspection

A.   West Terrace

Whilst the whole Terrace had yet to be used, the matches played since the
erection of the radial barriers indicated that generally they worked well and
satisfactorily effected the segregation of opposing groups of fans.

However, the police pointed out that in places the existing crush barriers
had been extended up to and, in some cases, completely through the new
radial barriers, which had the effect of making it relatively easy for anyone
who wished to do so to climb from one pen to another. Also, in the pen
nearest to the South Stand, a small length of existing crush barrier had been
left unsupported.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That, on balance, it was preferable from a safety point of view to
prevent crowd surge by the existing barriers being extended up to and/or
through the new radial barriers than to completely prevent persons being
able to climb from one pen to another, subject to review at the end of the
current season.

(ii) That the unsupported small length of existing crush barrier wquld
be cut off.
 B.    West Stand *

 One of the security gates which the Club wished to instal at the bottom of
 the two staircases had now beer, erected.                                                           ""i

 IT WAS AGREED     that this could be regarded as satisfactory.
                                                                      (.               Io J   lj 4
 C.    North Stand
                                                                           iJ tJ u A     L. J ,

 The Fire Service felt that the manner in which the security gates had been     P
 installed at the top of the ramps unduly restricted the 'exit width available.

 The Cluo s Consultants and tne Fire Service disagreed on the intemretation
 of paragraph 16 of the "Green Guide", and consequently on the figure to be
 applied in the calculation for assessing whether the exit width lost at the top
 of the ramps by the method of security gate installation was critical or not.

 IT WAS AGREED   that, as   the point might well have been covered in the
 initial consideration of   the Club's application for a General Safety
 Certificate, the point would not be pursued at the moment.

       NOTE - A search of   the file subsequently revealed that,as
              suspected, the point had been considered at a
              meeting of the Officer Working Party on 12.2.79,
              tne relevant part of the Note of the meeting reading:—

                "the construction and width of the ramos beine    .            I   A    t
                 such that they could quite^properly be     %            U                  /
                 regarded as elevated roadwavs".          < * *•    A             .I
                                                            a .-T   A ® .    < & .# ; 0 , K
D.    Spion Kop                                                        ______ '
                                                                                          «*
It was noted that the infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on
the left or tns original exit at tne top of the Kop had taken place; that
the boundary fence at the top of the Kop had been reinforced, and that the
existing barriers had been permanently extended and the area at the foot
of the new Kop exit (adjacent to the brick built refreshment point)         ^
levelled off as agreed.                                                   Vr

E.    South Stand

The agreement to visually inspect the roof trusses for apparent deflection
after exceptional gala or snow loading conditions was recalled.

F.    Items of General Maintenance

IT    AGfL.iD    tnac tr.e roilowir.g items of general maintenance required
attention

(i)   The rouncing off o: the corners on the steelwork of the underside of
the exit at the southerly end of the West Stand (to be done that day), as     /
well as the rounding off of the brackets to the North Stand security gates, v

(ii) The repair or replacement of the corroding stanchions supporting the
fencing and sheeting above the boundary wall on the right hand side of
Gate "0".


                                         -2-
  (iii) The cracks‘in the concrete terracing of the Spion Kop to be filled.

 (iv) The wooden support to the electrical line between the brick built
 refreshment point and the Owls Club to be fixed mere securely.

 (v)   The brick wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop (nearest
 to the South Stand) to be pointed.

 (vi) The concrete supporting strut to the wall between the Spion Kop and
 the South Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop) to be protected (cracks and
 exposed bar).

 G.    Temporary Structures

 Concern was expressed as to the possibility or inadequate structural stability
 of temporary structures, such as scaffolding used in connection with
 television transmissions.

 Paragraph 20 of the Club's General Safety Certificate required T.V. cameras
 and portable equipment to be placed only in such positions as may be agreed
 between the Police and the Club. The Club also were generally required to
 ensure that the Stadium complied with good engineering and building practices
 and with the relevant British Standard Specification or Cede of Practice.

 IT WAS AGREED that the question of temporary structures should be kept
 under review, and that the Club's Consultants should give advice to the


 3.    Future Develoomer
                velopments                               .J      if   f

 A.    Police and First Aid Facilities

‘ It was likely that, following continuing consultations with the Police, the
  Club would shortly be in a position to formally notify the County Council     '
  that the new Police and First Aid Facilities would be provided in the     \ /
 forthcoming close season.

B.     Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penis tone Read

The Club hoped to formally notify the County Council shortly of their
intention to proceed in the forthcoming close season with the demolition of
some of the existing toilets on the Penis tone Road side of the Stadium in /
order to provide additional turnstiles and exit gate on that side of the v
S tadium.

C.    Widening of Walkway and Erection of Xew ~er.ee

Because of drainage problems, the existing concrete panel fence to the
rear of the Spion Kop (nearest to the Owls Club) had had to be removed.(
When settlement was complete, it was intended to widen the existing
walkway and erect a new fence on the revised line.




                                  I


                                      •M l           .
                     S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E

                                                             REF:            F/RH/DR
■ Chief Superintendent Herold, .'F‘ Division
                                                             STATION/DEPT:   'F* DHQ -
 A/Superintendent Smith and Inspector Calvert                DATE:
                                                                             18 August 1981

   SUBJECT:   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY. FOOTBALL GROUND
              EDUCATION OF CLUB STEWARDS

   You are both aware of my feelings that Club Stewards at Hillsborough often
   do less than they should and are at times not aware of our function and
   operation and our respective roles.

   I crossed swords with them personally once or twice last season and in an
   effort to set things right for the coming season I have arranged, through
   ■the Club Chairman and the Secretary - Mr. England - for the stewards to
   attend in the gymnasium at 1 pm on Saturday, 22 August 1981, prior to
   starting their duty, and I should like you to address them.

   They should be told very bluntly that each of them should be aware of the
   location of their respective fire points, emergency exits, the recently
   introduced evacuation procedures, how to react to the broadcasting of the
   nursery rhyme records, etc.etc. They should also have drawft to their
   attention the Ground Rules of the Club, and in particular the recently
   introduced (and even more recently revised) Rule 15 which, in effect,
   appoints police officers as- agents' of the Club and allows us to deny
   admission to the ground on the Club’s behalf.

   We' should stress to the stewards that the admission of spectators and the
   packing of _ih6se'3p"ectators at the "bigger j g ^ e s on to the terracing is _
   primarily their’"function and not a police one.

  - Such unruly behaviour as the throwing of cushions, etc., also falls within
   their responsibility. -              _                      ’

   When I received critical letters from the Club Chairmanaalast year after   —
   several of the matches, I replied to the effect that much of the cjdLticsm
   he levelled at the police'should more properly have been levelled at his
   own administration and the stewards. ...

   We should cooperate- fully with them and they with us, and not pull in
   opposite directions.

   I remember one particular incident (I believe during the Derby County
   game last year) when the steward on the South Stand Terracing close to our
   new Control Box quite deliberately ignored fans climbing the railings
   between the Leppings Lane Terracing and the South Stand Terracing when I
   and a number of other officers had witnessed it and drawn it to his attention
   The steward subsequently maintained that the fans in question had occupied
   those seats for the whole of the time, obviously with a view to 'taking the
   easy way out1.

   That is not their function, and indeed it would be my intention i_n certain
   circumstances to call upon stewards to give statements of evidence that
   might support a prosecution. In the past we have never done, that but they
   would be good and relatively independent witnesses.

                    11   both understand what I have in mind and get the message
                    ards. I have already personally told the Club Chairman and
    the Secreta   of my views and they both support them.
^ A S T W O O D a- P A R T N E R S                                                                                       oc. rtiiurewjj iioudd
               (C o n su ltin g     E n g in e ers)                                                                      23 K ingfieid Road
                                                                                                                         S h effield S11 9AS
Directors:
W . E astw o o d              F.Eng., B .E ng, Ph.D.. D .E n g ..._ .                              :y >   ■ COUBia       T e l.: (0742) 583871
                                                                                             £ CO
                              C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.l.Strtict.E.f .                                                      T e le x :     547266
                              F.l.M ech.E., F.G.S., M .c d n s.E " '

A. A. W ood                   B.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng.. F.I|C.E„                                                                               and at:
                              F .I.S tru c tE , M X W .E S , M.Cons.E.

R. C. A . E as tw o o d       B.Sc.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .lStruct.E .                                                       36 H ig h H o l b o r n
                                                                                                                            London WC1V 6AA
G . Spir                      C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Mech.E.                                   .      5 573   W a
                                                                                                                            T el.: (01) 242 743S
                                                                          t
Associates:
C.   S. G re av e s           S .E n g ., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M .i.S c ru c t.E .
                                                                                                          Our R e f :   WE/JF
J.   A. S tr a n g e          C .E n g ., M .!.S cru c t.E .

G.   D o u g h ty             C .E n g ., F*I.Struct.E .                                                  Your Ref:
S.   P reston                 B .E ng., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M J .S c r u c t.E .

R.   T an d y                 C .E n g ., F.I.Seruce.E.

C onsultant:
A. G. B u r d e t t           G .M ., B .S c.(E n f-), C .E n g .,
                              F.I.C .E ., F.I.Scrucc-E.




South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                           9 April,      1985
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
BARNSLEY'

For the attention of Mr D Vaughan

Dear Mr Vaughan,
                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
        S egregation of Visiting Spectators at Leppings Lane End

             The club is anxious to segregate the visiting team's supporters
 as they enter the ground,                                                     and also to enable the police to control
 their exit at the end of a game.
             We have prepared the scheme shown on the attached print of our
 drawing 6705/2.                        This involves the construction of two new banks of
 turnstiles               (Nos 17 - 21 and 22 - 29),                                               and various runs of fencing
 and new g a t e s .
             It would be appreciated if the Working Party could consider this
 proposal at an early date.                                                       Mr Chester has already given a copy of
 the drawing to the police so that they have had some advance notice.




                                                                                         Yours sincerely,




 c.c.          Mr R. Chester
                                       An Unlimited Company, Registered In England - No 1833144
                                                                                                                    FENCE AND GATE
                                                                                                                    UNDER STAlfS.

                                                                                              EXISTING
                                                                                              REFRESHMENTS & BAR.
                                                                           /NEW
                                                                          / LADIES



                                                                            TOILET.


                                                                                          1     VISITING SEATED
                                                                                                 SUPPORTER'S.



                                                                                                                                NEUTRA
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                         VISITING SUPPORTER'S                                   VISITIN
                                                                          TERRACE .                                             TERRAC



            EAS TWOOD & PARTNERS                                                      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL
            C o n s u ltin g   Engineers                                              POSSIBLE MODIFICATION TO ENTR
            S t. A n d r e w s H o u se
            2 3 K in g fie ld Road
                                                                                      LEPPINGS LANE END.
            S h e f f i e l d S11 9 A S    T « l. ( 0 7 4 2 )   583871



:.as.Ltd.
         SCALE

N.T.S.
  D R A W IN G No,

6705/ 2 .
        South Yorkshire County Council
        Chief Executive & County Clerk:                           Department of Administration
        J. C. Harris, M.A., LL.B.(Cantab)                         County Hall
                                                                  Barnsley
                                                                  South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                  Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                  (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 8 6 1 4 1
                                                                  Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

        Our Ref:   DV/AA/583/5        Your Ref:    O P S /J B     Date:   12   April 1985


        This matter is being dealt with by        D. Vaughan      Ext




 Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Ground Act, 19 75
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

 Confirming the 'phone conversation between our respective
 officers yesterday, a further meeting of the Officer
 Working Party (Sheffield District) will be held at 10 am
 on Thursday, 18th April, 1985, at the Police Sports and
 Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield.

The purpose of the meeting is to consider the letter
dated 9th April and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners
relating to the Club's proposal to construct two new banks
°f turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in
order to achieve segregation of visiting supporters at the
Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Stadium (copy of the
letter and plan forwarded under separate cover).

No doubt you will arrange to be represented at both
Headquarters and Divisional levels, as usual.

                                              Yours faithfully,




                                              Chief Executive.
                                             Z^J




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield.
S3 8 LY
J




                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                    Note of a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
                    District) held at the Police Sports & Social Club, Niagara
                                  Sheffield, on 18th Aoril 1985


    PRESENT: N.   Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
             C.   Calvert   (South Yorkshire Police)
             R.   Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)        i— ' 7
             G.   Stanley   (South Yorkshire Police)
             T.   Stewart   (South Yorkshire Police)               S ' /
             G.   Sykes     (South Yorkshire Police)
             D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
             A.   Vickers (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)


    1.    Purpose of Meeting

    The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 9th April
    and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to the proposals of
    the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks of
    turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
    segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the
    Hillsborough Stadium.

    2.    Consideration of Proposals

    The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
    prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club. At one
    time, both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
    for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances
    at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of use by
    home supporters as well.

    The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
    Police representatives, subject to:-

    (a)   additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
          and the wall of the inner access- road;

    (b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral area or
          visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new
           central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
          pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit entry
           to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
           secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
           on the plan to be abandoned);

    (c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters'
          terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
          running from back to front with two gates (the existing radial
          fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
          home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

    (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have'additional exit gates
          installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
          area


                                             1.
+

    The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
    subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects,
    and the Building Authority similarly saw no objection, subject to
    submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

    3.   Action

    IT WAS AGREED

    (a) That R. Grimshaw should investigate as a matter of urgency the means
    of escape aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the
    outcome.

    (b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
    County Fire Service, the outline proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastwood
    & Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
    Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the submission of the
    necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act and Building Regulations.




                                           2.
          South Yorkshire County Counci
         Chief Executive & County Clerk:                             Department of Administration
         J. C. Harris. M.A., LL.B.(Cantab)                           County Hall
                                                                     Barnsley
                                                                     South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                     Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                     (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 8 6 1 4 1
                                                                     Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

         Our Ref: D V / A A / 5 8 3 / 5   Your Ref:      W E /J F    Date: 2 M a y     1985


         This matter is being dealt with by             D. Vaughan   Ext. No.   422.



 Dear Sirs,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1985
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club~PLC

 In reply to your letter dated 9th April, whilst a meeting of the
 Officer^ Working Party (Sheffield District) was held on 18th April
 to consider the proposals which you outlined, the County Fire
 Service requested additional time to consider the means of escape
 aspects.

 I am now able to say that, subject to the incorporation of the
 following points and to the submission of detailed plans and
 calculations under both the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and
 Building Regulations, the proposals outlined are regarded as
 generally acceptable

 (a) additional gates being provided between the turnstile
      numbered 16 and the wall of the inner access road;

 (b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral
        area or visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in
       half by a new central radial .fence running from the tunnel
        entrance to the pitchside security fence with gates erected
        so as to permit entry to be diverted to either half as
        appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial fence
       adjacent to the existing fence indicated on the plan to be
       abandoned);

(c)    the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters'
       terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial
       fence running from back to front with two gates (the existing
       radial fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral
       area and home supporters - to have a second gate installed);



                                                      /Contd . . .


Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
St. Andrews House,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield.
Sll 9AS
*

                                   -   2   -




    (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit
          gates installed — one in the neutral area and one in the
          home supporters area;

    (e)   certain gates to have the minimum widths (in metres) indicated
          on the attached plan and to them being fully supervised.



                                               Yours faithfully,




                                               Chief Executive.
                                                                                                      9




                                                                                                          n>




                                                                   EXISTING REFRESHMENTS ANO BAR.




                                                        3BES9

                 E AST WO OD & PARTNERS
                 C o n s u ltin g    Engineers
                                                                                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                 S t. A n d r e w s H o u se
                 2 3 K in g fie ld R o sd
                                                                                        EXISTING LAYOUT OF L
                 S h e ffie ld      S11 9 A S    t« i. (0 7 4 2 ) s a 3 8 7 i


C.D.S. L t d .
EASTW O O D & PARTNERS




     6705/15    Repairs to Crowd Control Barriers -
                Spion Kop.
           16   Plan on Spion Kop - Barrier Numbering
           17   Details of New Radial Fence on West Terrace
           18   Details of New Fences on Access Level of
                W est Stand.
           19   Location Plan for Crowd Security Fence,
                West Stand.




                                  Yours sincerely,
E A S T W O O D & P ARTNERS                                                                                                                             S t. A n d rew s House
              (C o n su ltin g      E n g in e ers)                                                                                                     23 Kingfield Road
Directors:                                                                                                                                              S h effield S11 9AS
W . E a s tw o o d            F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D.. D.Eng..                                                                                            T e l.: (0742) 583871
                              C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..
                              F .I .M s c h i. F.G .S.. M .Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                                        T elex:          547266
A . A. W o o d                B.Eng., Ph.D.. C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                                                                                                                                                                            and at:
                              F.I.Struct.E.. M.I.W.E.S.. M.Cons.E.
R. C. A. E as tw o o d        B.Sc., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.!.Struct.E.                                                                                        36 H ig h H o l b o r n
G. Spir                       C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Mech.E.                                                                                                London WC1V 6AA
Associates:
C. S. G re av e s            B .E n j., C .E n j ., M .I.C .E .. M .I .S tr u c t.£.
                                                                                                                                          02                Tel.: (01) 242 7436


J . A. S tr a n g e          C . E n j ., M .I.Seruce.E.                                                                                               WE/KWP/SEB/6705
S. P r e s t o n              B.Eng., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M .I.Seruce.E.                                                     Your R e f :                    __ _
R. T an d y                  C . E n j ., F .I.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                               .                 k    [    i.'.i'iN l Y      I 0;
G. M. S e a m a n             B.Sc., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                       ■ - t . i r l f ' H r,.   ■>       "I ,r     1,,   r - [ jor-
J . M. W o o d                B.Sc., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M .l.S tru c t.E .

Consultant:                                                                                          2 0         J!ji. SViiS
A. G. B u r d e tt           G .M .. B .Sc.(E nS.). C . E n . .,
                             F .I.C .E ., F .I.S tru c t.E .                            tfjtijljf *?au.                                        y            >


South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                                                        25 July 1985
Department of Administration
County Hall,
Barnsley
S . Yorks


For the attention of Mr. D. Vauahan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                   Segregation of Visiting Spectators at
                                                                        Leppings Lane End

              Further to our preliminary submission in April 1985, we
enclose six copies of the drawings as follows
              6705/ 1             Existing Layout of Leppings Lane Entrance
                        6         Details of the New Central Fence on Wes t Terrace
                        8A        Modifications to Entrance Routes & Revised
                                  Layout of Facilities.
                       9A         Proposed New Ladies Toilets Under West Stand
                      10A         Details of New & Refurbished Toilets at
                                 Leppings Lane End.
                      11A        Details of New Refreshment Facilities Under
                                 E levated North West Terrace.
                      12         Details of New Handrail at Leppings Lane
                                 Entrance and Barrier on West Stand.
                      13         Details of New Safety Barrier East Side of
                                 North Stand.
                      14A        N ew Brickwork Wall - Leppings Lane End

                                  An Unlimited Company, Registered in England -                                               No. 1 8 3 3 1 4 4
                                                                                                                                       I




                                                            T ill
                                                                                                                         V.*y
                      8 -fry
                                              <o!Yl        s.*.



                                   % % ~ \                        t c %
                          17
                E                        f-       \                      '< §
P\


                                                      hp   nn
                                                           111! 1
                                                                  'i
                                          GBTS                                              SUB
                                          T O IL E T S .                                    STATION.

        J       l — KTELETi PARTITIONED OFF                            ,- - - - - - - - -
                                                                                 HEW
                                                                                  RcFRESHMEHTS.


                                                                       1____
                                HOME SEATED
                                 SUPPORTERS .
            I     I



      iE'JTHAL AREA
            OR                                                             HOME SUPPORTERS
     ’'ISiTING SUPPORTERS
                                                                            TERRACE.
       rERRACE
                HEW S E M M V        !
                Siam f a c t         [                                                                   3
                                                                                                       DRAWN      J.C.
       BALL CLUB' P.L.C.                                                                               CHECKED
       ENTRANCE ROUTES AT                                                                                                       □ R A W IN G
                                                                                                       APPROVED


                                                                                                       DATE       APRIL 35
                                                                                                          Fc?G AJiO .
                                                                                                          UNOEH S T i.

                                                                                EX1STIHS
                                                                                REFHESHMEHTS & 3AH.

                                                             / LADIES


                                                               NEW GEKIS
                                                               rOIlET.


                                                                                     VISITING SEATED
                                                                                      SU PPO R TE R 'S.




                                                            VISITING ' SUPPORTER'S
                                                             TERRACE.



EASTWOOD                       St. P A R T N E R S                      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FQO;
C o n s u ltin g     E n g in e e rs                                    POSSIBLE MODIFICATION TO
S t. A n d r e w s
23
                       House
     K in g fie td #Road
                                                                        LEPPINGS U N E END.
Sheffield          S11 9 A S           T*l. (07*3) 333371
                                    nitn


                                                                           THE OWL SHOP.




                                                     UDIES TOILETS.




                    Q
            =1     IP              =3 i a
                                                      □    1

           GEHES        TOILETS.

                        JI
                                            EXISTING SUBSTATION.
                                                                                                         \

  STAND.


                                                                                    7/ * . / ? • /      SCALE
1TBALL CLUB P.L.C.                                                    d r a w n


                                                                      CHECKED
                                                                                              .it
                                                                                                       1:250
■PPINGS LANE ENTRANCE.
                                                                      APPROVED                       D R A W IN G   No.

                                                                                      2-7 -8 5       6 7 05 /1
                                                                                                                                                                                         I
               Notes.
 E        - g g io e ^ q k .

              ir<3    >
                                        A U o

                           »7> ^ g g . ^ 1 1 /
                                                   E 2 U S E .                             fc ^ v J E S L U

                                                                                        c ^ n J
                                                                                                                      T     o    ^

                                                                                                               s 7 e e .I c h ^ u J e L
                                                                                                                                         U    ^       W
                                                                                                                                                                                         I
     -         A ud           S3Ye.h\- px=S=p£,                   p«R £ g g -/ \<=-^=                 .




                                        A ^ C5                              To « U        s t   U     s        7 *. 1& Aii-lTa Z^Vl
                                                                                                                                                                         HEW WALL M f Pi
         - . - 'A   s s o q a     J   e d       a c c e s s          © s z te s ,        a jJ d           nne .c .h   ^ J \      s       >a   s   .
                                                                                                                                                                         TO H A K T :XIS
3 ^ = r& t* iW d E W ^ u i a J s i i l s fo V c c id
  —            L-oe^sJ^’
                       otJ               e e     -c   s e
                                                                                         ly
                                                                 srye..E\.w«sc:\4 A»e>o\/e w^\wi vJ^AL
                                                                                                                          reu sed
                                                                                                                                                                                     i
               ^^2.z^ kJci.e;>^e_w_Y ^ yac^. A—tkYcu-iy e>&p^A.s> « p k ie W
                                                                                                                                                             SEE DUG 6705/12..
                                  <-£. &A-<=<=.U1 ~F=» t s E                         A£>      Exj&fTt-je,.                                                              v
M -.          d b a        ^ I is h     ■£n c i s ^ u c , T ^ ^ j - J s T v V e . g=L<=<=.v£., e h n k q .'/s .
              D S M        o \.iS H £ D           > /^ T y c 5 Z .\^ \.      'y .o .              fc \jfiw V le .

               S s o ‘X2fLA<::;s- T«=» \-*.VeA. a s ^ .a jA .c .e w ’Y s=>r\l^skE.vJ
               AA>A»<t a r>AN \— vJeA .dK -lO Q2 S aa*a ) , b A S H . c^a.oJZSbE.
 -          (j= = *= > h ***) ok J             E-<iS>‘Y«o<=.            HAXZTTJcxaeE.                                                .
 ~ =>‘         Z s '° < ^ 6 .          AW D           E E -iiS E .                  pcV -I C.H.      H=»£YvsiE.E.>-j                                                                     i
                                                 AwIO            O tT fE .^ f E j c E . f= ,* E .£ y                             p H v ic t -
              W     i^ H                                  c x j a   [e d      p s z ^ p .le c s           £ > 7 e _ tJ L    S H E . 5 T [ , fcj < = .

              2S           DEH]3       r^£c£T['i<=3t-i         CaVooR.                 EE.f       1S> E.&2, -p=, H-&. 4.3,00
              T"       S£        P^-A.'S'JiSoV C -o ^ Y eo •ojJ H=<=|h pACES>.                                                                                     EXISTING- M.H.
O.            p^^/'De.                j4 h w      c«^gcoU                     s^p^YvcATz.fc o p e v j
             <=.W^>JjJe\» C ^ ^ W y AC5jA«E.v-lY            KS.\.O04aTyfe.o c^^Ye.
              O c ^ w itc .'Y T*=* E^ ',ST'v-aCL, MA vJ h o Ve .
7-           K E lo C ^ E A U O E.H. -«Jy==H- p^w lcE / c^ATh. £ 3tTw/E.E.v4
             1folZ.v4«>T»\.&s S s / *1 A U D J h E ov-jI s h o | ?
             ow l's. V-1E.W ps^kJeV o p pS.vJic.E. \<=3 12.E .Q U i\eE .O .



                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                            a                                    n                               rr                      I
                                                                      Exinms KEfREstiMEfrrs                    anq         bar
                                                                                                                                                           R JT
                                                                                                                                                              LADIES             P   I
                                                                                                                                                             -JGU£T4
                                                                                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                                                                      SEE 0R& 6705/10#               I
                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                 ■WEST STAND.
                                                                                                                                                                                     I
          ’E A S T W O O D & ‘PARTNERS                                                                    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FO O f
          C o n s u ltin g      Engineers
          S t. A n d r e w s H o u se                                                                     MODIFICATIONS TO ENTRANCE |
          2 3 K in g fie ld R oad
          S h e ffie ld        S11 9 A S              t« i. ( 0 7 4 2 ) 3*3 3 7 1
                                                                                                          LAYOUT OF FACILITIES AT
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                   \
I




              SHEETED FENCE, ACCESS
              5ATE TO BE MAINTAINED.

                                                  HOME    SUPPORTERS



  OLISHED _
lURHSTILESX
                                       /


*> ^                                 -! " t Z x *        ‘        *m


                nztocuared oeanz..
        newcharcoh        safehcurb .                        RE-USE EXISTING
                                                             OATE. “
                                                                          \
       HEW TURNSTILE BLOCk
       TO HATCH EXISTING                                 LINE OF RELOCATE!)'
                                                         FENCE.* ~~7


                                                         ONE NEW PANEL
                                                         REQUIRED

          \       ^PERSONNEL ACCESS
/     \         /door.
*5/11



                                                    REFURBISHED LADIES TOILETS
                                                    SEE DR5 6705/9.P



1
    SBISHED                    REFURBISHED         d!    LISTING SUBSTATION
I T S TOILETS       UP,        sents toilets       q|


      8705/10r>                                                                              HEW REFRESHMENTS
                                                                                             UHDER ELEVATED
                                                                                             NORTH WEST TERRACE
                                                                                             SEE DR5 670 5/11.




                                                                                                                     SCALE
j|L CLUB P.L.C                                                                   d r a w n   /.t>?.uuils^n


Ses AND REVISED                                                                  CHECKED
                                                                                             Qi'JL                   1:250
fNGS LANE END.                                                                   APPROVED                         D R A W IN G   N o.



- | -------------------------------------------                                  DATE        ss-e»-a?              6705/8 «
 E A S T W O O D & P ART NER S                                                                                                    St. A n d re w s House
                (C o n su ltin g      E n g in e ers)                                                                             23 K ingfield Road
 Directors:                                                                                                                       S h e ffield S11 9AS
 W . E astw o o d              F.Eng., B .E ng, Ph.D., D.En(/.,                                                                   T e l.: (0742) 583871
                               C.Eng„ F.I.C.E., P.P.I.SlrucfcE^
                                                                                                                                ? T ele x:         547266
                               F.I.MecKE., F .G .S , M .Cons.E. ’ •

 A. A. W o o d                 B.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..                                                             /                        and at:
                               F.l.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M .Cons.E.

 R. C. A. E astw o o d         B.Sc., C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M .l.Struct,E.                                                   /            36 H ig h H o lb o r n
 G. S pir                      C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                        '                London WC1V 6AA
Associates;
                                                                                                        ’’" - r /                     T el.: (01) 242 7436
C.    S. G reaves             B .E n f.t C . E n j M . I . C . E . , M J .S e ru c e.E .
                                                                                                   Our R e f :                    WE/KH/6705
J.    A. S t r a n g e        C . E n t ., M .I.S cruct.E .

S.    P r e s to n             B.Ent ., C .E n t ., M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tru c t.E .                Your R e f :                   DV/AA
R.    T andy                  C .E n ( ., F J.S eru ce.E .

G.    M. S eam an              B.Sc., C .E n * „ M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tru c t.E .

J.    M. W o o d               B.Sc.. C . E n t .. M J .C .E .. M J .S c ru e t.E .

Consultant:
A. G. B u r d e t t           G .M .. S .S c .{ E n f.)i C .E n * ..
                              F .I.C .E .. F.l,Seruce.E.




The Chief Executive,                                                                                                              1 August 1985
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorks.
S70 2 T N .




For the attention of Mr.                                                  D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                          Safety of Sportsground Act,                                   1975
                               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                 Thank you very much for your letter of 30 July giving the
outcome of the Working Party meeting on 2 9 July.                                                                               We note
the general comment that the calculations have to be approved
by the Building Surveyors Department.                                                          We believe that all the
calculations which are likely to be required have been sent for
checking and comment.
                With regard to your detailed observations our response
is as follows                  :-
(a)             We are not sure of the location on the West terrace of
the proposed extra security gate.                                                          There is already a gate in
the 2m wide gap formed by the new radial fence for use by the
police.              This same gate will still be available for the spectators
in emergency as there are gates into the-2m gap from the terrace
which will be under the control of the police.                                                                          This point may
perhaps be clarified during the Working Party's visit on 7 August.

(b)            The foundations for this fence are in fact already aligned in
                                    An Unlimited Company. Registered in England -                  No. 1 8 3 3 1 4 4
                                                                            SHEET 2 •



E A S T W O O D & P A R TN E R S




   the way you suggest.

   (c) and        (d)
              We are a little surprised by the suggestion that a
  single block thickness is not sufficient for the cubicle
  walls.        The inside of a toilet cubicle is not a very
  vulnerable area and the walls are braced by the door frame.
  Studding is not at all suitable in terms of strength or
  d u r a b i l i t y , and would probably invite vandalism.

   (e)        The       refreshment area is under the most westerly
  staircase up to the north west corner terrace.               There will
  be an opportunity to inspect on 7 August.

  (f)         The       handrail is to be at a height of 1250mm   (4'1")
  above the horizontal step, measured at the face of the vertical
  step.

  (g)         The       stepping of the face of the wall is achieved by 45°
  chamfers which will not form good footholds.

  (h)        Mr. Chester says that the club will certainly not
 object to the provision of another gate at this point,               and
 the precise location can be discussed on 7 August.

  (i)        As with point         (a), we are not sure what is intended,
 and the matter can be discussed on 7 August.

  (j)        Your comment regarding stewarding will no doubt, be
 taken care of by Mr. Chester.


             It will be much easier for your Working Party to
 appreciate what is intended when they see the works under
 construction.            There will also be an opportunity to see
 the metal decking of the South stand.


                                       Yours sincerely,




c.c.        Mr.     R.H. Chester
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

       Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on
                             7th August, i9inr      -

 PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

            Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
            P. Hough (Deputy Secretary)

            Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

            N.   Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
            C.   Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
            B.   Copley (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            B.   Mole (South Yorkshire Police)
            D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
            D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
            F.   Waterhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

 1 •___ Purpose of Meeting.

 The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "summer" inspection of the
 Stadium with particular reference to the Leppings Lane end improvements and
 the metal sheeting of the upper seated area of the South Stand.

 2.___ Ground Inspection.

A.    Leppings Lane End

The progress of the works to segregate visiting supporters behind and on the
West Terrace and Stand were inspected with particular reference to the
points raised at the Officer Working Party's meeting held on 29th July,
(forwarded to Messrs. Eastwood and Partners by the Chief Executive's letter
of 30th July) and Messrs. Eastwood & Partners reply of 1st August.

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners had confirmed that all the calculations which
were likely to be required had now been sent to the Building Authority for
checking and comment. .

On the inspection, the Building Authority pointed out what they considered
to be the poor standard of workmanship in the construction of the new
dividing wall which was being built behind the Stand. The position of the
Police Personnel access gate and the stepping of the face of the wall by
45 chamfers so as not to form footholds were acceptable.

The foundations of the new handrail by Turnstile 23 had actually been
aligned so as to maintain the exit width between the outer (river) wall
and the Turnstile (unlike the indication on the plan submitted).

As regards the single block thickness of the internal walls of the cubicles
in the new male and female toilet facilities at the rear of the stand,
Messrs. Eastwood and Partners considered that the inside of a toilet cubicle
was not a very vulnerable area, and pointed out that the walls were braced
by both the outer walls and the door frames. The Building Authority noted
the assurances given by Dr. Eastwood, but expressed concern that the
 dividing walls in the new toilet facilities evidently did not have any
 foundations, apparently having been built straight onto the existing
 concrete slabs. It was noted that there were some 9 inch thick brick walls
 in the Male Toilets, it being considered that any hooliganism or vandalism
 would be more likely to occur there than in the Female Toilets.

 The Club pointed out that the new toilet facilities would not be completely
 finished by the first match of the season (on 17th August) but that
 temporary facilities would be available and that no building material would
 be left on site.

The position of the new refreshment area under the most westerly staircase
up to the North-West corner terrace was noted. This again had been built
straight onto the existing concrete slabs.

On the Terrace itself, it was noted that there was an existing gate in the
new 2 m. wide gap formed by the new radial fence for use by the Police.
This gate would still be available for the use of spectators in an
emergency as the gates at the top of the Terrace under the control of the
Police would enable spectators to be directed down the 2 m. wide gap.
However, it was agreed that steps or a longer gate would be required. It
was also agreed that a new gate would be required from the new South
Central Terrace Pen.

As regards the upper seated stand area, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners had
sent by letter dated 2nd August plans of the new fences and barriers in
both the Stand and at the Access level.

IT WAS AGREED

(a)   that the condition of the internal walls in the new male and female
toilet facilities at the rear of the Stand should be monitored}

(b)   that the existing gate in the pitch perimeter fence should either be
extended or have steps to provide easier access from the new 2 m. wide gap
formed by the new radial fence;

(c)   that a new gate in the pitch perimeter fence should be provided from
the new South Central Terrace Pen;

(d)   that the advertising hoardings at the front of the upper seated stand
area should be securely fixed to the concrete wall;

(e)   that the spalling of the concrete of the wall at the front of the
upper seated stand area should receive attention as a matter of maintenance;

(f)   that the corrosion of the steel columns at the rear of the Stand
should receive attention on a maintenance basis.

B.    South Stand

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners reported that the condition of the upper
concrete outer portion of the exterior wall of the Stand had been
investigated and was considered to be satisfactory.

It was noted that the metal sheeting of the wooden upper portion of the
Stand had been largely completed, and the spraying of thenon-slip
surface was to commence very shortly (and certainly be completed by the
start of the season).
IT WAS AGREED that the metal sheeting of the wooden upper portion of the
Stand should largely overcome the flammability problems inherent in such
timber structures, and the Club stated that they would ensure that the
wooden intermediate steps were securely replaced upon completion of the
laying of the metal sheeting.

C.    Spion Kop

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners recalled that outline details of the Club's
proposal to cover the Spion Kop had been sent for the information of the
Officer Working Party by letter dated 22nd July. As part of that scheme,
the bridge portion of the Kop would be removed. Its present condition
remained acceptable with continuing maintenance.

In view of experiences last season, the Club were requested to provide an
additional gate in the pitch perimeter fence in the front corner nearest
to the South Stand to overcome the lateral crushing hazard which could
occur when large crowds were present.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would provide a new gate in the pitch perimeter
fence in the front corner nearest to the South Stand with a stepped
arrangement to assist access and egress.

D.   North Stand

The temporary storage facilities created by the erection of a timber wall
(in front of the Ladies' Changing Facilities in the Sports Hall) were
inspected.

IT WAS AGREED that so long as light combustibles (such as paint) were not
stored in this area, its use continued to be acceptable on a temporary
basis.

E.   Closed Circuit Television Facilities

The advantages for general crowd control and security (both in and outside
the Stadium) which would be given by the recently installed Closed Circuit
Television System were explained to the Officer Working Party.

IT WAS AGREED

(a)   that a    kg. CO2 Fire Extinguisher should be installed in both the
Police Control Box and'the Disc Jockey Box;

(b)   that loose external wires on the outside of the Boxes should be made
secure.
 c



CK SUPT MEADOWS   OPS L TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                               OPERATIONS
CH SUPT MOLE      DIVISION                                     18 November 1985

               SOSGA 1<      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




3le;.3 e *'inri attached for your information copy of minutes dated
13 ‘loveabsr 19G? in respect of a seating held at Niagara Sports
Ground.




C^ief Superintendent
Operations L Traffic Division


tnc
                   <2 ^   *1—J
                                                                    •   s°)
                        SAFETY OF                ACT", 1975
 Note of a Meeting of the Officer/Working Party (Sheffield District)?: held .at...
 the Police Sports and Social Club, Niagara Sheffield, on 13th November, 1985


 PRESENT:   N.   Atkinson (City of .Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
            C.   Calvert (South Yorkshire^Police) '
            R.   Greenwood (South Yorkshire Police)
            R.   Grimshaw (South. Yorkshire County Fire Service)    S O v T H Y O R K . 5, POLICE
            A.   McKenzie (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)'
            G.   Stanley (South Yorkshire Police)                j
            D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)     j         1 P
                                                                            ii; / : k; :
            R.   Woodhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)*

                                                                          CHIEF SURE?;;
                                                                                          m          I   i
       Purpose of Meeting                                                 OPERATiC        TRAFiriC

 The purpose of the meeting was to consider the response to be given to the
 proposals outlined in the letter dated 25th October, 1985 and plans received
 from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to facilities for the disabled, an
 increased capacity for the Spion Kop «and consequent additional exit routes.
 Outline details of the roof to be erected over the Spion Kop had also been
 provided.                                 \    ,      sj
                                                 L S -U .tJ L   (
       Disabled Facilities                                                                    lA M -

The Officer Working Party expressed reservations on both of the suggestions
proposed by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners for the disabled. If the disabled
continued to be accommodated in front of the North Stand, they would still
be in the "firing line" of mis—aimed shots and any clear sheeting over the
top of the area they occupied could constitute an unacceptable hazard to
persons who might vacate the North Stand in an emergency situation by
climbing over the front wall- of the stand onto the pitch perimeter. It was
accepted that the means of escape did not provide for this to be done, but
it had to be recognised that in practice this was a real possibility. The
structural strength of such a structure would also be something of a problem
The other suggestion of accommodating the disabled in front of the perimeter
fence along the front of the Spion Kop (nearest to the North Stand) was also
unacceptable for the reasons stated by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners.

The suggestion of the Police representatives was that the front area of the
lower Spion Kop (nearest to the North Stand) should have the terracing levelled
to provide, say, a two-tier level landing on which to accommodate the disabled,
with a substantial fence at the rear. The existing pitch perimeter fence in
front of this area could be removed, and the disabled would continue to gain
access from the ramp between the Spion Kop and the North Stand as at present.
This would also enable free access by the disabled to the proposed disabled
toilets under the rebuilt terracing of the Spion Kop.

The current legislation relating to the disabled was also discussed.

 IT WAS AGREED that the proposals for the disabled, as now
■ outlined by the Police representatives, should be supported and
  transmitted to Messrs.-Eas twood & Partners as the views of
 the Officer Working Party, subject to there being no obstruction of exit
 routes and flows.

      Enlarged Spion Kop

The Fire Service and the Building Authority agreed that calculations showed
'that the enlarged Spion Kop would provide for an increase of some 5,000
/ spectators on the present capacity of 16,850, and that the number of exit
 widths required to achieve evacuation was 46. The proposals to increase the
  tunnel exit on the north side of the Kop to 8 clear units and to provide a
  complete new six unit staircase on the south side were regarded as acceptable.
 As when the original calculations had been made, the units of exit width
 included the emergency gates in the pitch perimeter fence, but it was cons­
 idered that landings in front of these gates should be constructed (as has
 been done at Bramall Lane).

    IT WAS AGREED that, subject to the following points, the proposals from the
    enlarged Spion Kop submitted by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners were generally
    acceptable:-

          (a)    adequate headroom being provided between the new roof and the
                 upper rear and the new south side exit routes:
          (b)    to barriers being provided adjacent to the refurbished gents’
                 toilets and the new ladies' toilets in the new six unit staircase
                 on the south side;
         (c)     to landings being constructed in front of the existing emergency
                 gates in the pitch perimeter fence;
         (d)     to confirmation of the number of new turnstiles to be provided on
                 the south side and on the Penistone Road side;
         (e)    until acceptablealternatives are available,     the new exit gates to
                 be fitted with a turn—bar arrangement under the control of
                 stewards.

    4 .___ Roofing of Spion Kop

Whilst it was accepted that only an outline of the roofing proposals had been
supplied to date, the Building Authority pointed out that the plans showed
that the gables were not lined.

IT WAS AGREED that this should be pointed out to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
as well as the fact that should any of the proposed works on enlarging or
roofing the Spion Kop take place other than in the close season, it will be
a requirement that the areas concerned will have to be secured to prevent
unauthorised access.

5.        Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium

The Police reported on the continuing problems caused by the merging of
spectators from all parts of the Stadium at the Leppings Lane end.

It was difficult to see how this could be overcome, as the physical restraints
to achieve this could conceivably be more of a danger than allowing the present
position to continue.

6   .    Duties of Stewards Booklet

IT WAS AGREED that the draft of a Booklet prepared by the South Yorkshire Police
outlining the duties of safety stewards was acceptable and should be distributed
to designated grounds for the information and guidance of stewards emploved at
such grounds. Factors peculiar to particular grounds could, of course, be
added if considered appropriate.

7.       Spot Checks at Designated Grounds              ' *

The Fire Service reported on the success of the recent spot check carried out
at the Oakwell Ground of the Barnsley Football Club in conjunction with the
Police and the Building Authority, and reported that the Divisions of the
Brigade were being asked to carry out similar spot checks at designated
grounds in their areas.

IT WAS AGREED that such spot checks were essential to ensure that the required
standards were being maintained by the Clubs.
                                                                                OPS TWS/3H
                  CH SUPT MEADOWS              OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                                                       OPERATIONS
                   c:i s u p t ::o l ~      ? division                                   DeceobGr 19o5


                                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1?73
                                            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




                   Please find attached for your information a cony of a letter dated
                   2 9 Ncvocber     from Eatstvcod and Partners t o she South Yorkshire
                   County Council in respect of the forth cosing intended iaprovenent^
                   at Sheffield "ednecday Football Ground.




                          /
                  Chief Superinvsndent


                  i^nc




                                               a




                                                   ^     & /*y -




                            SOUTH YORKS. POLICE



                                    - 5 0 E C 1985

                          CHIEF S PE P.!N TE:)P5[ NT
                           OPEHATI J,\S & TFTAF 1C




                           M          r ^     V        ° Y   °
 S O U T H Y O R K S . P O L IC E



       - 6 DEC 1985
                                                                   (k
C HIEF S U P E R IN T E N D EN T
C F E R A iiO N S St TRAFFIC
     E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                       S t. A n d re w s House
                 (C o n su ltin g    E n g in e e rs)
                                                                                                                                      23 K in g field Road
  Olractars:
  W . E a s tw o o d            F.Eng., B.Eng„ Ph.D.. D,Eng„
                                                                                    /                                                 S h effie ld S11 9AS
                                                                                                                                      T e l.: (0742) 583871
                                C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E,,
                                                                                /                                               'iv
                                F.I.M k Jl E„ F.G.S., M.Cons.E,
                                                                                        . (O : -   ^ -O u r      ' ' ‘ “ r.-,         ■Telex            547266
  A. A. W ood                   B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E,                         h \:,: Jy //,
                                F.I.S tru ctE , M.I.W.E.S., m
                                                            M.Cons.E.
                                                              .v > u n s ,c .                                                                              and a t:
  R. C. A . E a s tw o o d      B.Sc., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
  G. S p ir                                                                                                        (' K                I   36 H ig h H o lb o r n
                               C.Eng,, M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                                                           London WC1V 6AA
  Associates',
                                                                                                                                           Tei.: (01) 242 7436
  C.    S. G reav es           B.Enx., C .E n t., M.I.C.E., M J.S truet.E ,
  J . A. S t r a n g e         C .E nf,, M.!.Struct.E .                                                  Our R e f :                       WE/KH/66 48
  S. P r e s t o n             B.Enf., C .E n f., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.
  R. T an d y                  C .E nf.t F.I.Scruct-E.
                                                                                                         Your R e f :                      DV/AA/583/5
  G. M. S e a m a n            B.Sc., C .E n f., M .I.C.E., M X Struet.E.
  J . M. W ood                 B.Se„ C .E nf., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Struct.S.
  Consultant:
 A. G. B u r d e t t
                                   -1s-S
                              F.I.C.E.,  e;(EnfJ.CEn«-
                                        F.I.Stru«.E.




  Department of Administration
  South Yorkshire County Council                                                                                                       29 November 19
  County Hall,                   '
‘ Barnsley,
  South Yorkshire,
 S7Q 2TN.


 For the attention of Mr.                                       D. Vaughan


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                                Safety o f Sports Grounds Act,                                                1975

                                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
           Thank you for your letter of 14 November setting                                                                                out the
comments of the offloer working party o n the proposals for the
new roof over the Kop.                                     Our response is as follows


1•        Disabled Facilities

          First it should be emphasised that the disabled will have
to be accommodated at ground level.                                                          No other arrangement is
possible at reasonable expense.                                                         The choice is between putting
them m           front of the North stand or in front of the Kop
         considering first the Kop, you will know that the terracing
drops down below the level of the perimeter track.                                                                               It would
therefore be necessary to place the disabled slabbing and seating

behind the line of the present perimeter fence.  Each disabled
chair including manoeuvring space and also a runway in front
of the chairs occupies the same space as about 20 standing
spectators.               It would therefore be necessary to sacrifice the

                               An Unlimited Company, Registered in England -                          No. 1 8 3 3 1 4 4
                                                                        SHEET   2 .


 EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




 equivalent of about 1000 standing spectator places to accommodate
 50 disabled people and their attendants.           This would be
 extremely costly.        The Club has decided to increase the
 capacity of the Kop by 5000 people and the additional cost
 compared with merely roofing over the present Kop is in
 excess of £500,000.         Thus,   if 1000 standing places were
 sacrificed the cost to the Club would be £100,000 at least.
 Ancillary expenses would include moving the boundary fence
 and reconstructing it to safety barrier standards plus the
 cost of the concrete hardstanding.          Ke also have to keep in
 mind that not only would the spectators be in the firing
 line if anywhere near the goal but that in addition the new
 Kop roof only extends to the front of the terracing so that
 the disabled would be virtually unprotected from rain.
            The alternative proposal of leaving the disabled in front
 of the North stand has the advantage that the cantilevered
roof extends some way in front of the seating so that there
 is some protection from rain except when the wind is blowing
from the South.           The club would like to give complete
protection from rain and is prepared to consider the cost of
the glazed roofing which we have'suggested as a possible way
of increasing the comfort of the disabled.           The glazing
would of -course be of toughened glass.
        If the w orking party has strong reservations about the
glazing then obviously it will         not be carried out.    Howev».
I should stress that there is no possibility of the disabled
being placed in front of the Kop because of the exorbitant
cost.         The Club will continue to use the present location and
the only question to be decided is whether it should be under
cover or not.

        I         should add that new toilet facilities for the disabled
are an integral part of the scheme for t h e K o p and will be
conveniently placed under the North - end of the Kop.
                                                                   SHEET   3 .


 EASTWOOD &■ PARTNERS




       Enlarged Spion Kop
       (a)  All exit routes will have 2.4m clear head room
       (approximately 8ft.).


       (b)    We will need to discuss the proposed barrier
      adjacent to the new ladies toilet.      The exit route
      widens out very considerably from 4.1m wide at the
      location where the six unit width has been calculated
      and is approximately 6m wide alongside the toilet block
      We,, therefore believe that there is no bottleneck effect
      and that a barrier might merely provide an unseen
      obstruction which could create difficulty.     We will
      forward a larger scale drawing of the area so that
      our comments can be considered in more detail.


      (c)    We will of course provide the landings in front
      of the existing emergency gates in the pitch perimeter
      fence but you will know that there have been changes of
      view on this particular matter in the past and we would
      not wish the Club to be put to the expense of taking
     them out again when members of the present officer working
     party are replaced with the passage of time.


      (d)    There will be four new turnstiles on Penistone
     Road and six new turnstiles at the South end of the Kop.


      (e)    Gates wit h a turn-bar arrangement will be provided
     at the exits and the Club will of course provide stewards
     to control them.


3.   Roofing of Spion Kop

     The gables will be sheeted on the outside face only and
      not be lined.     This is normal in Kop buildings and we
think it extremely unlikely that there will be any difficulty
with hooligans climbing.    The horizontal rails are at such
wide spacings that it would be difficult for even the most
agile to climb up.
                                                                      SHEET


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




      We are very mindful of the need to complete the areas
 open to spectators before the start of the new season.          It
 is conceivable that the contractors will have difficulty
 in completing the new terrace steps at the rear of the Kop
 before the first game.    In that event secure fencing will
 have to be provided as a temporary measure.       However we
 are reasonably confident that the whole of the terrace
 area of the Kop will be complete by the due date.          We
 also intend to have all the new exit arrangements completed
 but it is possible that work will still be going on in toilet
 areas, particularly the new toilet for the disabled.


 4*   Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium
      The Club is aware of the difficulties which the Police
 have to contend with at the Leppings Lane end and has of
 course been very pleased to help the problem by the major
 works which were undertaken during the last close season.
 We find it very difficulty to envisage anything more which
 could be done at reasonable expense.


 5*   Fire Brigate Access to the Front of all Stands
      As part of the works on the Kop, we are completely
 remodelling the area around the existing tunnel.         The
 head room is being .increased to 2.4m and the width of the
 tunnel is being increased also.    A considerable amount of
 earth shifting will have to take place and this
 presents an opportunity to widen the gangway so as to
 enable say a fire engine to pass between the North stand
 and the retaining wall of the Kop.       If the Fire Service
 think this is of value,   I should be pleased to know the
width they would like so that we can see whether it can
be provided at reasonable cost and without sacrificing too
many standing spaces.                      ' .


                           Yours   sincerely,



                              /O      I    CK. ^       t—r —A
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

             Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield
             "                on 22nd January, 1986~ ~

  PRESENT:     Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

               Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
               R. Ward (Groundsman)

               Representing the Officer.Working Party (Sheffield District)

              S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              N. Atkinson (Sheffield City Council — Building Surveyors' Division)
              Mrs. L. Bashforth (Sheffield City Council - Legal & Admin. Dept)
              A. Campbell (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              J. Derricott (Sheffield City Council - Legal & Admin Dept.)
              R. Greenwood (South Yorkshire Police)
              D. Rosevere (South Yorkshire Police)
              T. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
              G. Swann (Sheffield City Council — Building Surveyors' Division)
              G. Sykes (South Yorkshire Police)                  .
              D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
              R. Woodhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)*

 1.    Welcome and Introduction

 Mr. Vaughan pointed out that the Local Government Act, 1985, would abolish
 the South Yorkshire County Council (and the other Metropolitan County Councils)
 on 31st March, 1986. From 1st April, 1986, the Certificating Authority under
 the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, would be the appropriate District
 Council. In the case of the Hillsborough Stadium this would naturally be
 the Sheffield City Council. For this reason, it had been'suggested to the
 City Council that appropriate representatives in addition to the Building
 Surveyors Division might find it useful to be present at the meeting, and
 Mrs. L. Bashforth and Mr. J. Derricott were welcomed and introduced to the
 remainder of the representatives present.

  Mr. Vaughan took the opportunity of expressing appreciation and thanks to
•- the representatives for the help and assistance which they had given to him
   in his role as Co-ordinator of the Officer Working Parties since 1978. There
  had obviously been occasions when differences of opinion and interpretation
  had occurred but, in .the main, these had been resolved both amicably and
  constructively.

 For the Club, Dr. Eastwood thanked Mr. Vaughan for his services and wished
 him well for the future. Other representatives endorsed Dr. Eastwood’s
 remarks.

 2.   Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was two-fold; firstly to discuss the further
details of development proposals at the stadium forwarded with the letter
dated 23rd December, 1985, from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners and, secondly,
to carry out the "winter" inspection of the Stadium.

A.    Development Proposals for the Spion Kop

The further details were in-addition to the comments set out in the letter
dated 29th November, 1985, on the observations made following the Officer
Working Party meeting held on 13th November.
           (i)     Sheeting of Outer Face

           Dr. Eastwood reported that the sheeting of the enlarge        v
           t e rear and sides would result in the structure being virtually1* *
           sealed. In reply to queries from the County Fire Service he ™ f •
           that no storage „ould be a l l c e d under the L ^ c t u r ^ d Jhat ch” ^
           for any accumulations-of rubbish would be undertaken on a regular basis.

                  Climbing of the-Inner Steel Frame

          fra^eSS d^ the possiblity °f...unruly spectators climbing the inner steel
                   the new. structure, Dr. Eastwood reoorted that the hott-nm v.
          member was now to beomitted. The resultant height of over ?0 f e e t ' ^
          would make it very difficult far spectators to cfimb the structure'

          (iii) New Step and Barrier Layout

          Drawing No. 6648/56 was -circulated and considered.                This related to thp
          i^particular on'the d ^     " ^          K°P ’        ^stwood reported
      ~   a  Par5lcular on the discussions which he had had with the Planning
          Authority as to the height of anintermediate   or a low second raifto
          i n ^ l a c e s ^ V * 1161^ Jhe ^rop^ ° the gangway below could be over one metre
          in places. ^ He sought the Officer Working Party's views and the m e r i ^
          of the options were considered.                                 *         merits


                  fG5£ED thatJ i n .the view           the Officer Working Party            the best
          r £ & v . r ,& r“ lin the areas descriw - *                                      ^       "
 B*   . •facilities for the Disabled

                    thS figures originally quoted to provide facilities for the
       ; fat * e f°0t of     Spion .Kop (nearest to the North Stand) ^ e r e Jot
     n   tlC; DJ* Eastwood reported on the breakdown of the tender figures
 ( pened on Monday) for the enlarged, roofed Spion Kop. He still considered
 5 000 7       pr°P°Sals would involve the loss of up to‘1,000 of the extra
 other    Lp:L   0f
                  orth
 none could provide L
                         asctesduwhZit r\ld
                                    af  U
                                           b; providedby eni^ed S
                                                                * *
                                           t° e S , ' “ nSide“ d,'
                                                                 “ d i n s t i g a t e d , but

’problems^ ^ t o     80^    'b l   d ***                         or s T L n J w i t h o u t I n y ^ a j o r




                                                              probie” - —        ided

                                                              the Officer Working Party
tr^h i th e r i k i n r s I m r ntatlVeS     p ? " icular> sti“ expressed some c o n c e L as
Norfh        j                  Pe™ f nent fac lU t le s for the disabled in front of the
North Stand was the appropriate and correct thing to do.

The Building Authority confirmed that, after further investigations it was
  nsi ere that the disabled facilities requirements of the Building

enlarged°Spion K o p ^ ^     aPPSar “       StriCtly apply “       the r°°£i“S           the
  IT WAS AGREED that, in the first instance, Dr. Eastwood would prepare sketch
  plans of the suggested roofed disabled facilities in front of the North Stand
  for consideration by the Officer Working Party.

  C.    Ground Inspection
        (i)   West Terrace and Stand

  The Police representatives confirmed that the revised segregation arrangements
  to the rear of the Stand worked well on by far the majority of occasions.

  Dr. Eastwood pointed out that the segregation rail in the upper seated area "
  of the stand could be moved within .certain limits if the Police considered       J?
  that this would achieve a useful purpose.                        «>-

  IT WAS AGREED:-

  (a)   that the additional advertisement hoardings at the front of the upper
  seated stand area (nearest to the North-West Terrace) should also be securely
  fixed to concrete wall;

  (b)   that further areas of spalled concrete at the front of the upper
  seated stand area should received attention as matters of maintenance.

        (ii)   North-West Terrace

  IT WAS AGREED that the advertisement hoardings erected on the upper North-
  West Terrace should be securely fixed.

        (iii) North Stand

  The area for the suggested covered disabled facilities was inspected.

 As previously mentioned by Dr. Eastwood, the possibility of providing an
 increased width access to the pitch area (between the North Stand and the
 Spion Kop) for possible use by emergency vehicles, as well as fur maintenance
 by the Club was discussed. The facility could be incorporated into the
 enlarged Spion Kop proposals relatively easily.

.... It WAS AGREED that, whilst the County Fire Service felt that such a facility
    was not essential for their purposes, it could be useful for use by emergency
    vehicles in certain situations and generally should be supported.

        (iv)   Spion Kop'

 Dr. Eastwood indicated the extent of the work to construct the enlarged,
 roofed, Spion Kop, and confirmed that steps would be taken to prevent         ‘
 unauthorised access to areas where work might be m progress during the
 course of the season.
                                                                                    -a   .


 It was noted that the additional gate in the pitch perimeter fence in the
 front corner nearest to the South Stand, with a stepped arrangement Lu
 assist access and egress, had been provided.

       (v)     South Stand

 It was noted that the metal sheeting of the wooden floor of the upper
 portion of the Stand (with sprayed non—slip surface) had proved to be of an
 acceptable appearance in use, and generally appeared to provide a compromise
 solution to the flammability problems inherent in such wooden structures.

IT WAS AGREED that its condition would continue to be monitored.
    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


STANDING INSTRUCTIONS
. -       FOR THE
           \




        POLICING OF
 *•’ FOOTBALL MATCHES ,
 Cm                              S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E POLICE


      ACC (OPERATIONS) MR W JACKSON                                   REF:    OPS TVJS/SM

TO:                                                                   STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
      SEE DISTRIBUTION:
                                                                      DATE:           20 March 19S

        SUEJECT:     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - SYP STANDING INSTRUCTIONS
                     FOR THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES -
                     •EVACUATION AND STEvvARDING'




        The Interim Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety
        and Control of Sports Grounds, under the Chairmanship of
        Mr Justice Pcpplewell, was published in July 1985 end has been
        supplemented by Heme Office Circular 54/85 which urges, a~c-r.cst
        other things, chief officers cf police to respond quickly and
        constructively to the spirit of the recornrendations.' The report
      . contained 24 recommendations including the following: •

       Reccrrraeneat ion 1                -

       1 Evacuation procedures should'be a matter of police 'training
       and form part of the briefing by-police officers before'a
       football match.'               V   .

       Recommendation 10

       'Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
       precautions and fire fighting but should also be trained
       in how best to help the police in evacuation.'

       As you are aware, evacuation plans and the training cf stewards
       have been examined. A ccmr.cn framework makes reference to plans
       far simpler and allows officers with limited knowledge cf the
       stadium to contribute more effectively and with greater -sreed
       in an evacuation situation.

       In. craving up the suggested format it was 'acknowledged that
      - considerable flexibility is necessary to taxe account or
       many local factors that make each ground unique.

      Whilst responsibility for the training of stewards lies firmly
      with the club, the police have a vested interest in maximising
      the crowd management potential of non police resources at sports
      grounds. To this end it is felt the police should provide a
      significant input into the training cf stewards and that the new
      appendix on stewarding (attached) provides a satisfactory basis
      for ensuring adequate standards are achieved and maintained.

      Appendix 'L', page 35 of the South Yorkshire.Police Standing
      Instructions for the Policing cf Football Matches, should now be
      removed and replaced with the new Appendix.'L' pages 35 - 43,
      attached hereto.
                             »       •


      Page 2 of the Index of the Standing Instructions should also.be
      amended so that the last line reads - Appendix 'L' 35 - 43
      Emergency Evacuation Procedures/Stewards.
                               2




Following the abolition of the County Councils on 31 March 1986,
District Council Officers will be responsible for Safetv of Sports
Ground Act matters as from 1 April 1986, together with representation
of the Local Building Authority, Fire Service and Police.* It is not
envisaged that this will have any significant effect on established
procedures and the working party will continue to function as outlined
at ^paragraph lc.l, page 11, cf the Standing Instructions. Reference
trade however in that paragraph to South Yorkshire County Council
snould be amended to re'ad 'District Council*.




Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)


Enc
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




'STANDING INSTRUCTIONS


       FOR THE


     POLICING OF


  FOOTBALL MATCHES
                                  INDEX


                                       Paces        Paragraphs                 Acpertd ices

 OBJECT                                1             1.1       - 1.4


 C O ^ A N D STRUCTURE                 1             2.1       -    2.2


 OPERATI Q M k L ORDER                2             3.1                        rA*


 BRIEFING ARRA_NGE>!ENTS              2             4.1        - 4-.3          rB' L. 'C'


 MftKPCT*TER RETIREMENTS              2 &     3     5.1        - 5.6           *D‘ & *E*


 METHODS OF DEPLOYING PERSONNEL

 Uniformed Officers                   3 & 4        6.1         -6.3
• Detective and Plain Clothes
    Officers                          4            6.4         -6.6


 ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Transport ar>d Mobile Reserves    4 & 5            7.1   - 7.5
Police Horses                     5                 7.6
Police Docs                       5 & 6            7.7   - 7.9
Specialist Equipment              6                7.10 -7.13
Special Constables                6                7.14 - 7.15
Force Press Officer - iMedia      6                 7.16 ■
Refreshments                      7                7.17


                                  .7                S.l                       *F'


TRAFFIC FLa-;                     7 & 8             9.1 - 9.7


MATCH AND DIVISIONAL CONTROLS -
   FORCE OPERATIONS PCO:          8                 10.1   -       10.6


STANDARDISATION OF METHODS OF
   PROCESSING PRISONERS           8                 11.1                      *G' & *H'


CRIME PREVENTION                  9               . 12.1 - 12.6           •


FOOTBALL GROCTNT) FACILITIES      10                13.1 - 13.2
                                             Parcs            P n rarran hs   A cn cn cice




EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES/              10              14.1 - 14.3
  STEWARDS

FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY/                  .   10 i 11          15-1 - 15 -^
  INTELLIGENCE

INSPECTION OF FOQTEALL STADIUMS                11             16.1

liaison e e t v :e e n CLUE MANAGEMENT        11              17.1
  AND THE FCLICE



                                     APPENDICES


                           Pages


APPENDIX    'A'           13-15-             Standard Operational Order

APPENDIX    'B'           16 - IS            General Briefing

APPENDIX    *C'           19-21              Individual Eriefing

APPENDIX    'D'           22                 Grading Criteria

APPENDIX-   'E'           23                 Criteria for Levelling Charges
                                              for Police Services

APPENDIX     'F'           24-26             Control of Spectators

APPENDIX    'G'          ’ 27-28             Processing of Prisoners

APPENDIX    'K'           29 -’ 31           Standard Forms for Processing
                                              Prisoners

APPENDIX    'I'           32                 De-Driefir.g Sheet

APPENDIX    'J'      ~ ' -33. ■'             Schedule Shoving Overall Police
                                             C o — .i x   »


APPENDIX’   'K'           3-                 Football Match Su.--ary/Ir.telliger.ce

APPENDIX    'L'           35 — *+3           Emergency Evacuation Procedure-/
                                             Stewards
                                           (1)


            STUPING            ION’S FOR THE POLICING Or FOOTBALL M ‘
                                                                    \TCHES


  OBJECT

  1.1         *1. ~ ,necessary,^as far as is possible, to standardise our method
             °r_Fol-c—        z11 fc'2tbali league grounds in South Yorkshire so
              *y■— ai— c.— ic=rs of the force are av.~are that wherever they are
             ceta_iieo ^.for duty, slight variations being accepted for each
             ground, _tr.ey will know what is expected of them. Additionally,
             by stancarc-ising bur procedures which have been evolved throuch
             e:‘~’lfifr‘C£ We fhould ^     rnor- able to ensure the safety of
             spe— aters, _ lock to the protection cf residents and business
             concerns lixelv to be affected by the influx of football
             supporters into their area, provide cord value for money to the
             ciucs wno ^pay for the hire of our services and display a hioh
             stancarc or £~curtness and professionalism before larce Catherines
             of the public.

 1. 2       ^ “ eccepteo that there will be slight variations in policina
            at tne ^ five football league grounds to cater for the different
            conditions eppertaining at each of them but the standard methods
            set cut in this ‘report will be foilc'.oed throughout the police
            district.                '’

 1.3         It will be the responsibility of Superintendent (Operations) to
             circulate arend-nents to these instructions but it” will be the
             duty or divisional cornrianders to bring to the notice of the Chief
             Superintendent      (Operations and    Traffic) recommendations for
           . <=-->s~-ing t m s crcer, resulting frc-m their experience in policina
             football matches.

 1,4        V.itn a ^viev; to these standing instructions be5_ng frequently
            evaluated,    they will be . discussed at a Chief Constable's
            Centeren-ce ,ri.d-vay through the football season and also following
            tne enc: or the season.     These discussions will coincide with the
            inspection _ cf football' grounds by the South Yorkshire County
            Council l.'orking Farty involved with the Safety of Sports Grounds
            Act 1975.




                  crticer m charge of policinc foot c-all leatrue matches will be
           cr not less than superintendent ran.-:, with the exception of
           rr‘=-----=- being piayec at Bell Vue, Doncaster, where the rank of
           t..— c —        s.—u_c not be less tnan c m e i inspector, unless the
           match is one where, because of abnormal circumstances, an officer
           of net less than superintendent should be deoloved.

^ ^        General pc_icir.g outside the ground should be the responsibility
           of an officer not less than chief inspector rank, but in the case
           of Doncaster the rank may be that of an inspector. Tne duties of
           the otiicer. outside the ground will encompass the prevention of
           public disorder,     the supervision of car and coach parks, anti-
           vanoalis.T. patrols,   the supervision of licensed premises in the
           vicinity of the ground and the escorting of groups of supporters
           to and fror: the ground.
>
OPERATIONAL ORDER

3-1       It is necessary to use a standard format for operational orders
          for football matches within the force area with additions to
          cater fcr local conditions.   The format shewn at Appendix ’A ’
          vii.1 be aaoptea.


BRIEFING AK-^TGEMET.TS

4.1      The Officer in C c ~ a n d will, as far as is practicable, undertake
          his briefing within the         clcse confines of the ground in
          sufficient tirre to allow officers to take up their duties within
          the ground before the cates are open to the public, and outside
          the ground before the main body of spectators arrive in the
          vicinity of the stadium.

4.2       All officers will be briefed with uniformed officers being
          paraded in three ranks ready fcr inspection- • It will be the
           responsibility of ' the briefing officer to see that each officer
           is fully instructed in his duties and        is srrartly turned out
           including having his hair cut to an acceptable length and his
           beard or moustache trimmed - one man        of scruffy appearance
          standing before a crowd. of spectators discredits the force as a
          whole. Officers not corning -up to the acceptable standard will be
          advised and returned immediately        to their sub-division or
          station.    The officer in cc.Trrand will subsequently report the
        - matter to that officer's divisional commander.

4.3      Points to consider during inspections and briefing, whilst not in
          themselves exhaustive, are set out in Appendices 'B' and 'C'.




5.1      In estimating manpower requirements, the     following factors must
          be considered:

            i)   the    i— ortar.ee to each club of the result, ie league
                  position, local reputation in ’derby’ games, etc;

          ii)    the history cf previous encounters between     clubs and the
                 supporters of the clubs,-

         lii)    theabsence of other fixtures "in the area;


                 reputation;

           v)    relaticr.sh.ips of public transport oysters to the stadiu-.,
                  ie . rail stations, bus routes, etc - personnel will be
                  required to protect premises -en route’ to ar.d from the
                  stadium,-

          vi)    the ceograpltical features of .each ground and location in
                  relation to town or city centres - the arrival   of early
                  transport encourages supporters to invade shopping areas
                 which require extra protection.
                                          (3)




                   assist in identifying 'rranpov.er requirements’ a Football
             Liaison Orficer has been appointed within Operations and Traffic
             Division.       It is his responsibility to collate ar.d disse.Tir.ate
             intelligence relative to fixtures within South Yorkshire.           He
             v;--- liaise with his counterparts in other force areas and suoolv
             infcrmaticr. in respect of South Yorkshire Clubs and supporters
             *— ■
                civelj..inc to *sway' fixtures.   This officer will work closely
             with divisional officers        responsible for football policing


 ^‘             ~~            to underestimate the colice cormritment, but it is
             impractical to lay down a basic overall police detail- This can
            c~— y    determines, locally, through experience of the conditions
            applying to the area and of the stadium concerned and also of the
                -Nation c~- ''~*e home and visiting supporters.   Additional to
            officers employed on public order duties, officers will be
            required fcr the. police control rcccn, detective and plain clothes
            duties, prisoner reception, transpon: crews, traffic points,
            rpczcr cycle and traffic       patrols, mounted and cog duties,
            ^upporc ec by an acecuate mobile reserve for emercencies.

 5.4        Whenever possible ccrmrun.ity constables should be used to police
            the same areas or the ground at every match to try and establish
            a rapport with supporters and to identify and eliminate any
            disorderly section of supporters.

            Inspectors, sergeants and constables, should also,     if at all
            possible, police the same areas of the ground so that they become
            fully aware of the problems in their sector.

5*5    .    Fcotball matches will be graded by divisional commanders using.
            their experience of previous      encounters between the clubs
            concerned and intelligence from the Football Liaison Officer and
            local foot:call cxubs. The ■criteria fcr grading is outlined at
            Appencix 'D'. The Chief Superintendent (Operations and Traffic)
            VJ'"n  be involved in the planning of all category
                  _     ' *i_    »   ••           ._.
            Chier Constable   (Operations) informed   of police plans    for such


5‘.6       The criteria for calculating the charge to clubs       for the hiring
           cf police officers is given at Appendix rE ’.


METHODS Or DEPLOYING PERSOiO.'EL




           Afrer a general briefing by the Officer in Ccrrrrand, all uniformed
           o r n c e r s w i n as far as possible be designated'to a serial.   It
           will be the responsibility of the Officer in CoTrrnnd to declov
           his serials according to the- special needs of the particular
           staciim.        V.;>2:iever possible, officers within ar.d outside the
           ground will be employed 'in serials cf or.e sergeant and ten rren,
           with an inspector to every’ three serials.
                                           (4 )


  6-2        Serials will be deployed both inside and outside the ground
             curong the prc-match period, then ira.in.ly inside the ground during
             the duration of the garo. The operational order should cillov/ for
             tr.e withdrawal of certain serials from within the ground as the
             rrctcn nears its end to facilitate dispersal of the spectators and
             prevent public disorder.

 6.3         Operational orders will emphasise the need for police serials to
             march to their tasks or appointed positions and for units less
             than.serials to march or walk in single file especially around
             tne perimater track. The order will specify individual duties
             for eacn serial so that supervisory officers are aware of their
                   roles prior to, during ar.d after the match.   Each serial
             sergeant will ba responsible for completing a debriefing form at
             the end of each match (as shown at Appendix*" *I ').

 Detective and Plain Clothes Personnel

 6.4         ane rrair. function or cetective and plain clothes officers           at
             foccball rratcnes is the prevention' and detecrtion of crime outside
             the ground, particularly in relation to the theft of and from
             unartendec. rrctor vehicles.  They v;ill be used at "the discretion
             cr the Divisional Conrrar.der.      Officers   so e.*nployed will     be
             ecuippea with radios to enable them, if n e c e s s a r y , to be called
             into the ground to supplement those or n e a r s given specific
                ies within the stadium.

 6• 5       Detective and- plain clothes officers rray also be used outside the
             ground to gather intelligence in relation to the rood of
             supporters using licensed premises and fcr spotting the carriage
             °~. orfensive weapons by supporters making their way to and from
             the stadium.

6-6         A number or detective or plain clothes officers will be detailed
             for 'cucy within the ground to investigate rer-orts of crime and on
           . sp-ecir.3. cocasions to concentrate on particular facets of criTe,
            fcr instance .pick pockets           are knov/n to travel vith sore
            supporters and certain . clubs attract ticket forgers for          'all
            tic.'.et' racchcs .      Uniformsd cfficers and not detective or plain
            clcenes c i n c a r s vrill be involved in the sucervision cf licansed




Transport and Kobllo Reserves

‘-1         T h 2 use of resources additional to these* kept cn division, ie the
            commend vehicle or force coach,will be considered by the Officer
        • _ in CocTTond and particularly so for category 'A' and '2' rrotches.

7-2      . At least cne divisional personnel carrier v;ith 'a driver and
           police attendant . will be available n’t eacli football fixture for
           the carriage of prisoners.      • Kh-en the detention vcliicle 5s
           available, this should be used.
                                        (5 )


 7 .3         Tr.ere will be a mobile contingency held in reserve at every
              foe--ball league fixture.  Tne use of such a reserve will be for
              two rain purposes, ie as a unit in radio contact with the Officer
              in Command and available fcr deployment to any situation and,
              secondly, to afford assistance in the escorting of supporters
              between public service termini and the stadium.

 7.4      The use of a personnel carrier containing one sergeant and ten
          constables in the immediate vicinity of the football ground has a
          moderating influence on the behaviour of supporters.          The
          di%'isicnai crime and anti-vandal patrols will be considered for
          such a reserve strength.    However, it should be borne in mind
          that crime and vandal squads may be withdrawn at any tire to
          perrons duties at major incidents. Tr.ey should not, therefore,
          be considered when planning manpower requirements, or be included
          in Operational Orders.

 7.5      Tne motor cycle wings      will                      be used fcr .facilitating the
           unrutndered movement of traffic                     to ar.d from the foot call grounds
           and for escorting visiting tear,                    coaches into and cut of the force
           area when requested to do so by                     Divisional Commanders -

Police Horses

7 •6      Police horses are invaluable in the policing of football matches.
           They should be used to escort visiting supporters to and from the
        . ground in the segregation of-opposing fans, regulating queues at
           turnstiles and clearing the playing area in the event cf serious
           erod'd invasion. A mounted officer has a greater field of vision
        - than his contenporary on foot and is of such value that police
          horses will be used at every first team football fixture in South
          Yorkshire 1 When" necessary, a request will .be made to the Chief
          Superintendent (Operations and Traffic) for the hiring of hors 35
          from other police forces.    "During the game mounted horses, where
          possible, will be on view to the spectators. Their presence has
          a moderating influence upon potential hooligans.

Police Docs

         On ? Ncverr■er 197 5, the Horns Office St ending Advisors' Committee
         on Folice Dogs agreed that while cogs can be used to deal
         effectively v.'ith small groups cf hooligans, they should not
         normally be used ■ wr.sr. large crowds aSZ£* 'C“'333r:t. The Committee
         pointed cut that t.he presence cf cogs ~ay* v.-ell appear provocative
         and if surr ounceo by unruly crowds would b-e likely to becc-xa
                   1', c l T* CL fc ~          r r ’ n i ’r / *♦


7.8      Whilst the Committee advocated the retention cf dogs in a reserve
         capacity, it could see no objection tc- their use as a ceterent at
         railway stations, car or coach parks or along routes to football
         grcur.dc.    It advised that cots should n6t be used within the
         playing area at football ’ matches or other sporting events unless
         there were exceptional reasons.      This advice docs not preclude
         the officer* in charge from allowing them to be paraded around the
         per ire ter track before the kick-off and during half-time so as to
         interest the spectators in their presence-
                                       (6)


 7-9      The Gfficcr    in Cocrrrand will take the    above advice; into
          consideration but he has the overriding discretion to use police
          cogs if he considers their use absolutely necessary to avoid a
          dangerous public disorder situation.

Specialist Ecuirment

 7.10    In cue course it is hoped to arrange with football clubs for the:
         acquisition and use of closed circuit television and video
         recording equipment as at Sheffield Wednesday's ground- At this
         stage the only visual aid which will be used at football fixtures
         Vvill be binoculars w>iich have been supplied to each station
         concerned with the five football stadiums. • Divisional Co— anders
         should also consider using the facilities of Audio Visual Aids.

7.11    • The use of 'spotters' with binoculars in radio contact both with
          the police control rccm and arresting officers, is a technique
          which has been successfully employed nationally.       They can
          concentrate c.n particular sections of the terraces renowned for
          disorder, where pickpockets are operating, from where missiles
          are being thrown into the playing area, etc.

7.12     Cnee offenders have been located by the 'spotters',          ether
          officers can be guided into' the crowds and directed, by radio to
          persons to be arrested.        'Spotters' will s uh~it evidence
• '      accordingly.

7.13     Consideration should be given to using a helicopter for traffic
          control, and identifying public disorder situations in connection
 • .     with category    'A' matches   and possibly category* 'B'   cares.-
          Requests for a helicopter will be directed to the           Chief
         Superintendent (Operations and Traffic) for decision by Assistant
         Chief Constable (Operations).



7.14     The presence of special constables at football             grounds is
         cor— cvlcdged as a valuable''supplement to the regular force. This
         is especially relevant in crowd situations where an enhanced
         ur.ifcrr.'. presence ccr.uributes to the observance of public order.

7.15     Special Constables can be use-d as a deterrent factor but whenever
         possible they should not be employed .in volatile situations.



7.16    Tr.e Force Press Officer will, be consulted for press publicity in
        relation to other tliar. thenormil fixture.     ;It has been fove.d
        fre.i experience tliat there are advantages  in public is ing police
        plane for notches likely .to attract large crowas.
                                         (7 )


Refreshments

7.17        The provision of refreshments is necessary for all matches.
             Usually this can take the f c r o f pre-packed tea, coffee or soup
             beverages, but for major functions the Force Catering Officer
             will be consulted about providing a substantial meal for officers
             cn longer tours cf duty. Such meals could be provided within the
             ground, or nearby, and if necessary by outside caterers.


THE roVE-ELNT CF SPECTATORS

8.1         The movement of spectators to end from a football ground can
              present a threat to public safety through conflict between heme
              anc visiting supporters.    Tne basic strategy for dealing with
              football hooliganism, as with all public order events, is to
              ensure segregation of the opposing factions.    This segregation
           - should be planned in three stages - before, during and after the
             rratch, as is set cut at Appendix *F *.


TRAFFIC FLOW

9.1         The five rrain football stadia in South Yorkshire were purposely
             constructed in residential areas, to cater for mass spectator
             attendance. That situation was no doubt satisfactory at the time
             but the advent of m o d e m transport in current times has.resulted
             in serious congestion and        conflict between pedestrian and
             vehicular movement.

9.2         Controlled parking can    be a contributory factor to easing
             congestion but cannot,    in a residential area, be a total


9.3    .    There must be an acceptance by persons attending a football
            rratch, whether on foot or otherwise, that delay and congestion
            will arise and must be endured v.hen in close proximity to a
            crcund.     It is cur duty, however, to make every effort to
            minimise delay and congestion by whatever means possible.

9.4        During the pre-match period there is usually less cf a traffic
            problem because spectators stagger their arrival am the ground
            during the hour preceding kick-off time.     Notices showing' the
            whereabouts of coach and car parks should be displayed.

9.5        At this time previous intelligence enquiries will have been of
            assistance to determine the       number of visiting supporters
            expected and their mode of .travel. Once known and identified,
            arrangements should be made for their routing 'and arrival at the
           d 2 sigr.ated parking areas at a time shortly preceding 'kick-off -
           This strategy of delayed arrival of visitors reduces the ti~e for
           pre-match disorder problems.
                                        (8)


 9-6       It will be necessary for more widespread and advanced traffic
           arrangements to be made when the fixture in question is of major
           importance, in particular a semi-final rratch involving teams from
           different areas of the country.       Cn such occasions it is
           important to establish a       close liaison v;ith the motoring
           organisations and local authorities fcr pre-determined routes to
           be taken by vehicular traffic.

 9-7      Traffic Division'through the Chief Superintendent (Operations and
           Traffic) or the Traffic Group Superintendent, will be involved in
           giving advice upon traffic arrangements for all football matches
           and traffic officers will be vised to supplement territorial
          divisional personnel.


 'MATCH' AND DIVISIONAL CONTROLS - FOR OPERATIONS RCOM

 10.1     It is essential in the interest of efficiency that every first
          team, football fixture in South Yorkshire should be controlled by
          radio from a Police Control Room situated, within the stadium;, ie
           'Match Control*. .-The officer in charge of Match Control should
          net be of less rank than sergeant and be aided by at least one
          police constable.

 10.2     There is no requirement for Force Operations Room to be involved
           in the control of a normal football fixture but it is necessary
           for the Operations Room Inspector to be fully aware of all police
           operations in ccr.ections with football league matches, and this
           will'be achieved by the supply of the relevant operational order.

 10.3     Exceptions to this general principle will apply in relation to
          category 'A' and 'B' matches, when there will be an overall force
           involvement necessitating the use of the force cornirrunicat ions
          vehicle with direct contact to the Operations Rcxom.

10.4      Throughout every rratch contact will be maintained between the
          stadium, and the Divisional Control. £y this means the Divisional
          Controller will be alerted cuic/ilv in tr.e event of additional
          resources being required, and the requirement for resources
          beyond the capacity cf the division will be referred immediately
          to Force Operations Room, from, whore the Dutv Officer will be
          responsible fcr obtaining the necessary additir.al manpower and
          equipment.

10.5     The officer in choree of the Ccmrrvonicaticni; Decartmer.t will visit
          stadiums to ensure efficient radio ccmrnunicaticns.

10.6     Ail supervisory officers will        be   supplied   with   radios   to
          facilitate- control and deployment.


STANDARDISATION OF METHODS OF PROCESSING PRISONERS

11.1     There will be a standard procedure for the processing of
          offenders detained at football matches.  This is .itemised at
         Appendix   'G' and the standard forms to be used arc shewn at
         Aprendix 'II'.
                                         (9)


CRIME PREVENTION

12.1     Each of the five football league grounds within South Yorkshire
         Police area has -been visited and a survey completed by a
         divisional crite prevention officer.

12.2     The surveys had a two-fold function:

           i)      To ensure the general security of the premises, ie
                    the adminitrative offices, the Development Fund
                   Offices where much of the clubs’ revenues are
                    collected and the Supporters ’ Club where varying
                   amounts of cash accrue freer: the sale of liquor.

         ii)       Evaluate the systems currently in     use in relation
                   to the care and control of cash.

12.3   - The police can prevent crirs by protecting persons dealing with
         cr conveying money within the ground and officers in cc-mrand will
         make adequate supervision available to cater for this objective.

12.4     Tc ensure that standards of security are maintained, divisional
         crame prevention officers will re-visit the clubs at three-
         monthlv intervals and report to divis ional cccrmanaers. The vis it
         ''ill, on each occasion, include attending a football league match
       • to check upon security systems. A copy of the report showing any
         action taken will be sent to the Detective Chief Inspector (Crime
         Prevention) for him to check upon uniformity of advice throughout
         the force area.

12.5    The consumption of alcohol before arrival at the football stadium
        cf ten exacerbates police problems.  fc'ith a view to reducing this
        problem and thus preventing crime, advice will be given through
        the media, trade organisations, supporters clubs and the police
        of the area of _ visiting supporters, about the advisability of
        prohibiting the sale of alcohol in containers to obvious football

         ir. coaches,   ar.d the   stepping of   coaches at   licensed premises.

        with the local divisional comranders and the Force Press Officer
        will be responsible for civine this advice tc the aoorooriate


        —— tris visitinc suc’cozrt^’irs h-Hvs £: zr2 c*j,
                                                        isticri for- vi.oi'snc^,
        endaavc-urs will be made to bring forward the kick-off tire to
        outside licensing hours.       Discussions for an early kick-off
        should be undertaken as soon as possible after the fixtures are
                                             (10)


 FOOTBAI -L GROUND FACILITIES

 13.1       Every police complex at a sports stadiim must have. good vehicular
            access and its location well signposted. It should have separate
            accesses for     public enquiry (lost/found     property, missing
            persons, complaints cf crime etc) and prisoner reception.      The
            putiic enquiry section should include a reception desk and
            interview r corn.    There   should be facilities for prisoner
            reception ar.d    processing linked with     separate and secure
            detention accommodation for adults and juveniles. As an ideal
            there   should be     further accommodation ' for briefing     and
            refreshment purposes.    Toilet facilities fcr both prisoners and
            police officers should be provided..

 13.2       The availability of desirable police accommodation is clearly a
            matter for the football club concerned.     There should be full
            consultation between the club officials and the divisional
           - ofiicer concerned.    The Superintendent (Operations) will be
            available fcr advice regarding the standard facilities required.


 E-SRGZN-CY EVACUATION PROCEDURES.

 14.1       Divisional Commanders should ensure that emergency procedures at
            each ground are adequate and are in accordance with the 'Gresh
            Guice to Sarety at Sports Grounds' (paragraph 10.7) viz:

            (a)    It is essential that plans should be made for
                    dealing   with   emergency   situations.        Joint
                    consultation between the iranga.-re.nt of the ground,
                    police,   fire, a.~bularce   and other      emergency
                    services should be held in order to produce agreed
                    plans cf action.

            (b)    While the public are in the ground an adequate
                    nimoer of staff should be maintained to cover
                    entrances, exits and other strategic points.

            (c )   All such staff should be trained in the use of the
                    fire fichtir.g equip.~ent provided and in the action
                    to 1>3 taker, in the event cf a fire.

14 .2      Divisions should include details of evacuation plans, emergency
           warring systems etc, in their cp-3rational orders.

                            1^.3          r*/-; p.nei c.-jpicyrer'; of oaf-.-ty Ptsv.T.r-!"
FOOTBALL MATCH £’
                jr-r-lLRi   ciio-jld .a cczlz vitiv in iccor;^;'.c_* Hi I-.". np-,-or.-i- ’I-*

15.1      A Football Match Survrviry has been designed by the ACFO General
          Purposes Sub-Conmittce on Hooliganism at Sporting Events as part
          of a co:rpreh-2ns ive and systematic approach to intelligence
          gathering for the coming -football season. (Appendix 1K' copy and
          specimen.)    '                     . ^
                                              (11)

 1 5 .2         It is intended that the Su.-rrr\ary (ADM/124) will be completed
                by the Police Liaison Officer for the home club cmd forwarded
                without delay to the Headquarters Football Liaison Officer so
                that intelligence about fans behaviour at both horns and away
                fi>rtures will be collated and rrade available for futtire matches
                involving that club.

 15.3           The Summary also includes an Appendix showing details of those
                arrested, -charged or ejected and the offences or misbehaviour
                complained of. It should not be restricted to areas o f hooligan­
                ism inside football grounds but is intended to cover all such
                behaviour associated with a particular rratch, whether taking
                place inside football grounds, adjoining streets, public houses,
                railway/coach stations or other venues where football supporters
                gather.    It should also give details of incidents involving
                supporters travelling through the county to other:       matches.
                This will allow for regular offenders to be identified and sub­
                sequently targeted so that a systematic build-up cf intelligence
                will result.

 15.4          Misbehaviour by football supporters whilst travelling on trains
               or ferries or on .British Rail property is already collated by
               British Transport Police as part of a comprehensive intelligence
               system operated by that Force.      This information is available
               to Force Liaison Officers through their Eritish Kail couterparts
               and is recornrended as part of the nationwide intelligence gather­
               ing system.

 INSPECT'!1>N CF FCOTEALL STADIUhS

 15.1          A Working Party has been formed under the control of the S & = ~ i
    15-rx/c ■” Vo-
                 rlsc-Izirj-        Councils to carry out its responsibilities under
               the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1973.                This 1‘orkinc Party
              comprises representatives of the £~ri-~r— i     Z.-:cg-rti-va— — rhe— See-t-k
            ' ¥~ekshiru Z z zi-.t-j Councils, representatives of the Building Author­
              ity cf the council concerned, the Chief Fire Officer and the
              Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.            Arrangrxents have b-sen
              made fcr the Working Party to visit the football stadiums twice
              a year, at the beginning., and rrid-w=y through the season, and
              or. any ether occasion as the need demands, to ensure the safety
              cf spectators.         The Chief Constable has delegated his duties
              tc the Superintendent (Operations Division), to w h e m problems
              in relation to safety should immediately be notified, so that
              the secretary of the WorJcing Far_y can be informed, with a view
              to the problem being examined without delay and before the ns:-;t
              fcotbr.il lea rue match.

LIAISON   e   ~.-:e ZN CL'JB KA\AGZML:\T AND THE POLICE
              :

17.1          Tnere are considerable benefits to b e ‘gained from a close person­
              al liaison with the directors and management of football clubs.
              The establishing of such a working relatioiiship b y divisional
              csxnranders is essential to the success of police operations.




Chief Constable
                                (12)


DISTRIBUTION

For action:    Chief Officers
               Divisional Departmental Cccrranders
               Sub-Divisional Corrrranders
               Superintendents - Operation, Corrrrrunity Liaison and
                                  Corrrrunications & Cccrputers
               Detective Chief Inspector, Crime Prevention
               Inspector, Mounted and Dog Section




                                                           August 19S5
 1.       INFORMATION

 1-1      On ..............               .1985, ................ ......... .....
          will p l a y .................... at ..... .........................
          Footoall Ground (irsntion any significant points relative to that
          fixture, eg previous encounters between the two clubs resulting
          in serious outbreaks ofpublic disorder, etc).


 2.      INTENTION

 2-1     It is the intention of the policeto allow this match         to take
         P-£Ce =-'-G to ensure public    order and safety both inside     and
         outside the ground, to segregate end control opposing fans and
         prevent unnecessary- obstruction of the highway and dsrage to
         property.    This will be attained and displayed with a high
         stand arc of smartness and professionalism.




3*1      Icentifv officer in overall ccrrrrand and these with          specific
         responsibilities both inside and outside the ground.

3.2     _OPERATION*.-!, FHASES

         The operation will be in three phases, viz:

3*2.1   Pnase 1 -    before kick-off - which will include arrange."rents for
                      public order patrols, the escorting and segregation of
                      supporters and the control of traffic.

3.2.2   Phase 2 -    during the natch from kickroff to ten minuter, before
                      the end of the gate. (Tne specific duties being sliov.n
                      by Appendices.)
r#
     3-2.3      Phf.se 3 -   from ten minutes before the end of the gare until
                             walking   spectators and    traffic have    dispersed.
                             (Duties to be performed as directed in the Appendices)

     3.3       PARADING ON DUTY

     3-3.1     Tins and Place.

     3.4      BRIEFING

     3.^.1     This should be described in theStanding Instructions and
               particular rererence made to the need for police officers to
               march to ^ their tasks cr appointed positions and for units less
               than serials tc march or walk in single file especially around
               the perimeter track.

  3.5        - CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DEPARTMENT

  3.5.1       Duties of CID officers.

  3-6         PLAIN CLOTHES DEPARTMENT

  3.6.1       Duties of Plain Clothes officers.

  3.7          SPECIAL CONSTABULARY

  3.7.1       Duties of Special Constables.

  3.8         POLICE ROOM

  3-8.1 .     Identify officer in charge.

  3.9-        PRISONERS

  3.9.1       The full procedure for dealing       with detained persons   should be
              fully outlined.

• 3.10        MATCH CONTROL

 3.10.1       lcer.ziry location and officers involved.

 3-11        TRAFFIC CONTROL

             . Trafric    Points -   specified in the Appendices,   will be   worked
                                     before and after the match.

 3.11.2       Trarric Division's involvement



 3-12        PUBLIC TRANSPORT

 3.12.1       Give details of public transport, routes, termini,etc.

 3 .13       OBSTRUCTION OF THE HIG-JWAY

 3•13.1 •    Procedures regarding offences and offenders-
                                              (15)




 4-         AT"! NISTRATICN

 ^•1        Dress for all officers as indicated at Arpendix *Br

 4.2        TRA.'CS?CRT

 4.2.1      Par.-cmg anc use orofficial        police vehicles.

 4.3        RETrZSHr-SL'vTS       '

 4.3.1      ^—^P—      c-i.i.anger^nts.

 4.4        MAPS

4.4.1       To be gva.llable when necessary.

4.5        • REPORTING OFF DUTY

4.5.1       De      -1 c= -bn efin e system and hew* officers will reoort off cutv.


5.     _    co>;-rjNicATic-:-:s       _   .

^•1        Icentiry frequency and channel to be utilised curing the event -
            level or allocation of personal radios - public address systems
            to be checked before the event by a police officer. •
  i


6.         EMERGENCY PRC

6*1         Iderrtxry procedure for dealing with any emergency in the ground.


THE OPERATIONAL ORDER WILL CARRY APPROPRIATE APPENDICES INDICATING             THi
SPECIFIC SERIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES AND A SCHEDULE SHOWING             Tr>
OVERALL.POLICE CO--MITMENT EY RANKS AND BY DUTIES - SEE APPENDIX *J'
                                         (16)


                                                                    APPENDIX

GEKE5AL E7\IE~ING

1-       Tne officer in command v:iil wherever possible conduct         his
          briefing within the confines of the stadium in sufficient tire to
          allow officers to take up their duties before the cates are
          opened to the public, and before the rrein body of spectators
          arrive in the vicinity of the stadium.

2.       The briefing should set the tone of the operation end should also
         cc~rnunicate the standard ofpolicing expected of ell officers. A
         pier, of the ground will be displayed to assist in the briefing.

          Lac.-; or a thorough briefing will result in a loss of efficiencv.
          It is imperative that this force is seen to discharge its duties
          efrectively. A deliberate and precise briefing at the outset of
          an operation is seen as essential towards this end.

4-       Officers will be paraded      in three ranks and         inspected for
         smartness and dress which will be as follows:

            i)      Male uniformed patrol sergeants and constables will wear
                    helmets - the chin straps cf which will be in the ’down'
                    position; mounted officers will wear protected helmets.
                    Officers will be in possession of anoraks - not capes.

           ii)    Female officers    will parade with male officers and wear
                   normal ’uniformand headgear.     Tney also will be in
                 • pssession of Gannex raincoats or anoraks. Female officers
                   should be encouraged to wear trousers when performing duty .
                   at football fixtures.

         iii)     Traffic patrol  officers will parade in full uniform and
                  flat caps and be in possession of anorak, and traffic
                  rotor cyclists will parage in standard motor cycling kit.
                  Traffic officers will be briefed wit’n other officers
                  involved in the operation unless specifically excused by
                  the officer    in corrrrand due to   their duties being
                  undertaker, sore disiar.ce away from the stadium.     7ny
                  officer not attending the briefing will be briefed tv
                  other•means.

          iv}      Mounted officer will v.ear full uniform and protective
                   helrrets ar.d in the event cf inclement weather they will
                 . v.-ear Ganr.r-x raincoats. They will parade for briefing with
                   all other officers engaged in the police detail.

           v■    Dog handlers will wear standard police uniform with helmet
                 and will• be in possession of an anorak. Tney will not
                 wear the ’V' necked military-style sweater with epaulettes
                 which is supplied purely fcr training purposes, nor will
                 they wear the short 'wet suit' jacket normally used for
                 training and patrol duties.

         vi)     CID officers will wear conventional plain clothes          and
                 report for briefing with their uniform colleagues.
                                           (17)


         vii)     Special Constabulary officers       will wear full police
                  un.ifor— aixi be in possession of a Gannex raincoat.

  5*    A description of the 'event' about to take place      will be given
         along with the system of policing to be adopted (escorting £md
         segregation or rival fans etc); the basic reasons for the
         ofricers ' presence and what is expected of then, ie to facilitate
         tne attendance of spectators, to exercise crowd control,        to
         maintain public order, to prevent vandalism, to give attention to
         licensee, pre.rj.ses/bars, and other locations where problems .of
         public order ray be anticipated.

  ®*    Give details cr 'intelligence' reports received as    to number: of
         spectators anticipated, their general reputation, etc.

  ^•    Mention that,    despite the general    reputation  of football
        supporters, it mist not be overlooked that the hooligan element
        represents cniy a small proportion of those attending.      Most
        spectators will respond to friendly v.ords of ' advice.   Remind
        officers about public 'complaints'. Draw attention to the need
        to stop the use of obscenities by spectators, including those in
        team 'dug outs'.

        In-orm that a rirm but fair attitude will be portrayed-          Officers
        iriisc be on their guard to avoid being provoked.

 9:     G-^-ve tne location or any static/mobile police room/ vehicles to be
        used for the initial, reception of persons arrested-

 10.   . Instruct that no persons will be ejected from the ground without
         ^•2-rs‘- b s m g taken to the Police Roo-m and their particulars noted.

 II.    Remind officers as to appropriate legislation, ie:

                Public Order Act, 1936, Section 5
                City Eye-Laws, I960 (if applicable)
                Eraach cf the Peace - Justices of the Peace Act, 1361
                Ereach cf the Peace - Ccmrcn Lav, etc

                Tne rules of the

12*    Outline the     system cf     processing prisoners   and the   writing cf


       Give details cr the corTrminicaticr.s system to be used and give
       — -~uoticns for the tannoy system to be tested before each rr\atch
       by a police officer.

1— •   E>re_air. the refreshment arranc7™'r>*>r^*"<;

15.    Detail the de-briefi.ng system and how officers v.-ill         report off
       duty (see de-briefing form [Appendix ’!'])-

16.    Explain emergency evacuation procedures.
                             (18)


T-!,. operational order will b- distributed to all supervisory
''<r_*?s v,**1°     responsible for a nore detailed briefing of t h 2
    -icero .uncer their charge.   This briefina will errphasis^ tb0
v.=y officers will undertake their duties, working as a team'
q?v-c° will fca civen that officers will not ao alone into
                                             (19)



                                                                        APPENDIX »C'

 INDIVIDUAL BRIEFING

 (£ )        Officers cn the pla~-~ing area track

               i)     Prevent spectators sitting or scanning on the boundarv
                      walls o r fencing; or climbing any structure; no one must
                      b= allows c tc have their legs on the playing area side of
                      the track perimeter wall.

              ii)          Omcers    will be spaced evenly on the perimeter track.
                     Where applicable, such •officers will be in close pro:dLmitv
        ,            to any gates/openings separating the plaving area and.
                     track from ths .spectators1 enclosures.

             iii)    No unauthorised person must be permitted to encroach upon
                     the pitch/perimeter track before, curing or after the
                     natch. Any person so doing will be detained end taken to
                     the Police Ecom.    Officers will not pursue such offenders
                     but will    wait _ until   they return to     re-enter the
                     spectators'-enclosures. In the event of anyone persisting
                     in remaining on ‘the playing area, the nearest senior
                     ofricer will authorise the action to be taken.

              xv)    Spectators will not be allowed to remain in passageways
                     adjacent tc entrances and exits, or to be in terrace or
                     stand gangways.    Persons seen to be so remaining ‘will be
                     directed to rrcve.

              v)     Officers will stand and face the crowdr

                          Until kick-off                   )    This will be
                          V.nenever a goal is scored       )   indicated by the
                          Whenever there is a serious      )   senior officer at
                             stoppage of play              )   the entrance to the
                        ' Two minutes before half-tire     )   players’ funnel,
                             ST-c two minutes before       )   stepping onto the
                             the final whistle.            )   track.

                    In the^ event cf localised disorder in the crowd          - only
                    orncerc at the section concerned will stand.

(^)         Officers other than cn the rlavinc



             i)     Maintain order,   ensure that orderlv queues form; and tliat
                    pever.ents are obstructed to a rr.ir.i_—urn. extent and the queue
                    does not enter a roadway. Ivatch fcr .persons in possession
                    of offensive weapons, etc. Do not allow persons to remain
                    at entrances and give attention to the safety of money at
                    turnstiles,
                               (20)


  ii}    Under no circumstances must any person be allowed to take
         bottles, cans, toilet rolls or other potential missiles
         into the ground. Banners, flags or ether devices fastened
         tc sticks will also be prohibited.

 iii)    An officer who confiscates ar.y article because of this
         prohibition will do so on the understanding that it may be
         reclaimed after the rratch and he must therefore endeavour
         to:

         (a)    Obtain the owner's nate/address end note other
                relevant details.

         (d )   Ensure the owner is   aware of the   location of
                •the Police Room.

         (c)    Hand the item in to the Police Room (and
                nowhere else) where it will be labelled with
                the name/address of its owner and the details
                cf the officer.

         (d)    Any property not collected by   its owner after
                the rratch will be dealt with   subsequently as
                found property.

 iv)     Prevent unauthorised entry into the ground by persons
         climbing walls and fences or by climbing ever turnstiles.

  v)     Prevent anyone climbing from   one section of the ground to
         another.

 vi)    Persons remcved from the around through illness cr injury
        may be treated on the track by ambulancemen. After first
        aid _treatment, they will either be returned into the
        crowd, accompany the first aid man, or leave the ground.
        If the person is not returned into the crowd, the nearest
        officer will accompany such     person and obtain full
        particulars in order that, if necessary', his next cf kin
        may b-e inferred.-"

vii)     Officers engaged on duties in the stands and terraced
         areas will take up positions at the rear cf the crowds
         using any raised or otherwise advantageous positions which
         right be provided or available.      Passageways in these
         areas will be kept clear and the necessary advice and
        'support given tc stewards..

viii)   The Officer in Corrrr.end will ensure, there is at all tires a
        uniform presence at the rear of and at the entrance to the
        directors' box to prevent entry to the bo>: by irate cr
        celebrating supporters, and algo at the entrance to the
        Club Officers/Executive Suite and players1 dressing rooms.
<•                                            (21)


     (c )      O t n c i a l Car Park (if applicable)

              Officers will ensure the safety of such vehicles and their
              contents. When, the notch is ever, vehicles on the official car
              par* will be advised not to leave until such time as the
              spectators have departed.

     (o)      Officers engaged cn public order duties

              Maintain order enoncst the crov.^ds, prevent vandalism to propertv,
              prevent the congregating cf supporters arriving a t , or leaving
              the ground.    Give attention of licensed premises and other
              potential sources of trouble ar.d in particular check that cans
              ano bottles of liquid are not being sold at licensed bars instead
              of the agreed sale in plastic containers.

              Prevent obstruction of roads and footpaths by indiscrl-ninate
              parking of vehicles and by vendors of foodstuffs such as hot coq
            - stalls, etc.

              All officers to reT«ain in position until the crowds have cleared
              and traffic returns to normal.     They will then return to the
              cround/reception point as and when directed by their- supervisory
              officer.                    •

     Ce)      Officers should    make themselves familiar     with   the   Ground
            • Regulations fcr the ground they are policing.
%                                     (22)


                 •                                             APPENDIX *D 1

GRADING CRITERIA


Category *A'

Topical of a match which warrants a Category 'A* grading v.’ill be a Football
Association Cup Final, International or local 'cerby’ fixture.

Categor-y ’B *

A rratch which merits such a grading will be one where serious public
disorder can be anticipated frcm the considerations mentioned at paragraph
5 of the Standing Instructions. The number of police officers to be used
fcr such a rratch should be increased by at least two serials above the
number allocated for duty at a Category 'C' match.

Category 'C'

Such a rratch is one thought, unlikely to result in serious disorder after
giving consideration to the _matters at paragraphs 5.1 to 5.4 of the
Standing Instructions.
cm                                        (23)


                                                                    APPENDIX 'E'

     CRITERIA FOR LEVYING CHARGES FDR POLICE SERVICES

  The a.-rcunt levied for police personnel doing duty in the stadium will be
  related to crov:d attendance and the incorporation of a constant basic
  nirrher.    At all times this basic nurber will be one serceant and five
  constables. Tne number of constables will be increased by three for each
  2,000 spectators.    Tne number cf sergeants will be increased in the ratio
  oz one to every nine constables. A chores './ill be levied for the services
  cf an inspector for a gate of over 9,000 and will be increased by an
  additional inspector for every' four sergeants. In addition, there will be
  a charge fcr a chief inspector whenever the spectator attendance reaches cr
  exceeds 35,GOO and for a sijperintendent whenever the gate exceeds 49,000
  Ihe chart below illustrates this criteria.

  CROWD ATIErSS^r.            SUPTS     CH INSPS        INSPS      SGTS        PCS

     10G0 cr be lew (only charce actual hours worked)                 1          5
     1001 - 3000                                                      1          8
    3001 - 5000                  .—                                  2          11
   .5001 - 7000                                                      2          14
    7001 - SOOO                                                      2          17
    9001 -. 11000                                        1           3          20
  11001 - 12000                                          1           3          23
  13001 - 15000                                          1           3         26
  15001 - 17000                                          1           4     -   29
  17001 - 19000                                          1           4         32
  19001 - 21000 -                                        1           4         35
 21001 - 23000                                           2           5         38
 23001 - 25000                                           2           5         41
 25001 - 27000                                           2           5         44
 27001 - 29000                                           2           6         47
 29001 - 31000                                           2           6         50
 31001 - 33000 ’                                         2           6         53
 33001 - 35000                                           ->         '7         56
 35001 - 37COO                               .L          2           7         53
 37001 - 39C00                               1           2           7         62
 39001 - 41003                               1           2           8         65
 41001 - 43000                               1           2           8         6S
 43001 - 45000         -    •                T.          2           8         71
 4 z>u j _ — 4 /C w _•                       1           3           9 .       74
 47C01 - 49000                               1           3           9         77
 49001 - 51000                 1            1            3           9         £0

 These charcas will be at the Scecial Services Rate applicable at the tisvs.

          match he cancelled at snor- notice    .hereby police 0 xr"}c’sn<"!^ e is
 necessarily incurred, a -basic charge will not be levied but a re con will
 be submitted to the Assistant Chief Constable (Xunag-sman t Services) to
 negotiations with the Secretary of the club fcr reasonable reirrfourserrant.
                                        (24)




                                                                  APPENDIX 'F*

 CONTROL OF SPECTATORS

  FRE-M^TCH

 -ine^main risk of a pre—match clash between supporters is in the immediate,
 vicinity cr the ground end on public transport. Home tears* supporters
 O-        congregate at scrre distance from the ground so as to arrive ih a
 croup, ^ either on fcor cr using public transport.         They should not be
 <=U.c.-.ed to loiter at the approacnes to the ground and officers should be
     ■-ructec. at briefing to ensure that persons are not allov.'ef to congregate
           acutally in the designated spectator areas within the confines of^the
       i nr—^


 ^ _increased police presence will have the desired effect of discouraging
 rowdyism and vandalism. This applies to post-match also.

 Special police arrangements always need to be rrede at railway stations and
 on routes which visiting coaches will vise.

 m e use or mobile patrols in the form of the mobile reserve, motor cyclists
 enc mountec. orncers in the irmediate. vicinity of the ground have a good
 moderating influence cn the behaviour of the supporters. Thought should be
 given^ to^the need fcr selective searches,, both inside and" outside the
 crcuna and particularly at transport termini.

 Pcsting poiice officers to the vicinity of public houses to encourage
 separate -use by either 'heme' or 'awav' adult supporters and not both, has
 been found to reduce pre—match incidents.

Consideration should also be given to police visits being made at selected
licensed premises.    Other known trouble spots, especially those on coach
routes, if applicable', should be identified and policed.

'ihs use of signs to ensure that supporters go to the appropriate secxion of
tr.e staidum and do net accidentally mix with the opposition suocorters is
essential.

A most usezul instrument available to the police in their responsibility
ror crcv.'c control v.'ithir the stadium is the tannoy or public address
system.    Tr.is facility should at all tires be available to the police an
it is essential this equipment shculd bs proved effective throughout th
        Cind
         i    thorough!v tested before each fixture.

IN’ THE STADIUM

Tr.e crucial period fcr disorder is in the half-hour inrediately preceding
tne came and maximum police strength should be available at that tire. Tne
use or ‘entertainment1, curing this period is, valuable in turning the
attention cf supporters away from disorder sn,d clubs should be encouraged
to make the necessary provision.
                                           (25)




  Segregation cf supporters within the stadium is essential- As a matter of
  policy clubs must be influenced to provide barriers, sectorised fencing and
  other services (toilets and snack bars etc) which will facilitate effective
  separation of opposing supporters. It should not be necessary for police
                 £ task which could better be performed by manufactured


  Attempts to    'capture' the opposing           supporters’   end   is   a   problem,
  particularly at 'local derby' matches.

 The most cerrmcn way this is attempted is by horre supporters gaining access
 to one end cf a terrace before visiting supporters arrive. Police should
 be in position early to prevent this but seme tires the supporters take care
 to be unidentifiable until in sufficient.numbers to cause trouble.

 It- is considered that the appropriate police strategy, if this occurs, is
 to cordon them. off and contain then, not to attempt to move them elsewhere,
 unless numbers are sc small ' as to make it a simple police operation-  (The
 fact this occurs is a strong argument in favour of secticnalisea end


. It occasionally occurs that an attempt is made to capture ’ends* after they
  are fully occupied by opposing supporters.             The most effective way of
  preventing this is the erection of a fence around the whole of the
  perimeter track and adequate partitioning of the various sections of the
  around to prevent unauthorised movement of the spectators,            as mentioned
  above.  If in the a b s e n c e o f such fences and partitions the attempt occurs,
  the only available strategy is interposing police officers between the two
  factions and sending reserves in from the rear or both sides.             officers
 should never co into the crowd alone to ce=i with trouble.

  Where serious disorder occurs in a section of the crowd, it is not good
  strategy to atterrpt tc clear the whole terrace, whether onto the pitch or
  otherwise.   It is better to drive a double line of police officers,
  preferably from the rear or side of the terrace, towards the centre of the
  trouble.   Reserves can then be fed in between the police lines to make
. arrests.    Where disorder cf this, kind is anticipated the strategic
 positioning cf ample reserves is important -

 Clubs should be encouraged to provide perimeter fencing and partitioning as
previously described but where such fencing is net provided, there inay.be
occasions when a -pitch invasion occvrs.        Such invasions could have
difrering motivations.    In the event of a surge onto the playing area to
avoic scenes cn the terraces, clearly police attention must be directed to
staoilising that position and spectators can then be returned.        In the
event of an invasion designed to disrupt play,    1 uncommitted officers and
as a   last resort police dogs on short leads, should go onto the playing
area and clear it under the direction of the- Officer in Command.       That
officer .should consider the mood and object of the offending spectators and
deploy his resource accordingly with a view to protecting players and
officials and effecting the return of the supporters to the. terraces, if
necessary by a 'sweep* of the playing area.
                                         (26)


  *      T---ere 1S £ capacity crcr.va, supporters are often locked out and cam
  become frustrated anc hostile and have to be supervised by the police. In
               alleviate this problem clubs on appropriate occasions should be
  advisee to have 'all ticket' ganes.        Correct allocation of such tickets
  w ill further assist the desired segregation of opposing teams.


  POST MATCH

 hfcst of the strategy suggested for 'pre-match1 apoly equally to after the
 r^atch, ^particularly in relation to preventing the congregation of fans; as
 tnis often heralds an attack on opposing suooorters.

 Gi accasions there can be advantages of holding back visitina suooorters
 until the main body cf • home supporters has left or vice versa.      If this
 iranoeiivre is selectec, sufficient manpower must be available to achieve the
 objective without keeping the gates closed.

 P°lice horses are very useful in this context.    Experience has sh o w n that
 keeping the cates cxosed after match is likely to result in police officers
 end spectators being crushed.against the solid partitions.       Thf=» tarmov
 system snould be used to announce any such manoeuvre before the rratch e n d s ,
 and the announcere.nt should be repeated and the spectators exorted to be
 patient.    Spectators should be held in such a position for a minirrtim
 period.   Details of these procedures have teen included in the literature
 to be sent to visiting clubs by Football Liaison Section prior to fixtures
• in this Force area.                            .

In c_ny case, provision must be mace for escorting visiting supporters to
their coacnes or the relevant railway stations in a corrpact unit.    This
       entail close supervision by as many mounted, dog and foot patrol-
orricers as possible. .Additionally, there should be a literal presence of
police ofricers along the prescribed route to prevent attacks by home
supporters. _ Ofricers should join the escort through 'roll-uo' tactics,
thus strengthening police presence.

m e r e .should ba a -follow up vehicle to acuomrcdate prisoners     should the
occasion arise fcr arrests to be made.

Coach operators should, wherever possible, be warned in advance net to
arrive at the designated coach parks until a specified tine.        This is in
c—    " t>—’ efcorc police protection cf the vehicles tlirouohout the duration
or .----
    ^their----stay
                 -  and -to i
                            prevent, visiting supporters cziivxiw
                            — cvc.iuv.s.wii;             arriving too earl
                                                                        eariy.
Liaison witn British F-ail should be established to co-ordinate arrival and
departure tines of special trains.

Having escorted visiting supporters to their transport it is stressed that
coaches must not be released until such tine as the surrounding area is
clear cf horre supporters. When released they must ba escorted in convoy as
     as is dee-red necessary' to ensure their safety.     ’Police divisional
boundaries should be ignored for this purpose. Where Force boundaries are
concerned, neighbouring Forces should be notified and asked to take over
the escort responsbility when the convoy enters their area.
                                                                        APPENDIX »g *
      PROCESSING Fr.ISONZRS

  The following procecures will be irrplerrented throughout this          force area
  wnen offenders are detained at.football matches:

                Every detainee person must    be taken   irmediately t o th=- Police
                Room within the ground. '

      (b)     The cixcirnstar.ces of the detention raise then be the     subject of
               full enquiry by a supervisory officer of at least sergeant rank.
                  t-*'— s sts?2 / s decision will be mace as t o whether the person
               will be cnarged, processed by surrrrens cr ejected.     If the facts
               reveal only an infrince.'nsnt of the Ground Regulations, that
               person ^should be ejected forthwith, via. the Police Room] where
               only his name and address should be recorded.

  (c)         Prisoners should be photographed with the arresting officer by
               use of a Polaroid ca.Tsra. This photograph should sho w the facial
               features of both the prisoner and the~arresting officer.

  (d)          'pie prisoner should- be searched and his personal property placed
               in a ^property bag.     Any property subject o f a possible charge
               should be placed in a separate bag suitably labelled and cross
               referenced.

 (e)           The prisoner’s details should then be documented t o expedite his
               speeriy^flow-through the reception area,       thereby allowing the
               arresting o r n c e r to return to his match duties with the miniriKn
             ' of delay.    Standard forms will be introduced for this purpose
               (Appenozx *H'). .The couple ted fonn and photograph will be
              cfru-rec to the property bag of the relevant prisoner-            The
              arresting o m c e r should retain a carbonised copy of this fonn.

 (f)         .All prisoners with their property will be conveyed to a nominated
                     station.    In the case of those arrested at either of the
              Sheffield^ football grounds, the Central Charge Office, Bridge
              Street, will be the designated police station.    At this station
              there w n l be present a" prisoner reception scuad, capable of
              obtaining the prisoner’s photograph, * finger "irpressiens and
              antecedent -details.     In addition, fcrm Gen/29,    (Record of
              Detention and Charge) will be ccrrpieted.

(<3)         The prisoner should then be charged and formally cautioned,
             normal-iy by a rrsarrber of the prisoner reception squad and not
             necessarily the arresting o fnc sr an-i a p r e —pr coaxed staterr£;nt
             forrr. corbie ted-by the Charging Officer.

(h)          On ccnpletion of his match duties, the- arresting officer should
             attend the ncrrinated police station and -complete a     ’short*
             prosection file.                      ’

             Juvenile prisoners* should be processed _ b y tliis sarre method but
             care must be taken to separate tha.71 frc~ cclult prisoners and to
             ensure that existing procedures in. relation to juveniles arc
             adhered to.
                                       (28)


Pursuance cf the above procedure in relation to adult prisoners will
eliminate the necessity for the preparation of a full file unless a plea of
'not cuilty' is entered.


THE PRODUCTION O r ‘PRISONERS BEFORE COURT

There is considerable merit in the production of prisoners before court at
the earliest possible occasion following the cc-ntnission of the alleged
offence. This will encourage the speedy disposal of justice with a rniniinLrn
cf ad.T-inistrat ion.

     disorder is anticipates, Divisional Corrrranders should liaise with the
Chief Inspector, Headquarters Prosecutions, or the Prosecutions Inspector
at 'A', 'B' and 'C' Divisions, to identify a suitable cate to which aileced
offenders should be bailed.

On occasions when it is considered that it would be an advantage to hold a
special courz to sit on a Saturday evening then arrancerrents should also be
made via the appropriate senior officer of the Divisional Prosecutions
Department -

i.ne cues tier, cf bail should be considered on the merits of each case within
the existing terms of the Bail Act 1976-
If)                                                                                        (29)

                                              SOUTH                       YORKSHIRE                                     POLICE
I
                                                                    ARREST/SUMMONS REPORT


1    NCE BOOK NO.


    SION:                         STATION:                                                                                                      DATE SUBMITTED
I    R U N G OFFICER;                                                                                                  COURT:


    ;>;d a n t (S) n a m                      AGE L                                       OCCUPATION                                                          A D DR ESS
                                              D of B                                                                                                 (Tf company th o vr Reg. O ffice)



I

. If the defendant is a juvenile, Include parent particulars and the name and location o f school attended.


    p.’CE(S) AND LEGAL AUTHORITY                                                                                                                               For Prosecution use only



I
I
I
I
    I D AY , DATE O F OFFZNCE(S):
    E OF OFFENCE(S):



K LS AND EVIDENCE CHECKED                                                                           'DECISION




I                                                                       “rsean;                                                                                  ...... Superintendent


ft CASE OF ARREST CD.VOLUTE THIS SECTION

     R ACCEPTING C H A R G E ....................                                                                                                   DATEARRIiSTED____ _____
I    TNESSES ATTENDING COURT FOR FIRST APPEARANCE?                                                                          ’     YES/NO

      TO COURT O N -        ........................................................ .................................................... ............. .........................

1MAND REQUIRED? '                               YES/NO                                          PREVIOUS CONVICTIONS:                                                               YES/NO

^ E     OBJECTION TO BAIL?                      YES/NO (If Yea Form CTS/33 to S t c o m p i l ' d forcsefa person)

VND IN CUSTODY/ON BAIL U N T IL :___________________________ 1___________________________ _______

I III CTS/11 COURT WITNESS FORM - AVAILABILITY-
I
                                                               SOUTH Y ORKSHIRE POLICE


     Divisional Charge No (if ap p licable).................................................................... .....................

    Arresting O f f i c e r                         ........................................................................................     Su£ DIv

    C o rro b o ra tin g O f f i c e r ..............................................................................................               £ub Div


    Time A r r e s t e d ................................................................... D a t e .............................................

    Time arrived a t Police R o o m ....................................................                                                  _     _          _

    Time d e s p a tc h e d t o Police S t a t i o n ........................................................ ...................................


   A du lt/Ju v e n ile

   N a m e .........................................................................................................                    .... ....

   A d d r e s s .........................................                 •"




  D ate o f B i r t h ...................................................        •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••a*.
                                                                                                                          A,
                                                                                                                         , ^




  O c c u p a t i o n / S c h o o l ............................................................................... ..

  P a r e n t / G u a r d i a n ...........................................................................................

  O F F E N C E .................................... ;..........

  Place o f O ffe n ce (E x ac t l o c a t i o n ) ..........................................................

. Giarge au th o ris e d b /                          ............... .....................................................


 TO-BE C O M P L E T E D A F T E R CHARGING


 Officer c h a r g i n g .....................                                                                                                 Sub Div

 Antccedc-nts b y ..........................................................................................                                   Sub ][)jv

Finger p r in t e d b y .................                                                                                                      Sub Div

P h o to g r a p h e d b y .................................................................                                                   Sub Div .


P A R T IC U L A R S V E R I F I E D ..................... ................................................................................ ..
         s t a n c e s ok o f f e n t f /s )


    A t ..................... am/pm o n .............................................. t h e ......................................... .............

    I was on d u t y ..............................................................................

    "When I saw ( p r is o n e r ) ........................................................


    Describe Circumstances of Offence:




  I cau tioned and arrested him /her for




 He/whe-rcpLied



 I escortec h im /n e r to the Police Room within tJie                                      ...............................................

 Football Ground, where I related the facts to Inspector/Sersennt’.

^icekiy Leave Group o f reporting o f f i c e r .....................................................................

Weekly Leave Group of other police w itn e ss e s                                             ................................




Annual Leave (6 months in advance) o f ALL w itnesses........................... ...............
                                                                                               (31)


                                                         STATEMENT OF WITNESS

               (C.J. Act, 1 967, s.9; M.C.A., 1900, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1 981, r.70)

   S TA TEM EN T O F

   AG E OF WITNESS (if over 21 enter “ over 21")
   OCCUPATION O F WITNESS

   A D D RESS A ND TE LEP H O N E NUMBER

   T>-is s l i te r r .e n i , c c r j i i U r . j o f                           e tc h sitr.ed by m e. is t r - e t s ' b * b u t o f m y k a o w l e d f e m d belief aiui T c t k e

   i t k n o v r l n s t h a t . if it is te n d e r e d in evidence. I shall be liable to p r o j e c u r i s - •» J h a v e vrtl£i21y s t a t e d i n i t a n y th in g w h ic h

  I k n o w t o be false o r d o n o t believe to be tru e .


   D a te d th e                           d-iy o f                                          , 19


                                                                S i fc . . e d - . . . . » » . M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . —. M . . . I   ■ ■ Hi l l   I . .. .. .             .   I   II I   ,   .    I




                                                 Sig n a tu re w itnessed fry                                                                  -                                                                   . . . .



  (..______________                                            —.................................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ...................b e i n s u c a b ie t o r e a d


  I.                                                                                                    of                                                                                                                                          ,re * d

  i t t o h i m befo re h e sig n e d it.


  B a te d th e                            day o f                                          .1 9                                     .                                                                  -----------                                        )


A t ..................................am /p m , o n ....... ............................. t h e ........... — ......................... ..............................

1 9 ....................., I V 2 J on d u ty a                            t ...................................................—....... - .................................. ..........

■when I formally cautioned and charged (priso n er).................... - ................................... ........................

                                                                                                 Miih tiie particular.; of t h e offence. H e/she replied




He/she inis then served m t h a copy of the charge.

H n/ : he ivr.= then placed in the ccLL;/bailed to t h e ..................................... ................................................

                      •               '                                                             '                                                                                                                                                ;h<
Magistrates
  C
            Court a t ..........................                                                                                 on

........................................................................19

Weekly leave group                                   ..............................

Annual leave (6 months in advance)
                                       (32)


                                                               APPENDIX *1'
 '   ' DIVISION’


 FOOTED .T- DUTY__________                            D-^




 Serial No

Tne follov/ing officers trade

Sot                                           DT/OT
  1 ‘ PC                                      DT/OT
 2    PC                                      DT/CT
 3    PC                                      DT/OT
 4    PC                                      DT/OT
 5    PC                                      DT/OT
 6    PC                                      DT/OT
■7   PC                                       DT/CT
 8   PC .                                     DT/OT
 Q
     PC                                       DT/OT
10   PC                                       DT/OT

Titie on duty

Time leaving ground

lnCiCSHtS i n z i r n o v e m s n '                         in Cc-erati
Order;    & r= s-~ y        j r t «»
                                                t.


                                                                             APPENDIX »J'

    SCHZSJLE SiK3viKG'NU>5ERS OP O F F I C E R S INVOLVED

                                      CHIEF                  CHIEF
                                     .SUPT       SUrT        IK5?     INS?      SGT     PC

    Inside Ground

    T o v «T5   Petrol

    Mobile Reserve

    Control & Police Rocm

    Traffic Points

    CID

    Mounted

    Dog Section

    Prisoner Reception                     -.



                                                            Total Officers




I
                                        (34)


                                                                             APPENDIX ,K ‘

                                FOOTBALL MATCH S U G A RY


   DATE:                           FIXTURE:                       - V -

   VENUE:                                                   KICK OFF TIKE:

   KATCH:     (League/Cup/Other) (Specify):


   CROWD ATTENDANCE:            TOTAL          KO>S SUPPORTERS            AI-7AY SUPPORTERS

   Estirrate if not known




  M O D E O F TPAVZl:            R-I                                 BUS /COACH
                         (No on special trains)             (ivo and Transport Companies)

                         (No on service trains)


  OTHER: (Specify)

  Transit Vans:

  Special Parties _(political cr youth gangs):




  NUMBER OF                 INSIDE                outsid:                 EJECTIONS
  ARRESTS:                      VISITORS               VISITORS

 ‘Poblic Order
  cffences




 LEVEL OF POLICE COVER

 (a)    High priority

 (b)    Normal

 (c )   Low




24 (Revised July 1985)
 (Information and conments)

 Bus companies, Football Clubs, Police, etc.

 (Show nature of intelligence)‘




POLICING PRCrIZ>lS AND CRCv.~) BEHAVIOUR

(a).   In Transit:




(b)    Inside 'Ground:




(c)    Irrmediate Vicinity of Ground:




(d)    Other Locations.-
|L

      CC:-:-ZNTS ON POLICING TACTICS

      ie , Escorts, Turnstile Searches, Control of Licensing Lavs, etc:




                                                                             o,




     FROM: Chief Superintendent              '       •   TO; Chief Superintend
                                                                             hi




           1 .1 Division    '                                Operations & Tra




     Chief Superintendent



           I
                                                          SCHEDULE 1A


    NA    ADDRESS AND D O B
    (PERSON’S AR    ■r^/ru' v-rr D /E JE C T E D )   /p




I
I
I
                                                                                            SCHEDULE ’E ’

I                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


|    rc   :   CHI zlF S U P ERI NTEN DENT                   DIVISION

    ID:       ASSISTANT' CHIEF CONSTABLE (OPERATIONS)

l o , i3ALL MATCH SUMMARY

     -cer of officers employed inside the ground (rro.xi'ai-)
I
    | C/SUPT         SUPT          c   /i n s ?     INS?      SGTs         PCs      TOTAL



£ e se oriicers should be included in the table be lev;.

     lice ozricers on (A) normal voluntary overtime;
                       (E) duty tire or -
                     . (C) rest day working.


          SUPT            C/INS?                              SGTs         PCs




     MOUNTED OFFIC:


     DOG HANDLERS


     NO CF SPECIAL' CONST;                 ON CUT/:     Sucervisir               Other




i
I C #
I                                                                                                                      IJi ..V i.   ■*

                                                   FTOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY
I
          DATE:      Saturday     6 .7 .8 5             FIXIURc.:       S h e f f Wednesday       — V -      Tottenham

I         VENUE:      H ills r-o rc u g h , S h e ffie ld         ,                     KICK OFF TIME:           1 5 .0 0 hours

          MATCH:     (L e a r u e ( S p e c i f y ) :
I
          CPC'.-TD ATTENDANCE:                                            HOME SUPPORTERS                    AWAY s u p p o r t e r ;
I                                                   47,000                       41,000                            6,000
          Estimate if not kncr.vn

I
          MDDZ OF T rv-#v                             p x T7
I                                       (No on special trains)
                                                                                                BUS/COACH
                                                                                        (No and Transport Conpanies)
                                              2 , SCO ( o n e s p e c i a l )             43 coaches t o t a l
                                       (No on service’trains)                             (27) N a tio n a l     )
I                                         1,200                                           (1 4 ) F in g la n d s )
                                                                                                                    p r e v i o u s l y kno

                                                                                          (1)    S m iths o f W atford
          OTHER: (Specify)                                                                (1)    Browns o f G l o u c e s t e r
I   24    Transit V a n s :     240
                                                                                          Th e l a t t e r t w o n o t p r e v i o u s 1 y
                                                                                          knom .


I         Special Parties (political or youth gangs):
          A g ang o f 20 ( t w e n t y ) yo u th s f r c n Leeds v i s i t e d t h e m atch i n r e t a l i a t i o n
          o v e r p r c b l e - . s a t t h e Tozter.ha~ - v - Leeds c a m , !~arch, 1 9 3 5 .
I
                R OF                          INSIDE                            OUTS
                                                  VISITORS               ho:           VISITORS                         VISITORS

         Public Cr
                                                                                                            26




         Others


         .ule 'A 1


         LEVEL OF POLICE COVER

         (a)    High priority

         (b)    Normal
I        (c)    Lew


I
    12-1 (Revised July 1985)
I
^    •
I.    INTEILIGZN’OE RECEIVED AND FROM WHOM
      (Inforrv=ticn and co.Tments)

■    Bus companies, Football Clubs, Police, etc.

■    (Shcv: nature cf intelligence)

         1.    L en d er , £-'s Company - On l a s t ' away f i x t u r e t o L i v e r p o o l FC t r o u b l e
_                                   '     c a u s e d a t Kotor~~ay S e r v i c e s at K e e l e .

         2.    M e tro p o lita n     P o lic e   -   2 v a n s h i r e d f r o r . A v i s Van H i r e , A B C 2 2 3 S a n d
                                                      AFT 8 9 0 3 , b e l i e v e d t o c o n t a i n o f f e n s i v e w e a r o n s .




     POLICING PECr LET-3 AND C3CKD BEHAVIOUR

     (a)'      In Transit:                                                                                         •

               Coaches caused t r o u b l e a t W oodall S e r v ic e S t a t i o n , a t t e m p t t o l o o t
               shop.   2 t r a n s i t v a n s , CKC 1 7 3 V an d EVL 475/1, I n v o l v e d i n d i s t u r b a n c e s
               a t two p u b l i c houses i n M a n s f i e l d .



     (b)       Inside Ground:
               F l a r e s s e t o f f p r i o r t o h a l f t i . z a f~c~. T o t t e r J z a n c o n t i n g e n t - 2 srro.l:e
               b o ~ b s , c o i n s thrc:-.-n.       One r . i n c r a t t e . z p t by Tottenham . f a n s t o g e t asr.ongst
               S h e f f i e l d We d n e sd ay ■ f a n s V I A THE MA~:: STA2-D an d u s e o f PASSAGEWAY
               L’.vre ?. s ~.-.:;d .            '


     (c)      Irrrrediaoe Vicinity of Ground:
              S e v e r a l r u n n i n g f i g h t s r . o a r t o t h e cr cur .d a t L e p p i n g s L a n e .     Largo
              g r o u p s c f S h e f f i e l d Wed ne sday s u p p o r t e r s w a i t e d f o r T o t t e n h a m , f a n s
              t o l e a v e t h e grour.c.           R e s u l t - d i s p e r s e d by n o u n t c d o f f i c e r s ( s t o n e s
              th-o:.r: a t o f f i c e r s ) .


     (d)      Other Locations:

              P r o b l e m s i n c i t y ' c e n t r e f r o m 1 1 . 0 0 am o n w a r d s , i c p u b f i g h t s a n d s h o p ­
              liftin g .        B e f o r e n a t c h : - t w o h u n d r e d ( 2 0 0 ) To tten ham , f a n s g e t o f f t r a i n
              i n C h e s t e r f i e l d , a r e a sorr.e 1 4 r . i l e s f r c ~ t h e g r o u n d a n d r a : n p n c c d t2i r o u g h
              sh o p p in g s r e a .       Car.age a n d t h e f t .       O f f e n s i v e b a n n e r s d i s p l a y e d on
              coaches.




I
    r



          c c -:-:-^_\t s   on   policing tactics


          ^■e * E-2—o^ts» iumstile Searches, Control of Licensing Laws, etc:


          1.          S l i g h t p r o b l e m s e s c o r t i n g f a n s fronr, r a i l w a y s t a t i o n . A ttem pts to
                      e n te r la rg e stores.             Licen sed prem ises in v i c i n i t y o f g ro u n d c lo s e d .

          2.         T u rn s tile   searches      in   o p eratio n   (4 a r r e s t s ) .

          3•         R ailw ay    tra v e lle rs   re c u ire   clo se su o e rv is io n .




        F7C'.-'.: Chief Superintendent                                                        TO: Chief Superintendent
                 ’     1 Division                                                                 Operations & Traffic




        Chief Superintendent




I
    r~




                                                                                                 SCHEDULE *A'


         NAME, ADDRESS AND D O B
         (PER SO N S AR RESTED/CHARGED/EJECTED)                 OFFENCE /BEHAVIOUR


         (The f u l l m     r . s , a d d r e s s and c a t e   (0 ffe r.e s . i e S e c t i o n 5 , P.O 1 9 3 6 ,
         c f b irth o f     persons a r r e s t e d ,           e je c te d - bad b e h a v io u r )
         charged and         e j e c t e d t o b e shewn
         h e r e as p e r   paragraph 4)




I
I r
I                                                                                           SCrEDULE   ’S ’

                                                 SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
I
          M:   CHIEF SUPERINTENDED               ..1?'.     DIVISION

    TO:        ASSISTANT CHIEF CONST             ,E (OPERATIONS)

                   1^2-TCH S * R Y

    f-TTbsr of officers employed inside the ground (maxirnrr.)
                                           s.
                                       U




          C/SUPT
                                           H




                       SUPT
                                            8
                                            n<



                                                   INS?       S«iS        PCs    TOTAL
                        •1                          4          12         122    139


J h e s e officers "should be included -in the table below.

    Police officers on (A) ncrrral voluntary overtirre;
                       (B) duty time or
1                      (C) rest day working.- •


           SUPT             C /I N S P .         INS?        SGIs          PCs     TOTAL


                                                              31           205     243


      B        2                                              10                   112




                                                                           16          16



      DOG HANDLERS                                                         12          12
                                                             35                                   (APPENDIX 'L'


                               ’ EVACUAT I ON OF SPORTS                     S T ADI A

                           Contingency               Plans     for    Evacuation


It    is s t r e s s e d that aiI        evacuation plans                          mus t   be    dr awn     up        in
c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the f o l l o w i n g a g e n c i e s : -

a)       Fire      Ericade

b)       AraSulanes          Service

c)       An    appropriate             official         of    the     club      concerned

d>       Statutory           Local       Authority           (Safety         Committee)

To b e e f f e c t i v e a n y e v a c u a t i o n p l a n m u s t b e r e c o g n i s e d b y a l l
t h o s e ‘a g e n c i e s a n d I i a i s o n m e e t i n g s i n v o l v i n g r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s
from the a g e n c i e s        l i s t e d above,         will      be t h e      most e f f i c i e n t
method of            achieving a workable,                   agreed c ont ing enc y plan for
evacua ti o n .

An e s s e n t i a l  p r e - r e q u i s i t e to s u c c e s s f u l             evacuation          is     that
all  e x i t g a t e s a r e ma n n e d and u n l o c k e d .

I t s h o u l d be n o t e d t h a t e s c a p e r o u t e s from i n d i v i d u a l                   grounds
ma y a l r e a d y b e c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s .

It  is  appreciated that                          dealing          with       emergencies              requires
considerable f le x ib ility                    a n d mu c h      w i l l d e p e n d on t he          specific
nature of the i n c i d e n t .

In   preparing          contingency plans                    for     evacuation            the     following
      i ngs are         recommended.

        Fj_ a n _o_f __t h _ e _ G £ c u n d

        A      plan   containing           detaile-d                information   relevant   to
        evacuation        is  e s s e n t i a l -and                consideration   should  be
        g i v e n t o t he in e l u s i o n c f the                following points,  location
        O f : - '

        a )      Emergency            telephones.

        b )      Fire       fighting           equipment.

        c )      Control          r ooms       and    pol i ce     rooms.

       d )       Fire      Tender         (if    a p p r o p r i a te ) .

       e )       First       Aid/AmCulance              posts

       i)        Evacuation            routes.

       g>       Exit gates         (to          show    both      onto       the    pitch        and    out      of
                the g r o u n d ).
                                                        36

   Aerici         p r . o t c c r s p h s ma y b e a d v a n t s c e c u s in a i v i n c c I e =r » r
   a e r i n i t i c n c f t h e p h y s i c a l c n a r a c t e r i s t «c s " o f ' t h e a r o u n c
   and s u r r c u n d i n g a r e s ,

   Plan       cr     t_h e _ 5 u r r o u n d i n c    Area

   This should         i n c l u d e a g r e e d a c c e s s r o u t e s and r e n d e z v o u s
   p o i n t s a s at ( 1 2 ) and         (13) t o g e t h e r     with other        infor­
   mation,        useful        to   o f fi c e r s performing           duty,     such as
   locations        for      potential           disorder        ie.     public houses,
   railway stations,             coach parks.

         e_f_i. n c_FoJ__i_ c e

   This should include                          how   and    where   officers        are    brieve--1
   a n d by wh o m.

  In a d d i t i o n t o t h e no r ma l pre-match briefing   officers
  must    be i nf ormed       of evacuation    procedures   which w i l l
  include coded messages.

  Officers           perrorming duty          in   different          areas     of  the
  g r o u n d m u s t b e ma d e a w a r e o f t h e    e x i t r o u t e s , emergency
  t e l e p h o n e s and f i r e p o i n t s in t h a t a r e a .

  C o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d be g i v e n t o p r o v i d i n g o f f i c e r s w i t h
  returnable,               individual,          briefing          cards,         csntainina
  essential              facts       in  relation       to p o l i c i n g     the       ground
  g e n e r a l l y and s p e c i f i c r o l e s .

 All o f f i c e r s      s h o u l d b e i s s u e d w i t h a ma p o f t h e     cround
 end s u r r o u n d i n g      area,    to enable           them  t o be f u l l y c o n ­
 v e r s a n t w i t h the l ayout of the cround.

 B_r_i_ e_f j_ n c _ c _ £ _ S _ t _§w= r d s

 Stewards          s h o u l d be b r i e f e d     by         a senior Folice Officer
 p r i o r to      e v e r y match to         ensure           that they   ar e aware c f
 their       duties          and    r e s po ns i b i I i t    ies  in   the    event       cf
 evacuation            or e t h e r emergency.                  Previously     identified
 de . i c i er.c i e s i n s t e w s r d i n g s h o u l d      be  brcuaht     to n o t i c e
 at s u c h B r i e f i n g s .

          J_i = d _ 511l£ s£.s_a_t_p_ec_i_ca_t ed_Fos_t_s

Consideration             s h o u l d be    given       to     deslcvinc dedicate
err ice.’ -      at key p o i n t s       on a r e g u l a r     basis."             Tn e k e v
pc;nts,        tcgetner with             the o f f i c e r s r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in
an e m e r g e n c y , s h o u l d be i n c l u d e d u n d e r t h i s h e a d i n c .

S J l s i ! s _ c l _ D e c l o v m e n ^ x_pu.U es_find       I n s t r u c t i o n s to
•§_tewa£cs                                             ~                            :
                                                                                    -----

These        d e t a i l s s h o u l d be d r a w n up by t h e c l u b             in c o n s u l ­
tation       w i t h t h e F o l i c e and F i r e B r i g a d e , w i t h          particular
referen      ce     to    stewards'          responsibilities           in           assistino
police       in e v a c u a t i o n s i t u a t i o n s .
                                                                 37


  7 •        Lo . c a t i c n s. a n d    Functions         of    Co n t roj __Poj _n_t g__gnri      Police
             Rooms

             This should               include       cetails          of    club      and     police      control
             points.

             It     is strongly          a d v i s e d that one        cont rol point which is
             not n e c e s s a r i l y t he mai n p o l i c e         control    r o o m, be ma n n e d
             j o i n t l y by p o l i c e , a c l u b o f f i c i a l    and    the F i r e E r i g a c e
             <if a v a i l a b l e )   in     orcer      t h a t ma x i mu m c o m m u n i c a t i o n ' s n c
             liaison       is maintained.

             Each     of        the above personnel                        should    have       access      to    his
             o wn m e a n s     of communication.

             In the event of the p r i n c i p l e               control                    room      beinc ren­
             dered i n o p e r a t i v e , consi d e r a t i o n shouId                     be   d i v e n to the
             s u i t a b i l i t y o f an a l t e r n a t i v e location.

 6.       Co mmy n i c a t i o n s         Av5_i_J_atJ_e_wji__t_hj_n._t_he._Gr.ound

          This        should         inciude:-

          a)         Police          communications

          b)         Club      communications                - eg.     radios and/or                telephones
                     with      i n f o r m a t i o n on      t h e s y s t e ms e m p I o y e d

          c)         Methods             of      c o mmu n i c a t i o n      with     the       public       -   to
                     include           w h e t h e r pol i c e ha v e         a cces s to      t he m, e c : -

                     i )        Ta n nc y
                     ii)        Electronic Display                    Boards
                     i i i )    Loudha i I e rs
                     iv )       Banners

         d)         Methods          of     contacting           emergency          services

5".     Cc c e_c__y e          c_§_£

        C c c e d m e s s a g e s a r e - t h e m e a n s by               w h i c h a t t e n t i o n i s dr a wn
        t = s t a f f anc F c l i c e of the ne e c                         to take immeciate a c t i o n
        a s a r e s u l t o f an           emergency s i t                 uation        that has a r i s e n ,
        w i t h o t 1 1 C e u s i n g i mm e d i a t e a l a r m           t o the s p e c t a t o r s .

        It    is e s s e n t i a l       that everyone concerned                     in the    manacs-
        ment o f crowd                s a f e t y w i t h i n the ground is             aware o f the
        coded        m e s s a g e and           this    is   an e s s e n t i a l    ingredient      of
        bctrr      s t e w a r d and p o l i c e b r i e f i n g s .         Under t h i s h e a d i n g
        theactual             text        of      the    codedmessage               and. t h e wa y   in
        wh i c h i t     i s t r a n s mi t t eds h o u Id     be i n c l u d e d .

10•     I n i t i a l    Response           to   Emergency

        To     include         the       followinc:-

        8)        Methods         by       w h i c h p o l i c e and           steward         notify     emer­
                  gencies         to      the p o l i c e c o n t r o l        room.
                                                            38

            b )       Method of announcing     coded  messaaes    in                             order  to
                      g i v e jDersonneI early   warning  of   an                                emergency
                      situation.

            c)      The   requirec response cf               p o l i c e and       steward*  to
                     such   m e s s a g e s , eg. s e n i o r o f f i c e r w i l l go    to the
                     control    r o o m , g a t e s w i l l be ma nne d and o p e n e d e t c .

            d)      Met hod     of communicating                  with     the    referee      in    o r^ r
                     t o s t o p t h e game.

            e )     M e t h o d o f c omrnu n i e a t i n g      the     initial        addres =    to    the
                     spectators.

11•         Evscua t i o n Prccejurp

           (To       be i mp l e me n t e d   in           the  event of  fire,  structural
          hazard,          serious        crowd            disorder,  explosion    or   other
          serious         incident        which           ma y require a full   or    partial
          e v a c u a t i on ) .

          a)        This       sub-heading      should          identify,      the     intended
                    r o u t e s to   be  used      and e x i t s    available          for     the
                    evacuation        of   t h e t e r r a c e s and s t a n d s   w i t h i n the
                    cround.

         b )         It  is apprecia te d certain                        r o u t e s ma y h o w e v e r    by
                     inaccessible  depending    on                         the      nature     of         the
                     incident.

         c)         An     e s s e n t i a l p r e - r e q u i s i t e to s u c c e s s f u l evacuation
                    is     t h a t a l l g a t e s a r e ma n n e d and u n l o c k e d .

        d )        Access       routes            mus t    be    preserved       as     far   as     orac-
                   t i cab Ie .

        e )        It       is      suggested      t h a t g r o u n d s be   divided      on        an
                   individual basis           into readily identifiaD le sections
                   de pe r , c i n g on t h e l a y o u t -of t he g r o u n d i n q u e s t i o n .

                   Exit         routes          from t h e s e s e c t i o n s   should       be s p e c i ­
                   fied,        ( s a f e t y . c e r t i f i c a t e s should   be r e f e r r e d t o ) .

                  Th e s y s t e m o f a ! p h a b e t i c a I Iy        identifying         secments
                   is     worthy of        consideration,                 especially         in” con­
                  j u n c t i c r. w i t h  the o p e r a t i o n         c f CCTV        effectively
                  l o c a t i n g problem areas wi thin                  the g r o u n d .

      f )         This     sub-heading            should           also include d e t a ils    of
                  specific     t a s k s s u b s e q u e n t to        the i n i t i a l response
                  t h a t ma y r e q u i r e a l l o c a t i o n .

      Ac c e s _ s _ _ Rq u _ t e_s

      These        must       be      agreed   with       the    emergency       services.

      In a d d i t i o n to t h e i r l o c a t i o n ,          the method of           openinc      and
      preserving' these routes should                            be i n c l u d e d .
                                                                39
      Rendezvous              Points

      L o c a t i o n of rendezvous p o i n t s , agreed wi t h the emeraencv
      S e r v ic e s should          be      included       in     this       hesdina.     “ Any
      f a c ilit ie s       that      exist       at r e n d e z v o u s p o i n t s , eg. larce
      c a r p a r k s , a c comrr.o c a t i o n     capable        of h o l di na c a cu e l t i e c
      s n d / o r p e r s o n n e l , s h o u l d a l s o be i n c l u d e d .

      L 2 £ = l i g n _ o f _ F j _ r e _ F j _ c h t , j _nc _Ec uj _Dme n t _ _ £ n d _ F _ i _ r e _ H v d r a n t s

      Details             or t he         l o c a t i o n of f i r e f i g h t i n g eauipment                            a nc
      hydrants              should          be c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n    thTs h e a d i n a                        and
      c o u l d be        u s e f u l l y l i n k e d t o a map o f t h e s t a d i u m .

          r cnoemeo t s           for. V i s i t ! nc S u o s o r t e r s

     T h i s headi ng should i nc lud e arrangements that                          e x i s t for
     the s e g r e g a t io n   o f r i v a l s u p p o r t e r s and mu s t       take into
     ac c ount methods          of dealing with v i s i t i n g supporters                    in
     the event cf p a r t i a l       or total        e v a c u a t i o n to m i n i m i s e the
     o p p o r t u n i t y for rival     f a n s to engage in d i s o r d e r .

     Crowd        Mo n i t o r i n g

     T h i s s h o u l d d e t a i l what methods e x i s t              w i t h i n the ground
     to     o b s e r v e and a s s i s t      in crowd         movement f o r e v a c u a t i o n
     purposes           and s h o u l d i n c l u d e     the     CCTV        fa cilitie s,         if
     available,          t h e l o c a t i o n o f c o n t r o l p o i n t s , s p o t t e r s *e t c .

     Casualt i es

 Methods             of     dealing          with       casualties             should         include:-

 =)           Location              cf       c a s u s It y       clearing              station            if    prac-
              t i c a b Ie .                                                                                     r

 b)         Designated hospitals                          for        rival     supporters             or     police
             and suppor t e r s .

I-i. ^is a p p r e c i a t e d t h a t locat msjcr incident                                          plans        will
probably cater for these e v e n t u a l i t i e s .

Ad dj_.t \_o n aj__ I n f c r ma-t i o n

The        following             points         are     put      forward          for     consideration:-

c '          Lc c a ! conciticns,                     eg.        whether         emergency               v e n i c Ie c
             csn gain access to                       the       stadium.

3)          I n f o r m a t i o n as to            the hool igan e l ement - where they
            c a n be         located,              t a c t i c s e m p l o y e d by t h e m, v u l n e r ­
            a b l e a r e a s of the               ground.

.)        Special            arrangements                   -     eg.     deployment                of          plain
           clothes           police.

I)        Location of s p ecia l           equipment ( i f       any) eg.                                    white
           tape,  loudhailers,              first       aid,  seek    and                                   search
           lamps, f l u o r e s c e n t j a c k e t s , banners.
                                               40


              S A F E T Y OF S F G R T 5   GROUNDS         -    STEWARDS


     The       prime       responsibility           for  the   arrancemsnt    of
     a f f a i r s at    s p o r t s grounds l i e s with the c lutT   To t h a t
     enc        they     s houl d e ns ur e that      stewsrcs   are  suitably
     qua I i f i e d .

     QUALIFICATIONS;

     Stewards       should:-

     a>      Be t r a i n e d       and       instructed       to      deal    with         any
              e m e r g e n c i e s r e l a t i n g to f i r e or     evscu at icn,

     b>        Be g i v e n w r i t t e n i n s t r u c t i o n a b o u t t h e    a c t i o n to
               be      taken          in    cases        of   emergency,           including
               a r r a n g e m e n t s f c r c a l l i n g the e m e r g e n c y   services”

  c)         Receive    practical  instruction                and                   treininc
              appropriate tc their r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .

  d)         Should          not   be e mp l o y e d    as  a     steward          unless     sc
              i n s t r u c t e d and t r a i n e d ,   and

  B>         Ee a d e q u a t e  in number, p h y s i c a l l y and   mentally
              capable of performing their d u t ies ,              effectively
             deployed,          efficiently   supervised          and  readily
              identifiable.

              NE . S t e w a r d s s h o u l d n o t b e l e s s t h a n I E y e a r s - o r
              mere     than        60       years       of see   and    should       we ar
              d istin ctiv e dress             such       as   fluorescent jackets
              suitably       i n s c r i b e d f r o n t and b a c k .


On t h e o c c a s i o n o f e a c h m a t c h s t e w a r d s s h o u l d         attend a
pre-mate~ faristing                  and       be made           f u l l y aware   cf their
r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s e n d t h s .. I o ' c a t i o n c f     msmesrs     of   t he
Ems r g s n c y S e r v i c s s ,    if    " a p p r e p r i a t e , in     ths    a r es fcr
which they ars rsspor.s i b i s ,


S t s w a r c s s h o u l d bs    d i s t r i b u t s d throughout          ths orounc
 in      accordance with a              dstailsd           prs-arrancsd schscuis
agrssa         betwsen        the     police           and   managsmsr. t .        Th e i r
numcsrs         and        location        should        not   b s ” I s s s t han ths
mi ni mum       statsd        in t he        safsty        csrtificats.            Thsir
d u t i s s ma y b s d i v i c s c    i n t o f o u r ma i n c a t s c o r i s s ;

a)         C o n t r o l l i n g or  dirscting        msmbsrs o f           ths publi c
            who a r s e n t s r i n g o r ( s a v i n g t h s g r o u n d .

b>         Patrolling           t hs ground to           deal  with    any emer­
           gencies.              eg:   raising           alarms,   extinguishinc
            fires etc.

c>         Manni ng      entrsncss,  sxits               and      othsrstratsgic
           points,       particularly exit               doors    and g a t e s which
                                                          41

                    i nn Bu
                          u sc ee .Ct       continuousIy cPen                whilst       the   ground        is

       d)
                   Undertaking                specific  duties  reletino                        to    emer­
                   g e n c i e s and          evacuation procedures.


       E m e r a e n c y _ F r o c e d u r pc

    The i m p o r t a n c e o f t he       provision        of   f o r m a l e me r g e n c y
    procedures          c t e a c h g r o u n d c a n n o t be o v e r - e m p h a ' i z e c
   ■Joint    consultation              in t n l s r e s p e c t sn o o l a   be       U'en
       f ' r e " - m b u ? - n p o l , “ ' tne     "lanEgeimnt           of the      crouna,
       f.re,       = m b u l c n c e and  other services.               It is      e^sntial
       t h a t s i e w o r d s and t h e i r s u p e r v i s o r s e r e f u l l y a w e - e o f
      produced.            ^            ^         t0   P ‘ 5y    ln    th*     P ‘ 5 ns      which’ % r l


      d ^ I iU n n * t h f - ' ? .    SnSUre      th£t     v r i t ^ n  instructions
      d e |c ii,ng   t h e a c t i o n t o be t a k e n i n t h e      event     o f an
      emergency are served              on   a l l s t e w a r d s , and t h a t c t £ f *
       t r - i n S n n W- n n S     reCe,' ve             Practical             i n s t r u c t i o n " and
      ee vv ee n
               n tt oo ff e n e m e r g e n c y . t 0     t h B i r r e s Po n £ ^ i i i t i e s in t h e


  -Sh/n5     £ UCh      £S      the f i r e     sarv'ce,      the   police  end
  : ^ U' ! nce s e r v i c e      h5ve     expressed        a  wiiiincr.ess  to
  7„f.'         : - Cn      tr 5 ' n i n a  and   c l u b s ere urge5 to teke
  fulI   advant age of the o f f e r .


  fecuf-rfv              t n r £ t 5 f f 5 nd £ t e w 5 r d £ s h o u l d be              c a r r i e d out
   egularly              to ensure           the    smooth      opereton                  of the pro-
      . I 5.                   d e 5 l i n g w i t h an     emercency.                       a      r e ^ d
  i n s t r u c t • o i epn - COnt£ining       det£Ms                       of the     t r a i n i n g and
  inr    . d       h      9 , v en  end    exercises                         held,       and        should
  i nc l u d e the f o l l o w i n g m a t t e r s : -

 a)           Dete       and      time       of    the    instruction          or     exercise.

 P>           Duration.

 c )           N a me     of      the       person       giving       the    instruction.
 d )
               Names        of     the      persons        receiving         the     instruction,

 e)           Nature         of     instruction             or    exercise.



c n n ! - 0 !-    ° f     s ^ W5rds      S h o u l d be f r o m e   central point
= t ev~rd s       - ♦ e .f f , c , e n t   me s n£ to         communicate    with
-tewcrds                  key      po.nts        identified       in   discussion
D e t w e e n m a n a g e m e n t and t he p o l i c e .


Chjef        Stewards


|p'ubs                     appoint a          Chief Steward r e s p o n s i b l e for
           l?3       ,ngthe       dUties      of      rewards           and   to  be
i m m e d i a t e l y a v a i l a b l e f o r d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h the  senior
                                                    42
               police officer        present       ccncernino           sny    problem       in      tn»
               grouna.                                       "


7 •         Soecj_fj_c_pu_tj_e£_cf_SJ_swards

            Specific       duties      to   be   undertaken        by    stewards       include:

            a)       F r e v e n t ing      overcrcwcing,      ensurinc        that      crowd
                      limits         in     various   parts      of       the  ground      are
                      comp I i e c      w i t h and t ha t c a n c w a y s and   e x i t = are
                      k e p t cI e a r .

           b)        Preventing,              sc far     as   possible,                star.dine  on
                     seats,         and       the    climbing of            f e n c e s and    other
                     structures.             Where by v i r t u e o f t h e s c a l e o f t he
                     i n c i d e n t s t e w a r d s are unable to comply w i t h t h i s
                     requirement,               they   should without                 delay report
                     t " e b e t t e r to the ne ar est p o l i c e o f f i c e r , or,           if
                     no      pci ice       officer       is p r e s e n t ,       to     the   Chief
                     Steward or d e s i g n a t e d club o f f i c i a l .

           c)      7 he         i n v e s t i g a t i o n and  identification           of        any
                     i n c i d e n t or o c cu r r e n c e ,   reporting their findings
                     tc      PoI i c e        or       management  In     accordance             with
                     i n s t r u c t i o n s g i v e n at the p r e - m a t c h b r i e f i n g .

           d)      Being       aware of the            lo cat io n of  f i r e f i g h t i n g end
                    mediccl          e q u i p me n t in the ar e a f o r wh i c h t hey are
                    responsible                and b e i n g   capable      of    effectively
                    o p e r a t i n g the seme.

       e)          Eeing        fully     conversent          with      the        methods   and
                    s i g n a l s u s e d t o i n d i c a t e an e m e r g e n c y    situation
                   wh i c n s h o u l d have been            previously           set   down i n
                   w r i t i n g and s e r v e d on them.

       f)          Being       capable      of     recognising potential                  fire
                   h a z a r d s and      suspect packages.              Such f i n d i n g s to
                         r e p c r t e d to   t he n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r c r in
                   h i s a c s e n c e the c h i e f st evard or d e s i g n a t e d cl ub
                   official      .
                   Except   i n an e m e r g e n c y s t e w a r d s s h c u l d n o t l e a v e
                   their place     of duty          w i t h o u t the c o n s e n t o f the
                   Ciiief Steward     or       senior police o f fic e r present
                   wr. o should,     if      it     is      c c n s i cers.fl   necessary,
                   arrange for a replacement.

           ^      ^ 1 1 e x i t g a t e s s h o u l d be ma nn e d w h i l e t h e o r o u n d
                   is    u s e d by t h e p u b l i c , and be             capable cf'beinc
                   opened immediately,               f r o m i n s i d e , by a n y o n e i n an
                   emergency.

      i)          Reporting        to       the      Chief   Steward          any damage       or
                  defect        likely        to     cause     injury         or danger         to
                  p e r s o n s in a t t e n d a n c e .

                  In  trie event  o f an               emergency or           incident  the
                  senior police officer                present will           take  command
                                         43
            and e l l     stewards should promptly                c o mp l y w i t h any
            instructions             given    by     hi m    or     by     any p o l i c e
            o f f i c e r a c t i n a on h i s b e h a l f .


T r_a__i_n i_n a

Training of stewards                should  be c o m p l e t e d p r i o r       to the
s t a r t of the    season           tc  a standard acceptable                   to the
pdiice,        fire   and            ambulance     services          and          Local
Author i t y .

Refresher   t r .• i n i n g     should            be      g i v e n by  a competent
person during     t h e    m o n ths of          O c t o b e r and J a n u a r y .

S t e w a r d s s h o u l d be s u p p l i e d   with    a   handout        detailing
their         responsibilities              in   general     t erms as       s e t - out
above.

The a b o v e l i s t of d u t i e s i s by no m e a n s e x h a u s t i v e a nd
c l u b management shoul d l i a i s e c l o s e l y w i t h a p p r o p r i a t e
s e n i o r pot i c e , f i r e , and a m b u l a n c e services officers
tc      arrive      at    a final version that takes account                   of
Ioca I fac t o r s .
   ACPO SUB COMMITTEE ON
HOOLIGANISM AT SPORTING EVENTS
  GUIDE TO POLICING FOOTBALL




                        OCTOBER 1987
          A.C.P.O.

     PUBLIC ORDER GUIDE

    REPLACEMENT FOR THE

FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM SECTION
                                                                                    %




                                      CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1 - POLICING FOOTBALL
Introduction                                                      1.1
In te llig e n c e                                                1.2   -    1 .6
Pre-Match Planning                                                1.7
Use of 'Away! Officers (Spotters)                                 1.8 - 1.10
B riefing                                                         1.11-1.16
Away Supporters                                                   1.17-1.19
Flashpoints                                                       1.20
Stadium Searches                                                  1.21
Entry in to the Ground                                            1.22-1.27
Exclusion Orders                                                  1.28-1.39
Entrance to the Ground                                            1.40-1.45
Team Managers, Referees and Linesmen                              1.46-1.47
Entertainment                                                     1.48
Crowd D istributions                                              1.49
Segregation                                                       1.50
Stewards                                                          1.51
D isposition of Manpower                                          1.52-1.54
Police Reserves                                                   1.55
Persons Arrested or Ejected                                       1.56-1.60
Contingency Planning                                              1.61
Emergency Evacuation                                              1.62
Retention of V isiting Supporters                                 1.63
Early Re-Deployment of Police                                     1.64
Vehicular and Pedestrian T raffic                                 1.65
Bus, Railway and Main Line Stations                               1.66
De-Briefing of Senior Officers                                    1.67

 CHAPTER 2 - VISITING SUPPORTERS TRAVELLING BY COACH AND
                RAIL COMMUNICATION OF INTELLIGENCE
 Introduction                                                     2.1    -   2.2
 Action to be Taken by Home Liaison Officers                      2.3
 Action to be Taken by Away Liaison Officers                      2.4 -2.8
 Post Match De-Briefing on Quality and Accuracy of
               the Intelligence Provided                          2.9 -2.11
^Information to Police Force Through^Whose Area V isiting
               Supporters are Expected'to Travel                  2.12
 Travel by B ritish Rail - Liaison with B.T.P.                    2.13
 Intern atio n al and Other Foreign Fixtures                      2.14
 Liaison with B ritish Transport Police                           2.15-2.18
 Football Trains Etc. Ban of Alcohol                              2.19-2.20

 CHAPTER 3 - DUTIES OF STEWARDS
 The E ffect of Safety C e rtific a te s Issued Under the
                   Safety a t Sports Grounds! Act, 1975           3.1 -3.2
 I d e n tif ic a tio n and Supervision                           3.3 -3.6
 Emergency Procedures - Stewards' Role                            3.7 -3.10

 CHAPTER 4 - POLICING FACILITIES AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS
 Introduction                                                     4.1
 Prisoner Reception Point Within the Ground                       4.2
 Parading and Briefing                                            4.3
 Control Room                                                     4.4 -4.7
 C.C.T.V. and S t i l l Photography                               4.8 -4.16

 CHAPTER 5 - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS! ACT, 1975 - CERTIFICATES
                  FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM

POLICING FOOTBALL
Introduction
This document has been compiled fo r the purpose of providing
general advice to officers given the re sp o n sib ility of arranging
operational police planning for sporting occasions. The level
and degree of advance planning Bust necessarily depend to a large
extent on the p a rtic u la r fix tu re and the amount of trouble th a t
may reasonably be expected as a r e s u lt of in te llig e n c e gathered
by the police.
In tellig en ce
Intelligence concerning the likelihood of crowd disturbance or
hooliganism occurring will necessarily be obtained from a variety
of sources and should be Interpreted through experience and
common sense.       I t is recognised th a t the degree of advance
planning fo r a p a rtic u la r game depends upon both the In terest in
the fix tu re and the amount of trouble an tic ip a te d , based upon
in tellig en ce available to the police. Aside from the importance
of the fix tu re in terms of league position or 'cup' prospects,
football matches are often used by hooligans t o celebrate
previous encounters with p a rtic u la r se ts of fans.          I t 1s
therefore p a rtic u la rly important to be aware of the history of
th a t fix tu re .
The prime source of football intelligence i s the Police National
Intelligence System which is based on the network of Police
Liaison O fficers (see paragraphs 2.1 to 2.11 e t . se q .).
Summaries completed by police officers of the home club Force are
forwarded to the v is itin g club's lia iso n o f f ic e r , making
available in tellig en ce about fans behaviour at both home and away
fix tu re s. This Information will be collated and made available
fo r-fu tu re matches involving that club.
The sunmary includes d etails of those arre ste d , charged or
ejected and complaints of misbehaviour both inside and outside
the gro u n d , "including public houses, railway/coach statio n s and
other places where football supporters gather. This allows for
regular offenders to be identified and targ eted , resulting in a
systematic build-up of intelligence.          To ensure the maximum
benefit of such in telligence i t is essential th a t the match
suranary is completed accurately and comprehensively, and
forwarded promptly to the Police Force concerned.
 Misbehaviour by football supporters w hilst tra v e llin g on tr a in s ,
 London Underground, or fe r rie s , or w hilst on B ritish Rail
 property Is collated by B ritish Transport Police as part of a
•national in tellig en ce system operated by th a t Force.          This
 information 1s available to Force liaiso n o ffic e rs through t h e ir
 B ritish Transport Police counterparts (see paragraphs 2.13 to
 2.20 e t. se q .).
 Sources of in tellig en ce may be summarised as.fo llo w s:-
&   ■




                (a)      Match summaries compiled by the 'home' club w ill provide
                         a record of the s u e fixture on previous occasions.
                (b)      Intelligence from the lia iso n o ff ic e r associated with the
                         v is itin g club.

                (c)      Analysis of C.C.T.V. coverage to Identify group leaders
                         and observe the 't a c t i c s ' of the hooligans.
                (d)      'S p o tte rs' supplied by the police associated with the
                          v is itin g club.

                (e)      The football clubs (home and away).
                (f)      Travel agents, coach operators, B ritish Transport Police,
                         supporters' clu b s.                     *

                (g)      The development of Intelligence will take in to account
                         the h istory of the fix tu re , the anticipated size of the
                         crowd, Importance of r e s u lt to e ith e r club, strength of
                         'away' following, absence of other games in the area,
                         whether or not a !derby' fix tu r e , press coverage.
               Pre-Match Planning

        1.7    Depending on the fix tu re football matches w ill Involve the use of
               various branches of the Force (the mounted, t r a f f i c , special
               constabulary, e t c . ) .          I t is Important th a t the o ffic e r
               responsible for policing the match determines the pre-match
               planning in the l ig h t of the in tellig en ce a t hand. In many cases
               an o ff ic e r will be delegated the planning task and i t is
               recommended th a t as a routine the planning o ff ic e r , intelligence
               o f f ic e r and the o ff ic e r in charge of policing the match confer to
               analyse 'in te llig e n c e ' and determine t a c ti c s .
               Use o f 'Away' O fficers (Spotters)
        1.8    The use of 's p o t te r s ' from the Force area from which fans are
                tra v e llin g to 'away' games may be of b e n e fit, but there are
                d i f f i c u l t i e s , p a rtic u la rly i f the o ffic e rs travel with the
                supporters. A d is tin c tio n has to bedrawn between, on the one
                hand, routine 's p o t te r s ' who seek to provide regular in tellig en ce
                to the 'home1 Force and, on the other, covert Intelligence
                gathering.
        1.9    In the former case i t is recommended th a t arrangements be made
                beforehand with the 'home* police;              th a t the o ffic e rs do not
                travel with the v is itin g supporters as police o ff ic e rs ; th a t they
                rep o rt to and l i a i s e with the 'home' police to a s s i s t with
                I n te llig e n c e .. Whenever possible th e ir role should be solely to
                provide In tellig en ce and not to be d ire c tly involved in the
                policing.
        1.10   In the l a t t e r case (covert operations) I t is Important th a t a
                means of contact be established prior to the game and th a t the
                o ff ic e rs handling the communications, and the o ff ic e r in charge
                of the game, know exactly what arrangements have been made.
           Briefing
    1.11   O fficers should receive a full briefing p rio r to taking up t h e ir
           duties which should include a fte r Batch arrangements and clear
           instructions as to booking o ff. Where practicab le such briefings
           should be carried out on s i t e . In large scale police operations
           the operational coninander should b rie f a ll o ffic e rs not below the
           rank of Inspector, and Inspectors should be responsible for
           briefing o ffic e rs of the rank of Sergeant and Constable.
    1.12   In accordance with the 'Popplewell' recommendations the briefing
            nust Include evacuation procedures and the duties and
            re s p o n sib ilitie s of stewards should be brought to the atten tio n
            of police o ffic e rs (see Duties of Stewards - paragraph 3.1 e t.
            se q .).
    1.13   Briefing cards may prove advantageous, p a rtic u la rly when officers
           are unfamiliar with the routines of policing foo tb all.          Where
           o ffic e rs are unfam iliar they should be provided with a map of the
            ground and I t s immediate environs Identifying 'home' and 'away'
           sections of the ground and the numbers or l e t t e r s used by the
            club, so th a t they can answer questions fo r supporters.
    1.14   Briefing should pay p a rtic u la r attention to policy and practice
            as to searching, a r r e s t and ejection and o ffic e rs must know where
           to take prisoners.               Intelligence as to lik e ly offenders and
            common practices of disturbance should be carefully outlined.
           Supervisors in p a rtic u la r need to know the ground conmanders
            'p u b lic order s tr a te g y '.
    1.15   Copies of evacuation procedures and any b riefing cards or other
            information passed out in documentary form during briefing should
            be available within the ‘police c o n tro l'.
    1.16   Ground r e g u la tio n s ,' which have national application, should be
            brought to notice as follows:-
                                      ^ GROUND REGULATIONS

            1.      All matches are played in accordance with the Rules and
                    Regulations of the Football Association and The Football
                    League and the Laws of the Game.
            2.      Play cannot be guaranteed to take place on any p a rtic u la r
                    day or at any particular time and the Club reserves the
                     right to change i t s advertised fix tu re s without notice
                    and without l i a b i l i t y .
            3.      No refund of any cash adnission          charge paid a t     the
                    t u r n s t i l e w ill be made.
            4.      Refunds w ill be made in respect of seats booked in
                    advance and paid for where a match i s postponed, subject
                    to a time lim itatio n , d etails of which can be obtained
                    from the Box Office.                 *
            5.      Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the
                    fie ld of play.


I
6.    With the exception of authorised press representatives
      holding o ffic ia l passes, the taking of photographs or
      cine photography Inside the ground Is prohibited.       In
      addition, no recording, whether fo r radio or telev isio n
      or fo r private purposes and whether fo r transmission or
      otherwise, Is permitted save with a special authorisation
      In w riting by the Club.
7.    Only persons sp ecifically authorised 1n writing by the
      Club are permitted to d is trib u te w ithout charge or o ffe r
      fo r sale In the ground any newspapers, periodicals or any
      other a r t i c l e s .
8.    Unnecessary noise such as th a t from the use of radio sets
      and behaviour lik ely to cause confusion or nuisance of
      any kind Including foul or . abusive .language 1s not
      permitted In any p art of the ground.

9.    The climbing of floodlight pylons,          stands   or   other
       buildings In the ground 1s forbidden.
10.   The consumption of Intoxicating liq u o rs is permitted only
      In authorised places and in accordance with the Sporting
      Events' (Control of Alcohol E tc.) Act, 1985.
11.   Fireworks, smoke c an isters, b o t t l e s , glasses, cans,
       f la g s , banners, poles and other sim ilar a rtic le s or
       co n tain ers, Including anything which could or might be
       used as a weapon, are not permitted within the ground,
       and any. person in possession of such an a r t ic l e or
       container may be refused entry or ejected from the
       ground.
12.   Under no circumstances is      it   perm itted to throw any
      object on to the pitch.
13.   Any person who f a i ls to comply with in stru ctio n s from a
       steward may be ejected from the ground.
14.   In general the right of admission is reserved to the Club
       management.
15.   Any person who remains in a gangway may be ejected from
       the ground.

16.   The Club reserves the right to refuse admission to or
       e je c t any person who refuses to be searched by a police
       o f f ic e r .
17.   All persons entering th is ground are admitted only
      subject to the above Ground Regulations and to the Rules
      and Regulations of The Football Association and of The
      Football League. Entry to the ground shall be deemed to
      c o n s titu te unqualified acceptance of a l l these Rules and
      Regulations.
18.      The Club reserves the r i g h t fo r I t s servants tnd agents
         to remove from th is ground any person who does not comply
         w1     Ground Regulations and with the Rules and
         Regulations of The Football Association and The Football
         League or whose presence on the ground 1s or could
         reasonably be construed as c o n stitu tin g a source of
         danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.

Amy Supporters
In te llig e n c e o fficers should provide c le a r In stru ctio n s to coach
operators as to routes and parking f a c i l i t i e s .       Car and coach
parks should be clearly signed and a police presence maintained
to ensure security and prevent In terferen ce.              The presence of
police a t such locations nay also enable the early gathering of
in te llig e n c e on the numbers and behaviour of v is itin g supporters.
I t may be prudent for police to e sc o rt supporters from coach
parks to the sports stadium in order to ensure th a t they do not
become the subject of, nor engage In, hooliganism. Similarly,
railway statio n s should be (monitored by police and supporters
escorted to the stadium where the match i s to be played. Close
lia is o n with B ritish Transport Police i s recommended. Most fans
are fa m iliar with escort arrangements and where possible police
should stic k to routines which become fa m ilia r.
A fter a match coaches leaving the area may require a police
esco rt u n til they are away from tro u b le.

Flashpoints
Special a tten tio n should be given to *ny public house or other
uno fficial assembly point, and to the routes taken in general by
supporters where confrontation between riv al fans may occur.
Also atte n tio n should be given to waste ground and d e r e lic t
property along any such routes where m issiles or offensive
weapons may be gathered by hooligans. Bridges have often been
used by hooligans and should be monitored.

 Stadiun Searches
 Before spectators are admitted into the stadium a physical search
 should be made of the ground and terraces by the o fficer in
 charge of policing the game to ensure th a t all fences and gates
 are s u ffic ie n tly secure and th a t no objects which may be used as
 offensive weapons or m issiles are to hand. There should be an
 arrangement with the club for an o ff ic ia l to be available when
 the inspection is carried out to put rig h t anything which i s
 amiss.
 Entry Into the Ground
 Approaches to the ground are themselves flashpoints and need to
 be well monitored.       Careful planning to co-ordinate as f a r as
 possible the routes taken by d iffe re n t groups of supporters to
 relevant tu rn s tile s may reduce the opportunity of c o n flic t.
1.23     Clear narking of tu rn s tile s is essen tial and a l l o ff ic e rs on
        "TootbaTI duties should be briefed as to the segregation
          arrangements.
1.24     The searching of spectators depends on circumstances. The terms
          of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act afford a rig h t of search
          only where there are grounds to suspect an offence Is being
          committed, and the suspicion must r e la te d ire c tly to the person
          searched.     The Codes of P ractice, however, exempt the need to
          make customary records i f 1n the circumstances I t is not
          p racticab le to do so. Ground regulations reserve the r ig h t of
          the club to decline admission to any person who refuses to be
          searched by a police o f f ic e r , and th is may allow fo r routine
          searching on entry to grounds, but police o ffic e rs need to know
          the lim its of tills provision. Refusal to be searched may e n ta il
          a refusal to allow entry.
1.25     Within the lim itations o ffic e rs should seek to prevent supporters
         entering the ground with weapons, m issiles, flag poles e tc .
1.26     Drunkenness 1s recognised as a major cause of hooliganism and
          supporters may attempt to enter sports grounds w h ilst 1n a
          drunken condition or carrying alcohol. Where the conditions of
        • the Sporting Events' (Control of Alcohol E tc.) Act, 1985, apply
          the provisions should be enforced. The main conditions are as
          follow s:-
          (a)      Section 2(1 a) and (lb)    -   I t is an offence fo r any
                   person to have intoxicating liquor or an 'a r t i c l e ' to
                   which tiiis section applies in his possession during a
                   designated event in the viewing area or .w hile
                   entering/trying to enter a ground during an event.
          (b)     Section 2(2) - I t i s an offence to be drunk in a ground
                  during a designated event or while e n terin g /try in g to
                  enter the ground.
          !A rtic le ' means any a r t ic l e capable of causing injury to-a person
          struck by i t being:-
          (a)     a b o ttle , can or other portable container (including such
                   an a r t i c l e when crushed or broken) which:-
                   (i)    is for holding any drink, and
                   (ii)   is of a kind which, when empty, is normally
                          discarded, or returned to, or l e f t to be recovered
                          by, the supplier, or
           (b)     p a rt of an a r t ic l e fa llin g within (a) above.
          I t does not apply to anything th a t is for holding any medicinal
          product (Medicines' Act, 1968).
 1.27     The Public Order Act, 1986, makes i t an offence to be 1n
          possession of ^distress f l a r e s , fog signals, fireworks, p e lle ts
          and capsules intended to be used as fumigators or for te s tin g
          pipes a t a football match. Contained within the same Act are the
 offences of a ffra y , violent disorder,       disorderly    conduct and
“threatening behaviour.

Exclusion Orders
The Public Order Act, 1986, also gives the courts power to make
an exclusion order to prevent a person convicted of certain
offences attending a football natch. The court can nake an order
of conviction where
(a)      The person has been convicted of an offence which f u l f i l s
         one or more of the following conditions
         ( i)      The offence    was committed during any period
                   relevant to   a prescribed football match while the
                   accused was   a t , or entering o r ’leaving or trying
                   to enter or   leave, the ground concerned.
        (1i)       The offence was committed going to or             from a
                   natch and:-
                   (1)       Involved the use of t h r e a t of violence
                              by the accused to another person;
                   (2)       involved the use of t h r e a t of violence
                              towards property;
                   (3)        was consnitted    under Section 5 of the
                              Act.
        (iii)      The offence was committed under Section 1(3} or 4
                   or 1A(3) or (4), Sporting Events' (Control of
                   Alcohol Etc.) Act, 1985. These are the offences
                   of possessing alcohol tra v e llin g to or from a
                   football natch.
 (b)     No exclusion order nay be made unless the court is
         s a t is f ie d th a t ja k in g such an order in re la tio n to the
         accused would help to prevent violence or disorder a t or
         in connection with prescribed football matches.
 (c)     An" exclusion order nay only be made in addition to a
         sentence, probation order       or discharge,   following
         conviction, i . e . i t does not apply to person brought
         before the court to be bound over under Section 115,
         M agistrates' Court Act, 1980.
          If these conditions are s a tis f ie d , the court may make an
          order "prohibiting him from entering any premises for the
          purpose of attending any prescribed football natch,
          th e re ."
 A crucial fa c to r 1n the enforcement of orders i s the a v a ila b ility
 of photographs of those subject to them. Section 35 of the Act,
 makes provision fo r the coui*t, on application of the prosecution,
 to order a photograph to be taken.         However, where possible,
 persons arre ste d for any offence which might r e s u lt in the
 imposition of an order should be photographed a t the time of
          charging.    Photographs taken a t t h i s time are lik e ly to be of
       - —twre "vaVue f o r subsequent Id e n tific a tio n purposes than those
          taken a t or following a court appearance.
1.30      Photographs which should conform to th e following sp ecifications
           should be affix ed to each police copy of an exclusion order

          (a)     Standard passport size 2" x 2".

          (b)     To be 1n colour.
          (c)     To be 1n single aspect three q u arter p ro f ile   or fu ll   face.
          (d)     Polaroid photographs are NOT reconmended fo r th is purpose.
1.31      Photographs held fo r the purpose of enforcing exclusion orders
           are for police o ffic e rs only and must not be c ircu lated to any
           other person.
1.32      Wherever an order 1s made, copies, together with photographs
          should be forwarded to the Chief O fficer of Police for the area
          where the offender liv es and to the Chief O fficer of Police for
          the area(s) 1n which any club he 1s known to support is situ a te d .
          I t 1s recommended th a t any photographic negative also be
          forwarded to the l a t t e r .
1.33      Circulation of information re la tin g to Exclusion Orders                1s
          Incorporated in to the football match In te llig e n c e system.
1.34      Football Liaison O fficers will maintain schedules, together with
           photographs of those subject to orders who are known to support
           th e ir club.     P rio r to each match, complete schedules should be
           forwarded to the away team liaiso n o f f ic e r . Schedules should be
           returned a f t e r each match, together with the completed football
           match summary form.
1.35      These schedules and photographs will be of p a rtic u la r Importance
          to those o ff ic e rs operating C.C.T.Y. equipment.    When scanning
          crowds during the course of the game or when viewing videos of
          disorder a f t e r the event, operators will be able to check the
          crowd against the photographs.
1.36      Where weight of numbers of those subject to orders makes the
          supplying of fu ll schedules impracticable, c irc u la tio n should be
          re s tric te d to ta rg e tte d hard core offenders.
1.37      Liaison o ff ic e rs will need to maintain several schedules              of
          orders to c a te r fo r midweek games, la te re tu rn s, e t c . ,
1.38      Where, an individual f i r s t came to notice a f t e r 31.12.80, as
          Indicated by his C.R.O. number, su ffix information re la tin g to
          exclusion orders w ill be maintained on the P.N.C. within the
          subjects convictions f i l e .
1.39      In certain circumstances, offences which might lead to the
           Imposition of exclusion orders are not reportable to the N.I.B.
           Therefore, where an individual has no P.N.C. record, or f i r s t
           came to notice p rio r to 1.1.81 or where there i s any other reason
           to believe an individual 1s subject to an exclusion order, a
           check should be made with his home Force.
           N.B.     Where an order has been 1n force fo r a period of 12
                    months, application can be made to the court for the
                    termination of the order. D etails of Termination Orders
                    w ill not be shown on the P.N.C.

Entrance to the Ground
1.40       Stadium entrances must be signed to in d icate c le a rly the stands
            and te rra c e s to be used by home and v1siting supporters.
1.41       O fficers with local knowledge should be posted to tu r n s tile s to
           prevent supporters entering a section of the stadium allocated to
       r   supporters of the opposing team.          When possible, the same
           o f f ic e r s should be regularly used a t locations considered to be
           of p a rtic u la r importance, e.g. main entrance, points of potential
           trouble e tc .
1.42       I t is emphasised th a t effective t u r n s t i l e policing i s the key to
            prevention of disorder Inside the ground.                Officers should be
            encouraged to talk to those waiting to en ter 1n order to iden tify
            non-local accents, drunks, e tc .
1.43       Queues forming a t tu rn s tile s should be closely monitored by
            police and stewards.             I t 1s recommended th a t mounted o ff ic e r s ,
           where available, are used for t h is purpose.                 There 1s often
            fr u s tr a tio n a t tu rn s tile s 1f queues remain a f te r the game has
            s t a r t e d . Orderly control will minimise the r is k s .
1.44       All tic k e t matches also need t u r n s t i l e control as supporters in
            possession of tic k e ts for a p a rtic u la r section of the ground may
            seek to gain entry to another section of the ground, which could
            r e s u lt 1n some sections of the ground exceeding the lim it
            sp ecified 1n the safety c e r t i f i c a t e . Where lim its are c r i t i c a l
            p olice should make arrangements to monitor t u r n s t il e counts.
1.45       High in te r e s t ‘a ll ticket* fix tu res have the e ff e c t of generating
           a black market in tic k e ts and ‘t o u ti n g '.         This will lik e ly
           undermine , segregation.        I t is therefore recommended th a t sane
           section of the ground be s e t apart to accoranodate id e n tifie d fans
           who support one side and have tic k e ts for opposing supporters'
           area.       If circumstances warrant i t 't i c k e t to u ts' should be
           arre ste d , and e ffo rts made to discover where the tic k e ts came
           from. For all tic k e t games every e f f o r t must be made to tighten
           up the sales procedure to a s s is t segregation policy, preferably
           by r e s tr ic tin g sale of tic k e ts to those attending home fix tu re s
            and se llin g tic k e ts within the 'home! enclosures.
            Team Managers, Referees and Linesmen
1.46       All o f f ic ia ls concerned in controlling the game should be aware
           of the police action th a t will be taken i f there 1s any Invasion
           of the playing p itch , or serious disorder occurring within the
           crowd. All o f f ic ia ls concerned in co ntrolling the game should be
           aware of any planned emergency procedure th a t may be taken in the
           event of an emergency or bomb th re a t.
 The conduct of players on the f ie ld can have a narked impact on
'crowd      behaviour. P articu larly where the fix tu re 1s judged
 v o la tile the club should be encouraged to arrange for players to
 leave the tunnel together and to shakehands a t the end of the
 game.       They nay also be reminded of the Importance of good
 behaviour on the p itc h .   I t re s ts with the natch commander to
 take up with the club any nlsbehaviour by players.
Entertainment

The club should be encouraged to provide some form of
entertainment to take place during the h a lf hour preceding kick
o ff , fo r example bands, displays and recorded nuslc.    A good
‘announcer1 using the public address system can estab lish a
rapport with the crowd and Influence behaviour. Thought should
be given to 11alsln g with 'announcers! to nake su itab le
Interventions 1f appropriate. This means may be used to advise
'.away1 supporters as to arrangements fo r t h e i r leaving the
ground, changed travel Instructions e tc .

Crowd D istributions
I t 1s emphasised th a t stewards should ensure th a t a ll sections of
te rra c e s and stands are f i l l e d to capacity before allowing access
to fu rth e r sections where possible. This w ill require monitoring
tu r n s t i l e to ta l1 se rs and the use of public address systems 1n
some Instances.               This operation is greatly a ssiste d by the
corapartmentalisation o f grounds, each compartment being f i l l e d 1n
sequence.
Segregation

Home and v is itin g supporters should be segregated inside the
stadium by means of segregation fencing and/or s t e r i l e zones, and
steps should be taken to Impose segregation before they enter and
a f t e r they leave the stadium.                Each section of the stadium
designated for the use of p a rtic u la r supporters should have i t s
own t o i l e t and refreshment f a c i l i t i e s . B arriers and doors should
be provided so as to segregate home and v is itin g supporters and
thus avoid confrontation a t e n tra n c e s/e x its.            Experience has
shown th a t,p o lic in g segregated areas is best achieved by placing
o ffic e rs ‘inside* the segregation i f t h is i s possible.

 Stewards

Good lia iso n between stewards and police should be established.
(See Duties of Stewards - paragraph 14.1 e t . seq.) The o ffic e r
in charge of the match should nake periodic Inspections of
stewarding standards and report re s u lts to the club‘s management.
The police control must be able to contact the Chief Steward and
Head Fire.Steward a t a l l times.

 D isposition of Manpower
 Where no pitch perimeter fence e x is ts a presence may be required
 by police and stewards in order to Is o la te the playing area. In
 such circumstances police o ffic e rs should take up standing
 positions away from and facing the crowd when incidents occur to
         arouse the crowd. Where fencing has been erected police o ffic e rs
         and stewards oust have keys for the gates and a universal locking
         system should be used.       Pitch perimeter gates should remain
         unlocked and manned a t a ll times the public have access to the
         ground.
                          «

1.53     All bars, refreshment and t o i l e t areas should be policed in order
         to prevent hooliganism occurring.
1.54     At the conclusion of the match consideration should also be given
         to deploying police in appropriate areas to minimise a sudden
         stampede or pushing within the crowd 1n t h e i r endeavour to leave
         the stadium quickly.

         P olice Reserves
1.55     A number of police o ffic e rs should generally be held 1n reserve
         1n order to deal with spontaneous Incidents occurring inside, or
         Immediately outside the stadium.
       '—JJ^rsons Arrested or Ejected From the Ground
1.56     Ejection 1s an option which can be used where behaviour is poor,
         but f a l l s sh o rt of an actual offence (e .g . contravention of
         ground reg u latio n s). However, ejection should not be used as an
         a lte rn a tiv e to a r r e s t; where there 1s s u f fic ie n t evidence the
         offender should be arre ste d and charged.
1.57     I t is recommended, where possible, th a t in violent situ a tio n s
          police o ffic e rs ' in groups should enter the affected section of
          the stadium from above the incident, making a rre sts where
          necessary, and then making th e ir way onto the perimeter of the
          p itc h . Officers should not enter from the perimeter i f th is can
          be avoided. A rrest operations should be planned and controlled
          to avoid o ffic e rs being iso lated or overwhelmed.
1.58     A standard procedure should be adopted with regard to a rr e s ts and
         e je c tio n s. Prisoners ^should be taken to a forward reception
         point where d e ta ils are recorded (including e je c tio n s), and
         prisoners photographed together with arrestin g o ffic e r.
1.59     Persons ejected from the ground or supporters who are not
         adnitted for whatever reason should- be carefully policed.
         Experience indicates th a t such persons often gain fu rth er entry
         to the ground e ith e r a t half, time or immediately before the end
         of the match, and provoke confrontation.
1.60     In the event of a football match generating a large nutiker of
          a r r e s ts , i t i s worth considering bailing prisoners to special
          courts in order th a t Magistrates may be fu lly aware of a ll the
          circumstances appertaining to the events of th a t game.        Early
          lia iso n with the Crown Prosecution Service is advisable to inform
          then of the in ten tio n to hold special courts, in order th a t they
          can be fu lly acquainted with the background fa c ts .
Contingency Planning
Pre-determ1ned plans should be available to control such
contingencies as serious disorder, pitch Incursion and locked out
sp ectato rs. Because of the g reat divergence 1n ground and crowd
facto rs these plans oust be ground s p e c ific .        However, these
plans     must  take        In to     consideration   the   !Popplewel1'
recommendations with regard to the transmission of coded messages
over the public address system, the a v a ila b ility of emergency
telephones and a f a c i l i t y fo r the police to Intercept the public
address system.
Emergency Evacuation

Stewards must be fam iliar with the action to be taken in the
event of an evacuation of the whole or p a rt of the stadium.
Police should a s s i s t 1n the rapid evacuation of a stadium 1n such
circumstances. Stadia should have a universal locking system and
a ll stewards should be 1npossession of keys fo r the e x it gates.
They should wear ad is tin c tiv e tabard or other means of easy
Id e n tif ic a tio n .   I t must be made c le a r to both the club
management and to the Individual stewards th a t they must not
leave t h e i r post without being relieved.       I t is essential th a t
e x it gates can be opened without delay in the event of an
emergency.           Simulated emergency evacuation exercises fo r the
s t a f f employed by the club must be held a t le a s t twice each
season to t e s t the emergency evacuation procedure. The crowd
will not be involved but depending upon circumstances 1 t could be
an advantage to explain to the crowd th a t an emergency evacuation
exercise is taking place.            Experience has revealed th a t in an
actual evacuation i t is essential to monitor e x it doors when the
crowd has l e f t the stadium to prevent them wandering back into
the stadium before the reason for the evacuation has been
completed.

Retention o f V isitin g Supporters
In some circumstances the o ffic e r 1n charge may decide to hold
the v is itin g supporters 1n the ground un til he considers i t
appropriate to release them. I f such a t a c ti c is employed then
the situ a tio n will be greatly eased i f the v is itin g fans are kept
informed.
Early Re-Deployment of Police Officers
Police o ff ic e rs should be deployed outside the ground, in key
p o sitio n s, early enough to be seen in these positions by the
crowd as i t leaves the ground. This gives an appearance of good
order and police co n tro l. At c r itic a l points the use of police
o ffic e rs 1n groups under the command of a sergeant should be
considered.       The e ffe c tiv e after-match deployment of police
o fficers 1s dependent on the pre-match briefing and allocation of
tasks.
Vehicular and Pedestrian T raffic
At the end of the game early dispersal of supporters is c le a rly
b e n e fic ia l. Most Police Forces will develop a t r a f f i c control
plan to f a c i l i t a t e t h is . P a rtic u la r a tte n tio n should be given to
ro u tes used by lawayl supporters. Supporters who are not local
n i s t always be able to find coaches where they got off them and
generally 1 t Is good practice to convoy and e sc o rt coaches away
from the general area.                Many grounds are 1n heavily built-up
areas of old Industrial towns and 1t 1s extremely d i f f i c u lt to
move police resources 1n the Immediate aftermath - i t is
therefore esse n tia l to detail t r a f f i c and public order duties
beforehand.
Bus, Railway and Main Line Stations
Foot patrol and mounted officers (in lia is o n with B ritish
Transport Police) should be used to control queues and prevent
rowdyism occurring. Large groups of supporters should generally
be escorted on to the statio n and, where necessary, B ritish
Transport Police nay wish to consider tra v e llin g with supporters
u n til they are dispersed.
De-Briefing of Senior O fficers
In the event of Inadequacies being exposed 1n the police
operation, a t the conclusion of the match there should be a
de-briefing of supervisory o ffic e rs .
VISITING SUPPORTERS TRAVELLING BY COACH AND RAIL
COMMUNICATION OF INTELLIGENCE
The following Information Is s e t out for the p a rtic u la r advice of
Force (fo o tb a ll) lia is o n o fficers and for those o ffic e rs e ith e r
preparing or co n tro llin g police operational planning for
fo o tb a ll.
Since Force lia is o n o ffic e rs were appointed for each club 1n the
football league 1n 1975, the procedure for gathering and
cotnmunleating In tellig en ce about the numbers of v is itin g
supporters tr a v e llin g by coach and r a il has been developed and
refined. In the l i g h t of experience the following procedures are
recommended to Improve the quality and r e l i a b i l i t y of th is
In te lllg e n c e :-
Action to be Taken by Hone Liaison O fficers
At le a s t 21 days before the Batch the home team Force lia iso n
o ffic e r should correspond with his opposite number for the
v is itin g team giving Information on the following H n e s :-
(a)     Suggested routes for supporters tra v e llin g by road.
(b)     Off s t r e e t parking f a c i l i t i e s th a t will be available for
        coaches/cars near to the stadium.
(c)     Areas su ita b le for s tr e e t parking near to the stadium.
(d)     Location of railway statio n and distance from the ground,
         also arrangements for journeys from the sta tio n to the
         ground.
(e)     Advice to coach operators
        (1)        location of coach parking with route and plan;
        (ii)       arriv e no e a r lie r than one hour before scheduled
                   kick o f f time;
        (iii)      depart within h a lf an hour of the final w histle;
        (iv)       do not stop          within     ten    miles     of     t h e ir
                   d estin atio n ;
         (v)       avoid stopping for refreshment a t any place where
                   into xicating liquor is available.
(f)     Advice to v is itin g supporters
        (i).       plan of the ground and i t s environs                 showing
                   v is ito r s entrance and enclosures;
         (1i)      enter stadium only through designated v is ito rs
                   tu r n s t il e s ;
       (111)       supporters will not be allowed on to the ground
                   carrying a r tic le s which could be construed as
                   offensive weapons.
(g)     Obtain from B ritish Transport P ollce:-

       (1)         nuraber of tra in s carrying v is itin g supporters;

       (11)        times of arrival and departures;

       (111)       number of supporters expected on each tr a in ,
                   d e ta ils of the actual number to be confirmed on
                   the day;
       (1 v)       a breakdown of the number expected to travel by
                   ch a rte r t r a i n , . special tra4n or scheduled
                   serv ices.
        NOTE: B ritish Transport Police usually pass th is
        Information e ith e r by telephone or te le p r in te r two or
        three days before the game, and update as necessary.
Action to be Taken by 'Away Team! Liaison Officers
Liaison o ff ic e rs should establish and maintain close liaiso n with
the local supporters club and coach operators who carry football
supporters to away matches.
Forward to coach operators the information received from the home
club      lia iso n - o ffic e rs about suggested routes,   parking
arrangements, plan of the ground and environs, e t c . , requesting
d e ta ils of the number of coaches and the approximate number of
supporters tra v e llin g to the away game.
Forward to the supporters club the information received from the
home club lia is o n o ffic e rs requesting information about:-
(a)      the number of coaches and supporters tra v e llin g by road;
(b)     the number of          supporters   trav ellin g   by chartered    or
        special t r a in s .
Confirm with the B ritish Transport Police the number of
supporters expected to travel by charter tr a in s , special tra in s
or scheduled services.

Advise the home club liaiso n o ff ic e r in writing of                   the
intelligence co llated from the above sources, including:-
Ca)      the name of the coach firms, the d e ta ils of coaches and
        the approximate number of supporters;
(b)      any in te llig e n c e on the number of supporters tra v e llin g
        by t r a i n ;
r r*
V

              (c)      information about the behaviour of the supporters a t
                       other away Batches, and Information as to the known
                       !t a c t i c s ' of troublemakers and I f considered relev an t
                       d e ta ils of lik e ly offenders.
              NOTE: The most accurate and up-to-date Information Bay not be
              available u n til the day before the game or even l a t e r and lia is o n *
              o ffic e rs should contact th e ir opposite number by telephone where
              necessary.
              Post Match De-Briefing on the Quality             and Accuracy o f the
              In telligen ce Provided
       2.9    I t 1s e sse n tia l th a t home club lia is o n o ffic e rs advise, as a
               Batter of course, th e ir opposite number about the accuracy of
               in te llig e n c e provided by way of the football Batch summary form
               Including:-
              (a)    the estimated number of v is itin g supporters;
              (b)    the estimated number who tra v e lle d by coach;
              (c)    the estimated number who tra v e lle d by tr a in ;
              (d)    d e ta ils   of any Incidents    before,    during or a f t e r the
                     match;
              (e)    d e ta ils of v is itin g supporters arrested /ejected ;
              (f)    reg istered numbers of any mini-buses (or tr a n s i t vans)
                      seen i n 't h e v ic in ity of the ground, in order th a t the
                      names and addresses of the keepers or operators can be
                      ascertained for future in te llig e n c e purposes.
       2.10   The importance of the accurate completion and prompt return of
               the   football   Batch summary forms         is   again   stre sse d .
               Consideration should also be given to the forwarding of C.C.T.V.
               tapes containing in telligence about v is itin g supporters to the
               Police Force concerned.^
       2.11   I t is important th a t supervising o ffic e rs encourage o ffic e rs to
              submit any relevant intelligence to Football Liaison Officers in
              order to positiv ely a s s is t in the gathering of intelligence.
              Information to Police Force Through               Whose      Area   V isiting
              Supporters are Expected to Travel
       2.12   . I t may be necessary for information to be supplied to the Force
               through whose area large numbers of supporters travel or on whose
               area notorious 'crossroads' or 'watering holes' are s itu a te d .
               This assumes a more urgent aspect i f there has been trouble a t
               the ground;        or i f there is a history of violence between
                supporters lik e ly to meet en-route to th e ir respective away
               fix tu r e s . Reports of such problems should be passed to the
                football lia is o n o fficers of th e.clu b s involved by the Force 1n
               whose area the incident occurred.
Travel by B ritish Rail - Liaison with B ritish Transport P olice
B ritish Transport Police policy 1s to segregate football
supporters from ordinary passengers as f a r as p racticab le.    To
achieve t h i s , pricing and other policies have been Introduced 1n
an attempt to encourage supporters to trav el 1n the following
order of preference
(a)   Charter Trains or Carriages
These tr a in s are not normally accompanied by B ritish Transport
Police.     The chartering club MUST arrange for Insurance and
stewards, and accept responsibility fo r any damage which nay
occur on the t r a i n .
Cb)   B ritish Rail Sponsored Trains
these are special tr a in s used for the exclusive carriage of
football fans and which should always have a B ritish Transport
Police esco rt.
(c)   Schedule Services
Encouragement beina given to organised party tra v e l.      Such tra in s
are policed on an as required' basis.
International and Other Foreign Fixtures
 'PERMANENT CORRESPONDENTS' IN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
 ' TREVI‘ ORGANISATION.
Ministers of the In te rio r of member countries of the European
Coninunity meet regularly to determine ways of resolving mutual
problems. They are supported by teams of o f f i c i a l s . One of the
working groups of th is 'TREVI' organisation has football
hooliganism within i t s remit.
 Each EX. Country has a permanent correspondent with whom contact
 can be made in connection with a ll football m atters.       The
 A ssistant Chief Constable, B ritish Transport Police has been
 appointed as the 'PERMANENT CORRESPONDENT! for the UNITED
 KINGDOM. ,
 The B ritish Transport Police Football Intelligence Unit a t th e ir
 Force Headquarters has been recognised by A.C.P.O. as the Central
 collation point in respect of information regarding B ritish
 football supporters tra v e llin g to fix tu res in foreign countries,
 and foreign supporters tra v e llin g to the United Kingdom.
 Information is co llated and passed to Home Department Forces
 within the United Kingdom, Foreign Police Forces, and other
 nomi nated agenci e s .
 Officers who require information or assistance in respect of
 matters, connected with foreign fo o tb a ll, or who have information
 related to fix tu re s played abroad should l i a i s e with the B ritish
 Transport Police, Football Liaison Unit.
V

           Telephone: 01-388 7541, e x t. 8831 or 8961
           or INFORMATION ROOM
           Telex: 23508 Telephone: 01-380 1400

           Liaison With B ritish Transport Police
    2.15   The resp o n sib ility for preventing and dealing with Incidents of
            hooliganism on tra in s carrying supporters of football clubs to
            and from matches lie s primarily with the B ritish Transport Police
            and they should be given fu ll co-operation and assistan ce.
    2.16   I f disturbances Involving tra v e llin g supporters have taken place
            during the game or outside the ground afterw ards, p a rtic u la rly I f
            a r r e s ts have been made, i t 1s usually an Indication th a t trouble
            nay be expected on tra in s carrying supporters home.                Any
            in cid en ts which nay have a bearing on the behaviour of supporters
            tra v e llin g by tra in should be reported as soon as possible to the
            local office or Headquarters control room of the B ritish
            Transport Police.
    2.17   For t h e ir p a rt, the B ritish Transport Police will Inform the
            local police a t the terminal sta tio n and, 1f necessary, a t any
            stopping point on the route when hooliganism breaks out on the
            t r a i n or 1f they have any reason to suspect hooliganism is lik e ly
            to occur e ith e r on the tr a in or a t the terminal sta tio n .
    2.18   The B ritish Transport Police send by te le x d e ta ils of the timings
            of a l l special and charter tra in s to Police Forces covering the
            departure and terminal sta tio n s and those en route.
           Football Trains E tc ., Ban on Alcohol
    2.19   The Sporting Events (Control    of Alcohol E tc.) Act, 1985, as
            amended by The Public Order Act, 1986, prohibits alcohol on a
            vehicle which
            (a)     is a public service vehicle, or not a public service
                     vehicle but adapted to carry more than eight passengers
                     ( i . e . minibus),'"or a railway passenger vehicle, and
            (b)     is being used for the principle purpose of carrying
                     passengers for the whole or p a rt of a journey to or from
                     a designated sporting event.
    2.20   A bye-law made by the B ritish Rail Board under Section 67 of The
            Transport Act, 1965, in e ffe c t bans alcohol from any tra in in
            respect of which notice of the prohibition on alcohol has been
            given to the trav e llin g public.
 DUTIES OF STEWARDS

 The E ffect o f Safety C ertificates Issued Under the Safety a t
 Sports Grounds Act, 1975

 A level of control 1s provided by the Safety a t Sports Grounds'
 Act, 1975, a t those grounds which are required to be c e r t i f i e d .
 The Local Authority, before Issuing a Safety C e r tific a te , is
 required to consult the Chief Officer of Police regarding the
 terns and conditions to be Included in the c e r t i f i c a t e .
Whilst police do not d ire c tly control the employment of stewards
a t football grounds, 1 t should be accepted th a t there is a
re s p o n s ib ility , within the wider context of public safety , to
exert Influence to ensure th a t the arrangements made by the
management of the ground are adequate in t h i s resp ect.          I t Is
nost Important th a t stewards are s u ffic ie n t 1n number, suitably
deployed, well trained and capable mentally and physically of
carrying out th e ir routine and emergency functions.              I t is
recommended th a t the police regularly Inspect stewarding
arrangements to determine they are in accord with c e r t if ic a tio n .
Id en tification and Supervision

Persons employed as stewards a t football grounds should be
clearly id e n tifia b le , wearing coloured tabards. They should a t
a ll times be under the d ire c t control of supervisors whose
id e n titie s should be made known to the police o ffic e rs on duty a t
the ground and who should be in contact with the Police Control.
Stewards should be d istrib u te d throughout the ground in
accordance with a detailed pre-arranged schedule, agreed between
the police and management of the ground.

Their duties may be divided into four main categories
(a)      control!ing* or directin g members of the public who are
         entering or leaving the football ground;
                          -«*_          *

(b)    p a tro llin g the ground to deal with any emergencies, e .g .
        ra isin g alarms, extinguishing f i r e , e t c .;
(c)    manning entrances, e x its and other s tr a te g ic points,
        p a rtic u la rly e x it doors, and gates which are not
        continuously open w h ilst the ground is in use;
(d)    undertaking sp ecific duties relatin g       to emergency and
        evacuation procedures.

In accordance with the 'PopplewelV recommendations a ll stewards
should:-

Ca)    be trained and in stru cted to deal with any emergency
        re la tin g to .fire or evacuation;

(b)    be given w ritten Instructions about the action to be
        taken in cases of emergency;
(c)     receive practical Instruction and training appropriate to
        th eir resp on sib ility;
(d)     not be employed as a steward unless they have been so
        In stru cted and trained;
(e)     be adequate 1n number, physically and mentally capable of
        performing          th e ir d u ties,  e ff e c tiv e ly      deployed,
        e ff e c tiv e ly supervised and readily Id e n tif ia b le .

Emergency Procedures - Stewards Role
Formal emergency procedures a t each ground require jo in t
consultation between police, the management of the ground, f i r e ,
ambulance and other services.
I t 1s essen tial th a t stewards and t h e i r supervisors are fu lly
aware of the p a rt they have to play 1n the plans which are
produced.         The management of the ground should ensure th a t
w ritten in s tru c tio n s concerning the action to be taken in the
event of an emergency are made readily av ailab le to a ll s t a f f and
stewards and, in p a rtic u la r, th a t a ll the s t a f f and stewards
should receive p ractical instruction and tra in in g appropriate to
th e ir re s p o n s ib ilitie s in the event of an emergency. Exercises
for the s t a f f and stewards should be carried out regularly to
ensure the smooth operation of the procedure fo r dealing with an
emergency.
A record should be kept by the club a u th o ritie s containing
d e ta ils of the train in g and in stru ctio n given and the exercises
held, and should include the following m atters:-
(a)    date and time of the instruction or ex ercise;
(b)    duration;
(c)    name of the person giving the in stru c tio n s;
(d)    names of the persons receiving the in s tru c tio n s ;
(e)    nature of instruction or exercise.
Consideration should be given to the inclusion of                        these
conditions in any safety, or special safety c e r t i f i c a t e .
After i n i t i a l practical instruction all members of s t a f f and
stewards should receive verbal in stru c tio n , given by a competent
person, a t l e a s t once in every period of three months a t regular
in te rv a ls. Stewards should be given b riefin g cards relevant to
p a rtic u la r p o in ts.
POLICING FACILITIES AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

There are narked differences 1n the f a c i l i t i e s provided by clubs
and I t Bust remain a r a t t e r for local negotiation between police
and clubs as to the standard of f a c i l i t i e s , bearing In Bind
average attendance and a need fo r police presence.                I t 1s
recommended t h a t General Safety C e rtific a te s are reviewed on an
annual basis in an e ffo rt to achieve continuing Improvement.
Prisoner Reception Point Within the Ground
I t 1s considered essential th a t a priso n er reception point should
be available a t the ground.          The o ffic e should be site d , 1f
p o ssib le, so t h a t there 1s adequate access fo r the unobtrusive
removal of prisoners. There should be e ith e r a 6.P.O. telephone
lin e or a. d ir e c t line to the nearest police s ta tio n . Ideally the
police accommodation should have two detention rooms to separate
.home1 and 'away* supporters.
Parading and Briefing

I t 1s desirable th a t police o ffic e rs to be deployed 1n the ground
are briefed on s i t e . This can usually be done under cover 1n
most grounds. A standardised form of stadium grid reference used
by police andclub personnel w ill f a c i l i t a t e      briefing and
evacuation.
Control Room

I t i s desirable,-and in some cases e s s e n ti a l, th a t a control room
is provided to         oversee police operations in the ground.
Provision should be made for a base s ta tio n to control the U.H.F.
police radio.      I t should have a d ir e c t access to the ground
public address system and e ith e r a G.P.O. or d ire c t telephone
l in e to the local police s ta tio n , and the police office within
the ground. The room should be of adequate size to accommodate
C.C.T.Y. monitors and ancillary equipment. I t i s desirable to be
able to operate, in addition, high in te n s ity lighting systems
from the police control ^which may be switched on when there is
trouble or emergency.

The control room should be s ite d to give an over view of the
ground and to allow the match police coranander ready access from
the ' touch 1i ne' .

The costs of the provision of the police o ffice and control room
and f a c i l i t i e s should be borne by the club. The police generally
provide radio communication and additional items such as loud
h a ile rs and binoculars.
Safety a t Sports Grounds' Act, 1975, by providing for
consultation between the local authority and police (Section
3 ( f 11)) on conditions to be included on safety c e r tif ic a te s has
had a clear e f f e c t on improving ground f a c i l i t i e s . Full use
should be made of these provisions to ensure adequate police
fa c ilitie s.
C.C.T.Y. AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY
The guidance offered In th is section Is Intended to a s s i s t
Conmanders having operational re sp o n sib ility fo r policing
fo o tb a ll.       I t 1s not a definitive work and should be read 1n
conjunction with the report of the A.C.P.O. Working Party,
e n t i t l e d , 'Use of Video and S t i l l Photography.
Introduction
The use of C.C.T.Y. and s t i l l photography as an aid to the
e ffe c tiv e policing of football 1s a recent development. At the
present time, a l l F i r s t and Second Division football grounds are
provided with s t a t i c video cameras and recording f a c i l i t i e s ,
which enable the police to monitor crowd behaviour w ithin and in
the Immediate v ic in ity of stadia.            I t 1s -a n tic ip a te d t h a t -
videoing f a c i l i t i e s w ill be extended to a ll Third and Fourth
D1vs1on grounds 1n the near future but not necessarily of the
same type as 1n the two higher Divisions.
The quality of the equipment and re-production of Image presently
available 1n football grounds 1s now always compatible with I t s
adequate presentation before the courts, and I t s use has resu lted
in some confusion between i t s function in re la tio n to 'command
and co n tro l' and to evidence gathering.          Experience to date
indicates the g re a te s t value lie s 1n developing a system for the
use of C.C.T.Y. and s t i l l photography within s ta d ia for the
purposes of In te llig e n c e and evidence gathering.
All systems a t present in use a t football grounds are capable of
being enhanced and developed. When these changes are made i t
should be ensured t h a t the replacement equipment is of s u f f ic ie n t
standard th a t the quality of recording is such as to be
acceptable for use as evidence in court.
Accepting the need fo r iden tificatio n and evidence gathering for
prosecution to be the primary function of the system, the
following points are worthy of consideration in the use of
development of e x istin g ^nd anticipated f a c i l i t i e s .
Technical Considerations
(a)     At the time of in s ta lla tio n , consideration should be given
        to the s itin g of cameras and cables so as to prevent
        interference or damage.
(b)     As good video recording requires good lig h t and as most
        football fix tu re s are played during winter months, the
        need for adequate lighting within and around football
        stadia 1s essen tial to eliminate areas of darkness which
        may be used as cover for disorderly behaviour. Fans are
        increasingly aware th a t such behaviour 1s monitored by
        C.C.T.Y. and they will attempt to evade detection by
        seeking whatever cover 1s available.                I t 1s therefore
        Important th a t cameras are s ite d 1n such a way as to
        minimise blind spots and th a t f a c i l i t i e s are provided to
        Increase lig h tin g In te n sitie s 1n stands, etc. The s i ti n g
        of video cameras should take account of sloping roofs, to
                       enable recording a t the rear of stands. This problem can
                       be     overcone       by the    use of hand-held      cameras.
                       Consideration must be given to a ll foreseeable problems
                       th a t may a f f e c t the performance of video equipment.   A
 M^Pt




                       good example th a t Is easily overlooked 1s the path of the
                       se ttin g sun. A video camera would be Ineffective 1f the
                       sun was shining d ire c tly Into the lens.
 BHHV.




                 (c)   Police Control Rooms contain valuable equipment and are
                       often vulnerable. Consideration should be given to taking
                       protective measures to Increase secu rity .
 WBHL




                 (d)   Control Rooms should be placed 1n a position which
                       commands a good all round view of the ground and
 ^HHB




                       consideration should be given to placing the video
                       monitors 1n such a position th a t t h e . operator is not
                       d istra c te d by a c t i v i t i e s within the ground.
 VBHHw




                 (e)   Careful consideration to the type of lighting and the
                       provision of glass p a rtitio n s should be given to prevent
                       re fle c tio n or d is to rtio n . The Control Room should have
 VHHHB




                       adequate background heating to protect the e le c tric a l
                       equipment and for the comfort of personnel employed within
                       the room. Heating should remain switched on 24 hours a
 ■■■■■I




                       day during cold weather.

                 (f)   The use of flash equipment in the v ic in ity of sen sitiv e
 Wi^H




                       video cameras may damage the tube i f discharged facing the
                       camera. Even i f th is damage i s not permanent, the video
                       camera would be unable to function for some time. As a
                       general rule flash equipment should not be used in the
  mmi




                       v icin ity of operating video cameras.

                 (g)   Police Control Rooms must be provided with multi-recording
                       f a c i l i t i e s in order th a t the opportunity ex ists to capture
                       a ll incidents which may occur 1n d iffe re n t areas within
                       the stadium.
 MMP




                       Operational Considerations
          4.11   (a)   I t is important th a t police o ffic e rs are made aware th a t
                       th e ir actions in dealing with disorderly behaviour within
                       the stadium will also be recorded on C.C.T.V.
                 (b)   Consideration should be given to the preparation of a
                       ground specific video, to be used in briefing o fficers who
                       may not be fam iliar with the stadium.
                 (c)   I t is important whenever possible to use the same
                       personnel in police ground control room operations. They
                       will more readily identify regular troublemakers and
®®l4l




                       !ta rg e t' them within the ground. Over a period of time
                       they will develop sim ilar a b i l i t i e s in relatio n to
                       v is itin g supporters..
                 (d)   Inmediately following a fix tu re where a rre sts for
                       misconduct have occurred, a rre stin g o ffic e rs should be
                       allowed an opportunity to view any recording of the
 -
Incidents concerned to establish (1) the evidence fo r
t h e i r a r r e s t and (2) whether the offender has committed
any f u r th e r acts not witnessed by the a rre s tin g o f f ic e r .

In tellig en ce Gathering
Away fans a rriv in g a t grounds nay be videoed as they come
through t u r n s t i l e s , get off buses or leave railway
s ta tio n s . This helps with id e n tific a tio n and the tracin g
of those responsible for causing tro u b le. I t also makes
the fans aware th a t they are on record.
When grounds are f u l l , the crowd may be filmed a ll round,
so t h a t i f trouble s t a r t s , id e n tific a tio n w ill be
a s s is te d . I t w ill also make the crowd aware th a t they are
on re c o rd .' To a s s i s t th is procedure, I t 1s always useful
to have id e n tific a tio n marks around the ground so th a t the
fans' location within the stadium can be pin-pointed with
accuracy.
Some clubs have followings from areas of the country many
miles from t h e i r home base.       Therefore, when i t is
necessary to id en tify persons from the crowd, photographs
and video recordings should be c ircu lated to Forces who
have supporters! clubs of th a t p a rtic u la r football club in
th e ir area.
Each Force should compile sets of photographs and/or
videos of I t s own clubs hooligans and e ith e r ( i) forward
on such tom pilation to each force th a t i s lik e ly to host
the club during the forthcoming season, or ( i i 5 one such
compilation be taken to each awa' game by o ffic e rs
tra v e llin g with the clu b 's supporters.
Each host Force should supply the v is itin g team's home
Force with photographs and video recordings of the
v is itin g team s supporters, i f th e ir conduct is such as to
warrant t h i s . This will keep Forces aware of how t h e i r
own c lu b 's supporters behave away from home.
 Soto clubs have a section of supporters who are notorious
 for hooligan behaviour.           I t would a s s i s t in future
 investigations into serious disorder a t other grounds i f
 the host Forces of these clubs prepared video recordings
 and photographs of th e ir hooligan element and established
 the id e n tity of those involved. Then by comparing th is
 recording and the photographs with those of the incident
 under in v estig atio n , id en tificatio n should be greatly
 a s s is te d .
 Known hooligans should be targetted and followed in video.
 This requires local o fficers operating the video who can
 be a ss is te d by o ffic e rs from the v is itin g team's home
 Force.
 Id en tified fans   displaying  co n sisten tly      aggressive
 behaviour, not amounting to a chargeable offence on a
 single occasion, but who can be id e n tifie d , on other video
       recordings displaying siw tlar conduct, should be traced
       «nd-charged on th is evidence of system.

(g)    The video recording of a football fix tu re 1s a valuable
       source of In tellig en ce which 1s often overlooked 1n the
       absence of Id e n tifie d disorder.            I t 1s strongly
       recommended th a t a ll video . recordings be viewed fo r
       in te llig e n c e purposes, and th a t tapes be retained until
       the corresponding fix tu re in the following season has been
       piayed.
Iden tification
In the event of larg e-scale and serious disorder a t a sporting
fix tu r e , there w ill be a need to develop a strategy to id en tify
and a r r e s t offenders, using the evidence obtained by video
recording and s t i l l photography.     Practical guidance 1n th is
process i s as follow s:-

(a)    Photographs or s t i l l s from video recordings should be
       displayed fo r public view and Id e n tific a tio n wherever
       possible,      e .g . T.V., newspapers, natch programmes,
       po sters, e t c .

(b)    A viewing studio should be created not only fo r the use of
       police o f f ic e r s , but fo r the public as well as such
       organisations as supporters' clubs, stewards, residents'
       asso ciatio n s, social workers, probation o ffic e rs , e tc .
(c)    Ininediateiy a f te r the incident, a ll press photographs and
        other media evidence should be obtained and statements
       taken from those responsible for taking the photographs,
        video recordings, e tc . Attempts should also be made to
        obtain a ll amateur videos and photographs, and the
        appropriate statements taken. All th is m aterial, together
       with police photographs and video recordings, should then
        form p a rt of the viewing studio e x h ib its.
(d)    Officers from the host Force should v i s i t the v is itin g
       team's area and other areas containing supporters' clubs
       of the v is itin g team, where they should exhibit
       photographs and video recordings for id e n tifia tio n
       purposes as a t (b) above.
(e )   The size of the police team working on id e n tificatio n is
       c r i t i c a l . There should be s u f fic ie n t to do the work, but
       i t should be kept small enough to be cohesive.
(f)    The task of viewing video recordings and photographs many
       times 1s tedious, therefore i t is recommended th a t s t a f f
       should be selected who are in te re ste d in the sport
       involved.

(g)    Once Id e n tifie d and traced, offenders should be invite^ to
       view the video recordings and i f they are able, to
       id e n tify    themselves    w hilst  in   non   controversial
       circumstances before being questioned about alleged
       offences on video recordings and photographs.
(h)    Where people Identify themselves In photographs, they
       should be Invited to Indicate th is on the reverse of the
       photograph over t h e ir signature.
(1)    Consideration should be given to videoing suspects w hilst
        they are watching the recording of the in cid en t. Facial
        expressions, bodily movements and verbal exchanges nay
        form v i ta l supporting evidence.
Use of Video in Connection with Policing of Football Supporters
B ritish Transport Police are provided-with both s t a t i c and
portable video equipment which 1s widely used fo r nonltorfng fans
passing through sta tio n s and trav ellin g on the railway. A close
liaiso n should be maintained with th is Force fo r information
exchange, in te llig e n c e gathering and assistance with the
subsequent id e n tific a tio n of ' offenders in the event of
large-scale and serious disorder associated with a sporting
fix tu re .
S tatic In sta lla tio n s
Comprehensive s t a t i c systems are located a t the following main
lin e B ritish Rail sta tio n s and are controlled and monitored on a
twenty-four hour basis by police o f f ic e r s :-
                             London St. Pancras
                             London Euston
                             London Victoria
                             Birmingham New S treet
                             Manchester Piccadilly
                             Glasgow Central
Portable Equipaent
All B ritish Transport Police divisions operate portable colour
video equipment, which is used extensively for videoing fans
tra v e llin g to and from sporting fix tu re s.
The B ritish Transport Police also use video graphic p rin ters in
connection with the subsequent id e n tific a tio n of offenders from
video recordings and the circulation of in tellig en ce gathered
from these tapes.
Forces seeking to u t i l i s e the video f a c i l i t i e s and intelligence
gathered by B ritish Transport Police should d ire c t th e ir
enquiries to the Football Liaison Unit a t t h e ir Headquarters a t:
15 Tavistock Place, London, WC1H 9SJ. Telephone: 01-388 7541.
        SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS'           ACT, 1975 -        CERTIFICATES
The Safety a t Sports Grounds' Act, 1975, provides fo r the
c e r tif ic a tio n of designated football grounds specified within the
Act, which Includes a ll Football League and Rugby League Clubs.
On application fo r c e rtif ic a tio n the management of the football
club concerned o ust s a tis fy the local authority th a t c e rta in
standards of public safety are available within the ground. The
le g is la tio n requires the local authority to consult with the
Chief Constable of the area 1n which the ground is located
regarding the terms and conditions to be Included before any such
c e r t i f i c a t e can be issued.
The following recommendations on matters th a t should be Included
1n safety c e r t i f i c a t e s have been compiled from c e r t if ic a t e s
Issued across Force are a s. I t 1s f e l t th a t the recoomendatlons
meet the needs of police and should be considered for inclusion
1n safety c e r t i f i c a t e s .
Before the stadium is used on any occasion
(a)      The Holder shall notify the Chief Constable of a
          specified Activity a t l e a s t 28 days before such an
          A ctivity takes place (or such shorter time as the Chief
          Constable may require).
(b)      The Holder shall make an agreement on his own behalf and
          on behalf of the occupier of the premises under Section
          15, Police Act, 1964, to secure the attendance a t the
          specified Activity of such number of police o fficers as
          i s in the opinion of the Chief Constable s u f fic ie n t to
          ensure decent and orderly behaviour a t the specified
          A ctivity.
(c)      The Holder shall comply with such directions as the Chief
          Constable deems f i t , as t o : -
          (i)      methods of    admission of spectators to the
                   specified Activity to ensure public order and
                   safety ; and
         (i i )    methods of     control employed to ensure the
                   segregation of spectators supporting one team
                   from those supporting the other.
The Holder shall ensure the attendance a t every specified
A ctivity of a Chief Safety Steward and an adequate number of
Safety Stewards to the satisfactio n of the local authority and
the Chief Constable, and the Safety Stewards shall be:-
(a)      Trained and instructed to deal              with    any   emergency
          r e la tin g to f i r e or evacuation.
(b)      They should be given w ritten in stru ctio n s            about the
          actions to be taken in case of emergency.
(c)      They should receive practical in stru ctio n and training
          appropriate to th e ir re sp o n sib ility .
(d)      No one should be employed as a steward unless they have
         been so Instructed and tra in e d .

(e)      They should be adequate 1n number, physically and
         mentally capable of performing t h e i r duties, e ff e c tiv e ly
         deployed, effectiv ely supervised and readily Id e n tifia b le
         by coloured tabards.

In the event of a fix tu re being arranged as a r e s u lt of a draw In
a Football/Rugby League or Football Association Cup Competition,
which would indicate the attendance of a club from a higher
d iv isio n , who by the nature of the club or by local I n te r e s t
would a t t r a c t a crowd well in excess of the current ground
capacity, or the forward Information 1s such th a t a public order
situ a tio n may a r is e , then 1n consultation with the opposing club
and the local police commander, one of the following a lte rn a tiv e s
must be agreed or otherwise must be implemented i f the local
police commander so directs

(a)    In sistin g the match 1s 'a l l t i c k e t ! .

(b)    Requiring the game to be played a t an altern ativ e venue.
(c)    Controlling the day and time of kick o ff.
The Holder shall provide

(a)    Metering devices to record a ll admissions and to Indicate
       the number of spectators in each p a rt of the ground.
(b)    Suitable Separation and segregation fencing.

(c)    Elevated observation points giving uninterrupted views of
       the stadium.

(d)     An e f f ic ie n t P.A.   system with a f a c i l i t y   for use by
        police.

(e)    Adequate indications of e x it routes and numbering of gates
       in fluorescent paint.
No accumulation of rubbish, brick s, stones or other m aterials
which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as
m issiles shall be permitted to remain in any p a rt of the stadium
to which spectators have access.

Portable television cameras and a n c illa ry equipment shall be
placed in such positions as may be agreed between the Holder and
the Chief Constable.

No vehicles other than emergency ( i . e . police, f i r e , ambulance)
shall be parked in any p art of the stadium except as shown on any
plan or as agreed with the Chief Constable or senior police
o f f ic e r .

When owing to the condition of the ground a cancellation of the
match 1s likely a police representative should be present when
the ground i s inspected.
No tu rn stiles should be classed as a Beans of escape.
Under Section 10 (Emergency Procedures) of the Safety a t Sports
Grounds' Act, 1975, a Local Authority                is empowered, i f I t
considers th at due to any deficiency in safety procedures a t a
designated sports ground, to take c ertain step* to minimise the
risk to spectators. The Local Authority may apply to the courts
for an order prohibiting or r e s tr i c ti n g admission to the whole or
any p a rt of the ground until such steps have been taken to reduce
the risk to spectators.
I f the court 1s s a tis f ie d , on the application of the Local
Authority, th a t the risk to spectators a t a sports ground 1s so
g reat th a t, until steps have been taken to reduce 1t to a
reasonable le v e l, th e ir actaission ought          to be prohibited, or
r e s tr i c te d , the court may order, p ro h ib it, or- r e s t r i c t , t o the
extent they consider appropriate In the circumstances o f the
case, the admission of spectators to the whole or any p a rt of the
ground, until such steps have been taken as, 1nthe opinion of
the court, are necessary to reduce the risk to a reasonable
lev el.
I f spectators are a<taitted to a sports ground in contravention of
an order made under Section 10 of the Sports Grounds' Act, 1975,
any responsible person, and i f a safety c e r t i f i c a t e i s 1n
operation, the holder of the c e r t i f i c a t e , shall be g u ilty of an .
offence.
N.B. The Fire Safety and Places of Sport Bill currently before
Parliament amends the procedure under Section 10 of the 1975
Safety a t Sports Grounds' Act by allowing the local authority to
place an order of prohibition on sports ground management i f in
t h e ir opinion the c r i t e r i a a t paragraph 16.12 above i s s a t is f ie d .
Thus disposing of the need to apply to a court for an appropriate
order. The club management or holder of the safety c e r t i f i c a t e
may appeal to the Magistrates fo r cancellation or m odification of
the order.
                                                                      W     o   o            Cx

                          a p p e n d i c e s


        A(i)          S enior Officers duties
        A(ii)         Inspectors duties
        B             S e c t o r 1 (Ground) duties
        C             S ector 2 (Liverpool)               duties
     D
                     S ector 3 (Nottingham Forest)                 duties
    E                Ticket       colour codina
    F                CID duties

    G                Dog Section
    H                    &
                    M o u n t e d Section
                       If            Iff
    I               AdministrataorJ1 etc                                                A
    J           ^ T rr a f-% o j c ^ C o nntr
                                            roo1      y
                                                                                        Iv
    K               Trains

■L
                    Coaches        - Liverpool and N o t t i n g h a m Forest
M                  Vans      - Liverpool
N                  Vans      - Notti ngham Forest
O
                   Spor t i n g Events             (Control of AlcohoJ) Act 19          I-
P                  Cones

Q                  Route signing
R                                                                                   I
                   Special Constabulary
S
                  Ground Regulations
T                 Maps

U                 Schedule of manpower
                                       SCXTIH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                             'F' DIVISION


      OPERMTOJ CHEER »F*      2/m
              ---------        —                                           DftlE: 28 FftRCH 1988


                                        F A CUP - SEMI F U R L
                                     fflXLSQRCUGH, SHEFFIELD


                                   LIVERPOOL V NCrrriNGRH f c k e s t
                                       SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988

     1-       INFOf^RTION

     1. 1
                                       ^     t^?      ^verpool and Nottingham Forest
              l ^ r ^ 1                         st th? Sheffield W?dr»sd2y Football
              -* roo^v-    "r           “'fT-1  C °n          3th April 1988, kick-off
              ^          . _Tne g a 'es siloving £CC?~3 to the ground will open at
                    n =n.a acmiSiion will be granted to ticket holders only.

             l!? ,fU.-e~i0rt to nu.'u^dse traffic and spectator congestion and to
             ^T"-h’1iSe segregation, tb= stadium has been divided In accordance                  V
             with Appencujc 'T1.                                                                 ^

  1'3        LiverpDol supporters have been allocated tickets for tb=» West Stand            '
             S dJ S n 2 SI ^ . ^       ^             * * aC—      Vil1 *   via 'tbe^turnstiles

 1.4
             Nottingham Forest simporters have teen allocated tickets for the
             Spion Kop ana the South Stand and access will be via tb=> turnstile                        :
             in Pemstone Road North and at the rear of the South Stand. '
 1.5
             ^..tickets have been colour coded and details''are shown at Apcendix !E'\
 1.6
             th^Ku^         -haS        Created betw^ n the turnstiles at the rear of            % 2 o ^ ,
             the Soul^i Stana a n a those m Leppxncs Lane.                                       Q&izd

 1.7


                     ___ r-i               ,         2 "    — -- '— ^ / -- *
             (Pen-i— '-cr>:r Roaa e.nc; ana the South Stand (Leppincs Lane end).

            The routing of vehicles and spectators has oenerallv been oesicr^d to
            ensure that the approach of respective supporters will present'them
            at the e.na of the stadium appropriate to their particular ticket.

1.9         Extra time will   be played in the event of a draw at full time.

1"1°            f°^lowing extra time' the match remains drawn, tben tb= replay will*
            take place at Aston Villa Football Stadiun.\ .

2.          INTENTION

2.1         It is the intention of the Police to allow this match to take place and
            to ensure public order and safety both inside and outside the football
                                                                                                (2)




             ground, to segregate and control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary
             obstruction of the highway and damag3 to property. This will be
             attained and displayed with a high standard of sm=rtr>ess and professionalism.

  3          metihzd


  3.1        Chief Superintendent tele will be in overall cctnnand of the event,
             assisted by Chief Inspector Oughton.

  3.2       The operation will be in three phases, as follows:-

  3 -2-1    Phase 1 - Eefore the match (1000 - ISOOhrs)

  3 -2-2    Phase 2 - During the match (1500 - 1630Hrs) **

 3-2.3      Phase 3 - After the match (1630Hrs until stand down) .**

                 Subject to 30 minutes "extra tin?".

 3.2.4     The operation will be divided into three sectors, each of which will be
               -     - *2tec to a Senior Officer who will have responsibility for that
            Sectcr. The Sector areas are snown on the mao at Anoendix 'T' and the
            Senicr Officers are:-

            SECTCR                                         OFFICER                      % '
                                                                                            I
            Sector 1     (Sherfield Wed lesdav               Superintendent Marshall        ^
                           Football Stadium)

            Sector 2     (Liverpool Supporters)              Superintendent Greenwood

            Sector 3     (Nottingham Forest Supporters)      Superintendent Chacman

3.2.5       Each sector will be further divided into Sub Sectors with a Chief Inspector
            m charge, as shown at Appendices A(i) and A(ii).

3.2.6      Separate Operation Orders have-been prepared by "D" and Traffic Division!
            in respect of Policing arrangements for Sheffield City Centre and the    1
                                                                                            1
            Ml motorway.

3.3        FRE       BRIEFING-                                                       !
              ---------- :
                         ----                                                      I•£
                                                                                  1| V
3.3.1      The^event is ^being policed by Officers, seen? of whan have never visited3
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium previously and who, therefore, will
           be unfamiliar with the ground and locality.

3.3.2      In an effort to alleviate this problem, a pre rretch briefing w in take
           place at 10.00am on Friday 8th April 1988 at Sheffield Wednesday Football
           Ground, entry via the "Gymnasium Gate" in Penistone Road North." All
           supervisory officers of the rank of Inspector and above should attend;

3.4        REPORTING FOR DUTY                                                         *■'

3.4.1       All Officers shown in the attached Appendices will, unless otherwise
           stated, attend the gyimasiun at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at
           9.45cct for briefing at. 10.00am prarpt on Saturday 9th April 1988.
           Entry to' the stadium will be via the "Gymnasium Gate" in Penistone Hoad
           North.'
                                                                                          (3)




 .4.2     On arrival, each Inspector will report to the Administration Etesk situate
          inside the entrance to the gyrmasiuii and will report his serials present.

 .4.3     Police Officers attending in their own vehicles must find tfr?ir own parking
          facilities outside the football around.

 .4.4     The parking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane,
          Sheffield will not be used

• 5         BRIEFING - MATCH DAY

.5.1      After reporting for duty at the gymnasium, all officers will be briefed
          eS to t*>r general requirements of the day and will ccnmence duties in
          accordance with the instructions of thrir individual Inspector.

 5.2     Inspectors will ensure that officers under th~ir canmand disperse to their
         respective places of duty with a mininum of delay.

.5.3    Packed reals will be provided and will be taken at the appropriate tire
         £-nc place, dependant upon the exigencies of duty.

■5.4    Sergeants will brief members of their respective serials as to their
         individual duties as outlined in Appendices B, C and D.                              ^

6                   SECURITY                                          ^              \'

6.1     Shetneld Wednesday Football Club, will te responsible for the ovemioht
         (8th/9th April 1988} security arrangements at the ground.

6.2     Iirmeciately following briefing, two 'explosives' dogs will search the
        stadium assisted by the serials scheduled for duty inside the ground.

7       CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION EETPAtn^jENT

7.1     Members of this department will be on duty at the ground. A manned CID
        post will be situated in the gymnasium at the ground and at Hairrerton Road
        Police Station and will deal with all‘'.ccrrplaints of crime and arrests for
        criminal offences made in connection with this event which do not require
                                                                                              \
        irmeciate attention. Any such ccrrplaints will be directed to whichever
        of the. above locations is most convenient.

7.2     In addition, teaTS of Officers will operate from Parkside Section Station,        i !.t;
        Wacsiey Endge Section Station (Halifax Road) and the Police Control      "■       '\
        Caravan (Killfoot Eridge/f^eepsena Lane).

7• 3    .Detective Superintendent McKay will have an overall responsibility for
         Crime and the CID Operation as a whole and duties of personnel are
         shown at Appendix 'F'.

i       DOG S E C T I O N

 *1     Members of the Dog Section will mainly be used as a deterrent before and          V
        after the match on the routes to and from the stadium, at the coach parks,
        transit van parks, railway station, private vehicles parking areas and
        escorting supporters to and from the stadium.

        They vill not normally be used in public order situations but thy? Sector
        Cotimanaer has the overriding discretion to use dogs in such circumstances
        where be feels a serious public order situation may occur.
                                                                                     <•*J




 .8.3    Duties of the Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix     'G'.

 .9      KXEfTED SH-'ITCN                                                        ^

 .9.1    Me-icers of th? Mounted Section will be enployed outside the ground to                       *£
         maintain order, seccrecsate suooorters one escoirt them from and to their                     *
         transport.

>.9.2    Duties of Mounted section personnel are set out at Appendix     'K'.

;.10     C C t m C L BOCM

j.T^l    A Control Room will be established at Sheffield Wednesday Football
         Stadium in th? Police Control Box situate between the South and West
         Stands.

3.10.2    Superintendent Murray will be in overall control with the assistance
         of Officers shewn at Appendix 'I'.

3.10.3    The Control Room will oversee the entire operation and will operate on
         both UHF and VKF channels.

3.11 ■    TRAFFIC CONTRCL
                                                                                             V\
3.11.1    Traffic points will be worked both before and after the match by tne
         personnel shown at Appendix 1J1. Fluorescent sleeves will b? worn.                       ^

3.11.2    It will be necessary to switch certain traffic lights off in order that
         the flev.' of traffic can be maintained.  These lights are identified at
         Acpendix 'J' together with the officer responsible for ensuring that
         they are turned 'off at the ccnroenceme.nt of the operation and 'on' at
         its conclusion: Keys will be supplied to the relevant officers for this
         purpose.

3.12      TRAVEL AND POLICING AHRANGg-SNTS

3.12.1    The routes to the ground and designated parking areas for coaches,                      \
         transit vans and private vehicles are shewn at Appendix 'T' .

3.12.2    ROUTE SIgCENG
                                                                                 . .    j'Si
         S^cnina of the routes to the around has been arranged in conjunction          j\
         Sheffield Wednesday'Football Club. In the event of congestion contin-^_ > s*
         oencies exist for oetours to be implemented by members O j. thr Road Txc— -ic
         Motor Cycle Wing.

3.12.3   To assist in identifying traffic problems, a fixed wing aeroplane will be
         taken into use from 1300 to 1500hrs and from 1630hrs to the close of th?
         operation.

3.12.4    m   TRAIN -   LIVERPOOL
                                                                                            ■*.
         Broadly speaking, Liverpool supporters will travel on 'special' trains
         and alight at Wads ley Bridge Railway Station where they will walk the
         half mi 1^ to the ground under Police supervision.   Service trains will
         also be operating to Midland Railway Station and supporters using this
         service will travel by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses to
         the Leppings Lane end of the ground where they will alight.
••
                                                                                            (5)




      3.12.5    D?i_ails of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto are
                show-, at Appendix 'K'.

      3.12.6    BY TR A IN   - NGOTINGcgM PQ&EST

                Nottingham Forest simporters who travel by train will aliaht at Midland
                Raily=y Station in the centre of Sheffield and travel the "three mile
                journev to the ground by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses and
                W3-H =i-ght on the Penistone Road North side of the stadium.

     3.12.7    Details of t r a m arrival/departure times and duties relatina thereto are
               she**.-, at Appendix 'K 1.                                   "

     3.12.8    BY OQftCH - LIVERPOOL

               Liverpool supporters who travel bv coach will be encouraged to use the
               M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter a: Tankersley (Junction 36).
               EXn i—.= relating thereto are shown at Apt>endix 'L'.

     3.12.9    Coaches ^found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
                  the designated parking areas and not the stadiun itself.

     3.12.10 On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alight ancl^
             '"dk to the ground under police supervision.                          'S

     3-12.11 BY COSOl - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

               Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to use
               the HI motorway leaving at Tinsley (Junction 34). Duties relating thereto
               ere snown in the 1D 1 Division Operation Oroer.

 3.12.12 Coaches^found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
         to the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

 3.12.13 On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will aliaht and \
         VoJLk to the ground under police .'.supervision.               *       ]

 3-12.14 BY TRANSIT VAN - LIVERPOOL
                                 /.                                                    I
              Liverpool supporters who travel bv transit van or similar vehicles will'^.
              be encourages. to use the M62/M1 motorway's, leavina th? latter at i’ j    .
              Tankersley (Junction 36). However, it Is not feasible to atterpt to
              crannel such^vehicles^through one "checkpoint n and it will be th? duty,
              therefore, of-all Serials outside the ground to check these vehicles
              and their occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M* .

 3.12.15 All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
         suppc_ i_ers will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision -

 3.12.16 BY TRANSIT VAN - NOTTINGHAM FOREST                                         «.■.

            Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by transit van or similar vehicle
          ■      ^ encouraged to use the Ml motorway, leaving at Tinsley (Junction
           34).^ However, it is not feasible to channel all such vehicles through
           one “checkpoint" and it will be the duty, therefore, of all Serials
           outside the ground to check these vehicles and their occupants as outlined
           at Appendix 'N'.
                                                                                           (6)




  3-12.17      All transit vans will be directed to tlv? designated parking area where
               supporters will alight and walk to th? ground under police supervision.

  3.1.2.18     SPORTING EVENTS (gyTTRQL OF ALCCHX) ACT 1985 - AS A»£KE£D

               A precis or the Act is shown at Appendix 'O' and the legislation will
                  strictly enforced in relation to coaches and transit vans or similar
               vehicles.

 3.12.19       PRIVATE VEHICLES - LIVERPOOL

              Liverpool supporters who travel by private vehicle will be encouraged to
              use the M52/M1 motorways leaving th? latter at Tankersley (Junction 36}.
              They will proceed to the designated parking areas on the Parson Cross
              and Foxhill estates.

 3.12.20      ,On arrival at the designated parking areas, supporters will alicht and
              walk to the ground under police supervision.

 3.12.21       It is envisaged that trafric will als~ approach the stadium %'ia the
              Flouch (A616). There is a contingency plan should the voltm= of this
              traffic be such that it is impracticable to direct it to the aesionated
              parking areas referred to at papragraph 3.12.19.
                                                                                    1
 3.12.22      PRIVATE
              —        VEHICLES - NOTTINGHAM
                                  _          FOREST
                                                 -                                    V'
                                                                                   'S.
              Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by private vehicle will leave \
              the Ml motorway at Tinsley (Junction 34) and proceed to the designated
              parking area in the Neepsend area of the city.

 3.12.23      On arrival, supporters will alight and walk to the ground under Police
              supervision.

 3.12-24     COACHES AND TRANSIT VANS - RETURN JOGR?€Sr                                      '

              Coacnes and transit vans will not leave their desicmated Darkinc areasV
              until authorises to do so by Ground Control. The return joumev for \
             'these vehicles wil be the reverse of that on the incoming journey.     '

3.12.25      COACHES AND TRANSIT VANS - GENERAL
                                                                                     i
             No coach or transit van will be allowed to load, unload or park in anti-
             area other than the designated parking areas, nor will they be aiiowd^to use
             routes other than those designated, unless diverted by Police Officers,
             following consultation with Ground Control.

3 .’12.26 PARKING RESTRICTIONS

             Parking of   vehicles in the irrmediate vicinity of the ground and on main
             roads will   be strictly controlled by use of parking cones. These will
             be set out   during the early hours of the day in accordance with
             Appendices   P and Q.

3.12.27      The emergency services have been informed of all parking restrictions/
             arranoements.

3.12.28      It will be the responsibility of Police Sergeant 102 Fidler to ensure
             that these cones are in position before 0700hrs Saturday 9th April 1988.
••
                                                                                                            <7




    3.12.
            29        No Officer will allow any vehicle to park in contravention of ttesP
                      restrictions without seeking the authority of Ground Control.
    3.12. 30       KEMDVAL OF v e h i c l e s

                   Jl*5- "               ^ perked in such a position as to warrant r^m^val tfr=n
                   ^                          b>' ^  °ffic*-' concerrved throuch Ground^ntrol
                                               12th     suP ^ ^ ° r y Inspector. Two Brirec .
                         1 — x V8.jj.cles will be available to remove vehicles*
   3.12.:II
                   Where a vehicle is parked in contravention of par kina restrictions ?nd
                   aoe^not merit removal, then the driver may be d*lt\rtth In t h e ^ s S

   3.12.3 2       CAR FORKING

                               b \ i imit? ! F-'ivately 0P»-=ted car parks in tl» vicinity of
                  ^               ~                 *■*11 be *iv*n in th- operation of th=se
                               - run car               It is intended that pri%*ate vehicles w i n
                                              ^    tb= obsignated parking areas she*- at
                  c^-.'ttVv^c--- •         0?fr£ricr Vl11 ^ carried out by m=Tb=rs of th=
                  w.• - r • Cw    .   .  *  v o s - cur2*5
                                                        — — ar~ shcvni dat
                                                                         i Appendix
                                                                                iw -\ ’H
                                                                                       r* 1.
                                                                                           • p
                                                                                             r,
                                                                                              , rxina
                    *Ai ^ permittee on all roads where restriction^ oo not apply.
  3.12.3:1        SCOTH YORKSHIRE TRA?gPCRT BUSES                                                   A
                                                                                                    V'
                                              vUl           ■special buses- from Midland   I
                                       ^   S^ounc. At the end of the net ch. they will b=
                                        Roaa North (Adjacent to Wads ley Brida? and facina
                       T 5 . £ «-^tre)a.na Pemsto.ne Road North (Directly outside th? -
                          fnQ   f ^ 9 tc^crd£ citY Centre) for transportation of Liverpool
                                  ^or^ft _supporters respectively. During th? match tb?v
                 iiiL      FT;k!a ^ Feru^ tor>e Rosd and ferries Road Bus Depot and tly» ‘
                 forrrer will be the o.nly vehicles allov^d so to park.
 3.12.34
                 The routing of South Yorkshire Transport buses both to and f-crr, th=
                 staciur, is shown at Appendix 'K'.

 3.12.35:;
                                                                                                        \
                 S K L b r x z L D VEENESDAY FOOTBALL CLOS - OFFICIAL CAR PARK

              .Only crivers possessing official passes will be allowed access to this i
              p=-^c_ the grounc v m c h is situate at th* rear of th- South Stand.                j*
              t ~ : f r \ Cfffner contf-~i^9 / A £~c Club officials, etc. will be aUowti.5
               -        " ef       °ar p£r-k‘       ^r -? passengers before driving to a parkinc' '
              ^                r.^?m th! 9^ o \jr\6 (Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Trai.ninc
              G t o l t v :, Mioaiewooc Road).

3.12.36
              Unaer no circunstances will any other vehicle, other than Police vehicles
              be al loweg access.

3.12.37
              The gates giving access to the South Stand Car Park will close at 2.00pm
              and    LI not re-open until half an hour after kick-off. This fact has
              Deen publicised to persons having legitimate access.            •      *’
3.12.38      Club Stewards will be employed at the access points in Leppings Lane and
             Penistone Road North to control access and e oress •

3.12.39      Vehicles owned by the television oonpany providing coverage of the game
             will be permitted to park in the South Stand Car Park at both the Tappings
             Lane and Penistone Road North ends.
%                                                                                                   (8)




    3 .12 - 4°        PAKKPC - POLICE VEHICLES

                  Police vehicles will park in the car park at the rear of the gyrmasiun.
                  accessed via the 'Gynnasiiin Gate* adjacent to Gate 'O'. Only official
                  vehicles will be allowed access and movement into and out of th? ground
                  mast be kept to an absolute minimum.

  3.12.41         CfcbTKJCTlCNS - OTHER THAN BY VEHICLES

                  Street traders, ticket 'touts' and any other person causing obstruction
                  will be roved on. If they persist then they will be arrested and
                  brought to the Police Bocr. where, they will be dealt with as outlined in
                  paragraphs 4.1.1 to 4.1.7 (Headed 'Prisoner Process').

 3.13             RAILWAY PROPERTY

                 .Trains will carry Liverpool supporters to Wads ley Brid?= Station. These
                  trains anc th2. Station will be manned bv ETC Police who have th2
                  respcnsiDility for policing this property. Officers should onlv enter
                  th* station for the purposes of pclio= duty at th*- invitation of.
                      accxrpamec by, a rre:x>=r c: th® BTC Police. This also applies to
                  all other railway property, including sidings, cuttings, lines, etc.

 3-14            SHZFIT^LD WEDNESDAY FOOISALL C U B GRGLHD REXULATICNS                        1
                                                                                             \ '
 3.14.1          A precis of the Ground Regulations is shown at Aro=ndix 'S'.                '%

 3.14.2          Where an officer seizes property by virtue of th? Ground Regulations
                 he will:-

                 A)    Supply the person freer, when the article has been seized
                       with his 'collar nurxer *.

                 B)    Inform that person that the item ney be recovered on
                       carpletio.n of the came from the Police Property Post at the
                       rear of the Spicn Kop, in the case of Nottingham Forest
                       supporters, and the Police.Property Post at the rear of the             \
                       West Stand, in the case of"-Liverpocl supporters.

                 C) ,Afii>: a label to the item bearing the owners name and the
                     Officer's "collar nurcer".
                                                                                              I
                 D)    Ensure that the iter, is taken to th3 appropriate Police       •=•   | ^r*
                       Property Post and entered in the Property Register.

3.14.3       It is a condition or entry to the ground that persons acreeto be searched.
             Any person refusing to be searched will be in breach ofthose conditions
             and will be refused entry.

3.15         LICENSED PREMISES

             The great majority of licensees in th? imnediate vicinity of the ground
             will either close their premises completely at lunchtime and early
             evening or operate a 'selective door' whereby football supporters are
             not admitted.

3.15.2         It will be the responsibility of all Serials outside the ground to
            _ identify those premises which remain open and to monitor the behaviour
            •of persons resorting thereto.
                                                                                            (9)



    3.15.2I     Alcohol is not available to menbers of the public inside th? around.

    3.15.4      A precis of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985 is shown
                at Appendix 'O'. This legislation will be strictly enforced both in
                relation to vehicles and in relation to persons e.nterina or at tenet ina
                to enter the ground.

    3.16        e m e r g e n c y a n d e v a c u a t i o n procedures

    3.16.1     In_the event of an emergency situation arising (i.e. fire or tent? call)
               wrucn may require evacuations of all or part of th? Stadium, th?
               procedure outlined will be followed:-

 3.16.2        Groric Control will pass the following message over the P A system and
               this '*xll indicate to Police personnel that a provisional emsroencv
               and evacuation procedure is in force:-

                                  "THE ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY
                                  REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL"

 3.16.3        Should an emergency evacuation be necessary then an oral rr>?ssa3e will
               be passed to Police personnel via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants,
               giving specific instructions as to the action to be taken.

 3.16.4        In th= event of an "all clear" situation, the following message will hk.
               passed to Police personnel that the .necessity for e.Tergencv evacuatio4 '
               has ceased:-                                                *           ^

                                 "MR MEADOWS IS NO LONS R REQUIRED AT POLICE COOTROL"
 3.16.5        Evacuation procedures for various parts of the stadium are shown on the
               appropriate serial order.

4             ADKEHISTRATiqj

4.1           PRISONER PROCESS

4.1.1-        All persons arrested or detained inside the ground will be taken, in the
              f— ~t instance, to the Police Rocm at the rear of the North Stand. Those
              arrested outside the ground will either be taken to the Police Roan or ’’
              Ha.Tni=rton Road Police Station (in the case of Nottinchan Forest suooorters)
              and Ecclesfield Police Station (in the case of Liverpool supporters) j
              whichever is 'most convenient.                                           ~

4.1.2         Wnere a prisoner is taken to the Police Rocm, details will be obtained,
              the prisoner searched, the arresting officer and prisoner photographed
              together and form PACE 19 completed. The arresting officer will then
              ccrrplete the necessary paperwork which he will hand to the Process Super­
              visor in the gymnasium, which is adjacent to the Police Rocm. Once the
              paperwork has been checked, it will be handed to the officer in charge of
              the Police Rocm and will acccnpany the prisoner arid his property to t!he
              appropriate station for processing/chargina.                          4

4.1.3         Where a person is arrested for a criminal>offence, the prisoner will
              firstly be taken by the arresting officer to the CID point in the gymnasium
              or at the station, where the office in charge will decide on the further
              course of action.
                                                                                      (10)


 4.1.4    The duties of the "Prisoner Process" teams engaged on this operation are
          shown at Appendix "I".

 4.1.5    Two vehicles with detention facilities will be parked adjacent to the
          Police Rocm for the retention of prisoners and a further detention vehicle
          will be parked at each of the two Police Stations for identical purposes.

 4.1.6    After initial process, persons detained will be transferred to        on
          Road Police Station (in relation to Nottingham Forest supporters) and
          Ecclesfield Police Station (in relation to Liverpool supporters).

 4.1.7    Inspectors must ensure that officers on serials under their ccmnand do not
          oo off duty without firstly submitting the requisite paperwork.

 4.1.8    EJECTIONS

          Where circumstances are such that a person is to be ejected frcm the
          Stadium for breach of the Ground Regulations, then he will not be photo­
          graphed, etc but his details will be recorded on an 'ejection slip' for
          entry in the Police Roan Register, prior to ejection.

4.1.9    COURT APPEARANCE

         W h e r e an arrested person is charged ana bailed to Court then the Court
         dates allocated to this operation will be strictly adhered to. On al 1
         occasions, therefore, the staff at the Charge Office, Bridge Street,
         Sheffield, will be consulted as to availability of dates before a
         prisoner is released on bail following charge.                               >
4.1.10   Provisional arrangements have been rrade should the number of persons
         arrested and kept in custody or the seriousness of offences necessitate
         a Special Court being convened on Monday 11th April 1988. In the event
         of such criteria being met then Chief Superintendent Mole will be informed
         in order that this contingency can be put into operation.

4.2      MISSING/FOUND CHILDREN

4.2.1    Reports of missing children will 'be passed via telephone to Ground Control
         inarder that the necessary action 'can be taken.                           1

4.2.2    Any child who has becccne separated frcm his parent/guardian will be taken
         to the gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand. Ground Control will ther^
         be inforrred via telephone in order that the reauired action can be takeni V
                                                                                 | ^
4.3      FOUND P ROPERTY

4.3.1    All found property will be taken to the Administration Desk in the gymnasium
         and the register completed.

4.4      UNIFORM

4.4.1    All South Yorkshire Police Officers will wear full uniform, including
         helmet (with chin strap down) and gloves. Anoraks will be worn in      S-
         inclement weather. Female Officers should wear trousers and not skirts.
%                                                                                              (11)



   4.5       TRANSPORT - POLICE FSRSC?«EL

   4.5.1     There are no parking provisions for officers arriving in private       vehicles

  4.5.2      Officers arriving in police transport will alight at Gate ’O ’ in
              Penistone Roaa North. ^ Drivers of police transits will resort to the
              Admirus trat ion Desk situate inside th? entrance to the gyrmasiun for
              lnf l
                  TrVcrtlons    to the utilisation of their police vehicle. Where such
             vehicles are used for purposes not involving the personnel carried
             ther-rin, then, on ccnpletion of th? came and dispersal of the crowd
             the driver will return to th? Administration Desk tocoll^c*-     th?
             vehicle keys in readiness for th? return jourrey.

  4.5.3      Police^ vehicles which are not taken into use duringthisooeration will
              be parked at the Road Traffic Division premises at Clavwheels Lane
              follwing consultation with the office: in charge of those premises!

  4.6        REFRSS3-ENTS

 4.0.1       Packed lunches will be provided and there will be distributed at
             mealing locations prior to the allocated meal times.

 4.6.2      Retresrroent will be taken as indicated   ontheindividual Serial      Ord=i‘r fc
             at the w n u e s stated.                                    *            —

 4 -7       FRPS

 4.7.1      Maps^of the ground and surrounding area areincluded     inthis Order
             for information purposes. (See Appendix ’T 1).

 4 *8       OPERATIONAL CHEER - DISTRIBUTION

 4.8.1     This Operational Order will be distributed to Inspector Level and above
            only. A Serial Order will be distributed to si 1 Serceants involved in
            the operation.

 4.9

4.9.1
           PRESS AND PUBLICITY                                                             V
                                                                                           l
            Publicity has been given to traffic routes and parking arrangements for
           • the event by the Football Liaison Officer and Press Liaison Department. .
                                                                                      J
4*-/*2      All ccrtTThrnts concerning the event and replies to encruiries frcm the J
            mecua will be handled by Chief Superintendent Mole or through th? "press
            kia_son           w m c h is under the control of Superintendent Pratt.

4-10       COMPLAINTS

4.10.1     All complaintsagainstthe Police    willbedealt with   inaccordance with
            Force Standing Order 5S. Complainants who approach Police Officers
            engaged on this operation will be directed to one of the Officers shown
            at Appendix "I".
                                                                                       V
4-H        OOMKICAnONS

4.11.1     All ccmnunicationsrelevant   to the eventwill   bedirected   throuah
           Ground Control.
                                                                                                 (12)




  4 .1 1 .2    The following UHF/VHF channels will be utilised in relation to this
               operation:-

               A)    UKJ personal radio channel 25 will be used by all supervisory
                     officers, both inside and outside the ground.

               B)   UH_- personal radio channel 19 will be used by all CID personnel
                    engaged on duties in the Parson Cross and Neepsend private
                    parking areas.

               C ) Vru radio channel 2 will be used by mobile patrols.

  4.11.3        rl" Sue Division's operational functions will continue to be transmitted
               on UHF personal radio channel 35.

 4.11.4        Personal radios will be issued at the A&ninistration Desk in th?
               gyrmasiu?. to all supervisory officers.

 4.11.5        Strict rscu.o discipline will be maintained at all times. Messaoes must be
               kept as short as possible and, where this is net try? case, Ground Control
                       o v e r r i d i n g option or cutting short any transmission irrespective
               of r                                        '

 ■4.11.6       Grounc Control can also be contacted on internal extension 3277.
 4.12         AUDIO VISUAL AIDS UNIT
                                                                                            £
  4.12.1      Four members of this Unit will attend 'Match Day' briefina, Thereafter,
              they vill be operating in the Wadsley Bridge Station, and'coach and
              transit van parking areas of both teaTi supporters before and after the
              game.  During the match they will operate inside the stadium.

 4.13         ct/e r t m   :

 4.13.1       All overtime claims will be sumitted to supervisory officers and will
              be clearly marked "SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v* NOTTINGHAM FOREST".

4.14          REPORTING OFF DUTY
                                                                                             I
4.14.1        It w i l l be the responsibility of individual Inspectors to report the
              whole of their. Serials off duty/ account for any member not present ana
              ensure that all radios are returned. He will also submit the de-brief
              form previously supplied to him.       Serials 1-22 will report off duty > \~J-
              at the Gymnasium. Serials 23-66 will report off duty at Clavwheels Lane.
4.12.2        Authorisation will be sought via Ground Control before anv serial is
              "stood d o w n ” .




Qiiftf Superintendsnt
"F" Division
                                                              m i * # * *




     :     c m   m m    wmm> * n     m   f i a   i   i   i   »—    >




od*r m m m A B

rnmuiMi m          m   f « A i i

         f t f a r i n t m i M i qpovtJcni    tantsc

mat                          «r mmsm
          U >fl*         flrw4i       *$' &   u&»

rn^jmtim fkpirfj m m m m           * r €XD

                       • « * A * ttUU£t«»

^*r£***idN* •ft1 m fevisioB

**»'*£*% *«ft«»t * » ’ • * r*. Uk? <

*fi‘ fc#-                           fe?t

•it1 m afetaion, 4m*«ci tew

•t# iMtrtoc © » ® f 6 ^ * r t c n

®n»ai Qwtital

•t' H W A t o t i i i

Cfcfmf toemrimtmamn *M*0 « r . •€*. V . V . «n5 CZD
! » •

14
            • * * ■ s a w                    a a s s a r j p » ■*
                              ■ M M artsartnt                           *•»**
            ____________________                                                 Ihto ^ U M k i a t t S ^ a l
            M «Ue*J$«4 * th • &#►’ »VwW*rf *Brtwi» ** ^^n V m ilw k .
i.
 t*i                            Ami »cWWU i4 U to it t« » U t i w l «* **»

 m                                                                            ii-

 M . l                                       a*»Mk UW6-«*•*»>
                                             a mutt tUW * Mfemi *•
 »*i.i      ^        »    -                       <ufc            wtn M mt So*ii

                    Asamfcm «*U t» ti<lM Ms tt*w **da*», masfc a i
             tm iyw tdtf to » i n t a i Mf teK **» « m to*» a w p a y a m tr t o a s , “
                                                                                                m m m




                                                  W A r n m            mmmsmrnimm
                                        ■■    ■          I)




     tJ 3    i        torttt rnCIJ Ik                             ft*# *rt» # « & * * «tfe # «k#*f
                                                                                                       V
                t* *«.-?* » **«» «r                             HW mm «M>
     % *§             m   ftemjcsi M n i m                i*»             %* £&' ^     * * * * * * f # " l€
                i*f m v vt «t ft**** *wr«*^» *r                                  Gtf Cta»» *«4 f l
             afe^eras » # « * * ■ * * fe ^
     1.3
' 1.1.1         m e em nt in M a t *»M»S *»                                    •*«• *** ■ * * «ft»it«aS
                           • A w f ^ i r Vtoettnll §t®§i** pwwiiwily und «fce* • « & ? * »
                tc wtfwriiUiMr adtfr the freywS m A locality*
     I.Mt       1® a n «C fect t o m m m o k m m                      * p m f c * t o f e f t * *411       * ti
                g te c . I* I t N » to M if f Mill npr» * m * mmfli
                %gfcjw(i       vi* to* ,%»fji®is8i** fpte I*                       • • i fctfe, fcll
                ! ......... ..      ■*        ^
                                              «w#      »*»«»  X               Mu * « * * « » * * * «
I
I
*•**•*                tttte       • ttfttte          D M « #a M M 1 ta A m
               » £ « » tf «te S h A t a M m S M n f e M l * U   kt w t n U a M t e * - t e U
               »**» t i n *» awtltar Ha          K te u tm «f M scsun.
               fccta# tfet mtdt tfeqr »CU <«»m* inMt tt» Ma&m,

*, u -1              aw tiat eUiw wtu W n K M * ws*rvia«y tfttean and
                «ftu to «*»]? awtad *wa rase - tn m n . * mmamm tomr.
«.u



                                     $|*g Jo       __           _ _ _ _ _
                M l * 2 1 n p « t cffMAily * ' * t                i u M * n*m       .__
                a p o i t «Cf<4My •*            tM.

i.lt.l          testarfMtJta * 1 1 tut *Jii#tt nfe fifwui Cbrtnl M a m « r ferial
                i» *»tood Ho***.




,! 2 U * v«   io i
                                                                                               \

                                                                                      . t\i

                                                                                           %
Im to r Off te r n t e t i t t
    jaeter* M in t
•mem? 1 fepxnll
•urtar i fU^RSpooll Mitt
                         %
Stefor » fltettlA^iBi f e r a l) Buttes
             f&ctairU

OD Buttes
We§ Suction
Vtountttd' Ssctten
JkA«Lnis>iation, Me.
tfcaffic Obntipl .
fe a lm

Gumtm% »                     srs£ a n t if ^ w f« m
f v « » S l wans - M ^ f w & f

f * ^ » s t <fc*4* • f c / r i t ^ w fm zit-t

            B ra ts f€oftt»l «f JUmtol) Art » 5
and ©rawii    l^ tl* tta n s . .


S *,*1* fcijji *tw;

%Ht* t-Ml Ctt&tAibv>lbi f

tfepfc

fr~ifeftag putting a & n
                                                                                    a w m
♦




     € M m i X napartorv anfl a te * * « 1 U W f v m • c « U Ulan t u t w i l l t » 2 f c .u £ f s * *
     ty tfw ir m           w* iw ft.

     & EM U . CGttffte                                         Chi*f

                                                               U M t a m * Iimpctor tr*tU
                                                                            C a ll l i p   In& a J f

                                                               • ifa r in ta n ta it M a n y


               I £^m »§f                                       flkvazintandant fesirw aa?
               m                                               CWaf I m p e c to r

     ta r ia la 1 - l i

     ifts a tis
     9 m w H       11-11

     iHftSfewis S e ri& i* 20/21


                                                               fevc^intantent m n h r n l l

                                                               <1m** In s p e c to r M sring
     ® * rials 22-33 and 44, 46, €? i 41

                                                               0 « # f Im ,**. tu t fteiS y

    _ .*« ria ls 34-51 m tc h s t.'c ^ $?, i t      #• I 4 i
                                                                                                              \

    gC W R g g g          ( lP ! T D a « H WHBST)

    fc e ta r m ,                                              Chief t « t*, %f4, */» r*x              %   i 1*
                                                                                                       .-■■ I * *

    S e ria ls 5 2 -5 6

                                                               CMef l» p s i i ot
    S e r ia ls 57-64
                                                                                              M—        tt l i l *




                 u   - m w                     MXL


                                                                                                              ®tE «**
 Mb M eter I                       (Strliil* I - li       lnsj»ctor Hurling ‘F*                               Mi* 1

 Mb ItKlaer 1                      tMrSjrt* 4 4)          ta'fftrt**’H a m y W                                Wto 2
 Mb feetor 3                       ($*ria ls f-HJ         I n s p e c t o r   f a l w t r l   ' H O *         India 3
Mb fector i                        (teUs t-l®J            JteptCtOT B&C-Ul 8E*                                Mia I




                       „    * 0*\U S fS ^ §tft« <3K*£ER
                                                                                                                        \
Mb S acter           5             CS e r a i s 11-121    fcasp&ctar HE<sdward fF*                            M ia 5
ft*' &*et*r §                                                        Ur B^/isv *H0’                           India §
Mb Sactar *7                       f S e r ia ls 14-15)   In®! « d ce Wi it T*                                M ia 7
Mb          Suet* 8                I S t r k l i H -19)           i «y t/« ss ’I"                             XnSve 8*
■ijife W,   S&   _   .*».                                 Iteperta' Psjrdy *Trg*                              India m \
                                   f f e r ia l* 20*31)   IfirfX-rtQf Xfelaney ff '                           In4i® Hi'
                                                          Mmpactm Beresford                                   India 9B
\:
                                                                                                                                                                                lil



      9*11.24        a h           tcwwii « v » * u                                      %• m              m       m            %» m                                       ««• **w»
                                                       * U mi#! «* mu, I# rn pmm! wrftr prtJot m m ^ r n m .
     *9.13.1$

                                                                                                                «ht< t i i w t l toy tr% m it w n o r ♦* -!% r
                        wft^fcJ* * 1 1 t» # r w * a * d to »                                                                    tht W m t m m f , l*t*iog r. fiw te y
                        f ) j n r t k n M l.                          I t e « r » I t t* fr t                                                   to •« « ? * * t© «ft*m 1
                      « u A v«Mcl«i                                                      «n»                                              anA It m i U tht t o s t h o t f s t .
                     c ? « U M rtftl* fwtifeS® f t * fp m »§ to tihmcli. tl*** vchieXm aafi thtLr
                     ORAjpiRtt 1* cvtlir*ad a t              *ip.
      9 .1 2 .K      C 2 trt» * lt wmt wLIl t» A tactui to g»              purttnf *nst %t»«t
                     «4*w U r* * U * I t # i t M tadft I© tht gronA tnflar j»Uc* *euvi»inn.
      9 .1 2 .:*                                                     l * m s m * w                          m      m       %     i    m     m b     .m m r n m

                     1 ? s r e l s oC Hit He! I* *h;*r» »f ^owNSitr *0*CiK                                                                                m i* 1«9ij% *Itr «tU»
                     ■» S iric tljr                                                 In m latfen tc « l » i nn# U w l t nnsos * tiarflar
                     '••S’J e J i i s , m                                           f iiw                    ante.? xnq m irtf f r p 1 lug to m t m th r ynsuntf.
     3.12.:i         m i m m                  m x m s                     - ijwscm

                    tr^tjrjcfel U f o t u i * » t r « * £ I f private v th iU e * 1 1 I# t r ^ - j u t A
                    ^ M e It# HKjte *r4Lor*ay* la c O ig th» 1*1 t« f «t t e t e f i J j t |3yrrf tok
                       *• **3? w ill pr^^nm 1# f t * **»!griat*A pufcung ar<MS «» it* f ir m * 1
                    C ^ n y r tM h lU a a ta ta a .

                    f t a n i w l at tl* # » s Igiw tm S p a rk in g irwus, *^ffc«t«*» w ill eli^h? «r*d
                    -                t o II* #f*iMn<S yre% r p o lio ? *• qptrviirian.

                    S-                                                » h *t * * * r f > c w i t                                s H .’ w      <•«»*» f t *      V I ure v ia th e
                     F^wc#?           I w f ! t# * c e n t i r ^ f r y       s im M ttv w J ifs t of tl,is
                              f« m \h *$vtt i t 1»                     l* fp a « w 7 i t 10 th r &t'
                    l ^ ^ * S » » r # f « r r ^ to • ! |«a-^f^ph 3 ,1 ? ,1®,                               |



                    ■fe^tJmgjhaB Vtanst                                                                      *x> tzavel % pneimtm ythiclB m m be
                    ®                       r**6 tr-                                                                              »    T^ur
                    t            I>k                                fS ^            ■*                 i f ^F in the iteepsenri ar«e o f the c ity .                                | 4, |
     3v
                               m r s im t                 f t f p v t t r s WI-.O                                               arid um it           i t* <jtt*xnJ! vjrtier j r l u-e

     3.12.23

                                  tx m m it m m v m i l wit                                                                            t h e i r d e s i ^ i e t ^ i ^ , 14^
                          m ifl^ m ifi* to 4 b «t>                                                                               to il m l.       Thp « t* » <               fr^
                   t*CT»c w M r k i * U t e the n w w                                                                           of t h s t on th e incoming Journey
                                                                                                                                                                                     V
 3.12.24           « Q 11'' g' "' s1,1 ' 1hi■■aja..m,j^u.u..w
                                                     m ^i8   mwiwm   miiHiiaBx  f mWiiiT'' 'm            - m o m
                           1                                     wiwiM       WBW
                                                                               ww»wwMBiBW   'Hi"''"" iii 'i ' iMiiijii'i
                                                                                                   1       \ u.Mamaw ^ KTmmm*




                   •*'     If fw                                                  '*w.i m i 1 t# < ‘
                                                                                                   J w*                                 f/ If-Vf,                  ,4 |c't Sjpi mny
                   mr^sB m-thmT t f «                                                                                                  # r ^ 5(          ^33     tT-»^ te
                   t e « a e x a u te s o th ex th a n                                                                                      i r J^ ss   d i . » r f ^ ta
                   Ofcfjdtiejr*, f o U ^ j ^ cxMwaLtatiyar^ wi!>                                                                                  C o n tro l.
                                                                                                                                                                  I ll
 t . l t 8t§

                    •Kffesf oe wfeteltt in th t f a l l a l * vidAity «f Hit fpwnfl «g « tmjji
                    * n i t rtrtetly «e»tPoU«d fey «*# of psiMjif m s , «*§*            fet t t t cc:
                    £ * ^ 3 the mrly t» a » e t th t fey ta             v ilh          I « S 0,
 J .1 3 .H          &» f~ augury f t t v iw * t e w katn tr»f<*ntd «f mil m i U m x m ^ ^ ic x W
                    :      _____ _ _ _____.

 3 *****            *t t£ H fee tt* » p i » § M l f i f of M ic t te p ti* 162 VSAtar s ianv«
                    tin t       ev*t a r t §a fm ittm tw f*t §H§ bona £#twrd*y            aprtl
                    IMS*

                    *» «£££<** « tll m m any w M clt te p u t t» wnti'»<*flttan & t m m m
                    • f c s b tr w stite tJc n without tMfeiog tht trthcvUy c* Hffwrf ! ^ » L
 3 ,1 2 *2 9

                    •#?« a i*tMrlt I* i * i fad in iPuA » jm iik r * te m ettnt t i t r f J , thm
                    th*« w ill te                            b}    C * ©fhn«T emuem** thittjgh QrronC ^arM^vl '
                               xv»ui;««rlo» wuh la* *4 «rw*.*vy towpKtcr. twu frv;*,: « . <©**»*
                    ’w^viclv* *11 i t « v « tid b it t e i « bk» * vehicles.               I

3.12.3©            ®mr« « vehicle & pu'teed in cwtjmentiaR af perking n stric rjR * tntflfeet
                   » « rrJt ntm X # then t h t d riv tt m y b e feslt irfth l» the tn C m m *!.
3.11,31

                   th r o w ill te *I»I«5 |»2iiitit%                             q p * r * l* &     an fm ls w tlw* v**” wy r f fbr
                   fp v^ r*      * *.«'*?*,»«* Mill                                       i in f*k r*rr*t*f»,                   hi?   rhrt*~
                              pmU« I t i * ir?< *
                    ***> « * .;                                                t l» t , ^                  w h w - . lf s % o il * &          Set *
                   ? K * ^ ^ t ) ! t , md >M                                     *srfcirf, *'«*.*                         « t % p e jy „              ‘& \        fh is
                   C fT *-» , ~ «ar, n a i l fee <a»?f \is 2 o u t         K                        o f t jp      5Jm * . \**» H i * ^ r              ‘ ^t-% ^ * w r
                   A tcl«» Ai* #y>#> m                        « v lr «     1*'.       ^                   *n1i |c                             t       *21
                   ostkferm                           4fc           i^ly

3.1?,i?                                                                                                                                                      n
               .            ¥ » M
                   ® ^ *tic c . t o            groora i-          A- tS** *t^K* of ttc m ' z h , ts»j                            fc r #> - 'r < i- u ?
                                              util's,               t,£< fl#-                       «f,»'tic» m il te psrfc: ia .                                     .it
                                      Ik^fed fci’t/t £r^,#                            fc^* Wx<)> m                                      Irfis, .rx«&>SA,n -
                                   £ » i * c ity ,           Ai^es f m u w p v t t u a n of m^tir#A= fc»-rt
                                        V 'i tc It*                                             mil br parlyp^ is,
                   Hcrth o c ts id t t e             p u n i             faring                            o ty .

3.1J.JJ            ^       y ^ —o ^ «f ti» t o j t i Y*^ lAh* ^                                                                      U*           ^ jb, thf
                   StAdior; i* rn^m'i ct                                 #1* ,
3.12 14            jrb^uk/,                                                                                   $$**£*
                                                                                                                                                                      *%,
                   Only f c x ^ w                                                 p u ses m il be tU oued aooess = th is p u t
                   ^ t»» fr^md i^ich xt m t'jz t* mt the seer rf a« Sr*.^h S i« » . 3ert*in
                                                      ? E. *nf n » t                                              vilf Iv » V ^                       •: .^f«r
                   t t »   c » r   f®Tlt   m % i   # « T '   ^ s » e r « ^ r s    i ^ |     b t f t x t   &   %   m   m   t o    e    f * r k i r ;    b t t ,m   m    |

                   fc*» i±«f mrnud ( S h e f f i e l d iNsiries^s- tem i»l! QiA trz kmm
             as®*!* s»                             u tlt any *0** vtfiiete, etfcar tin t M J » vMt&aa

I   M    M   S » fptas §fwtft§ n m i t o t h i troth ftn fsl Cm                               M      w ill t l w t    at   2 .0 C ^ i
             and w ill n o t *a-4pan u ntil h alf an hew a fta r                                            ftii     fu e l fa *
                                      to p *#m w » Having Hagittaktt sonwm.

M2.lt        C * SftMudi *ULl to                                     at tti» § s » t points I » I«gf l* p tone
             ®fl f tn ia ta n toad North to                    e m tm i m m m       and 9 § a m »
3.12.3*      tWhtelaa «ewd i f tha teto*teion w p s f pw lA t?^ e « i f af «hs p s*
             m i l to p av rftu * to pac* In Hat Smith Stand car patitat U tn I t*
             I^BPingi lana *wi fcanlatsna feni fkrtli anda.
3 U 3 .3 I                  ► m o m maroons
             JL.'Zharlaad teMet ^ d « u til paift la the car pack at tin mar of the
             % * T m * iw          v ia H* ' O ^ r m k m pta* a S y * L * n t I# G*tt ‘O'. CWy
                             m rc m § *4
             r£ f it‘1*1 *thfclaa w ill to aLlmad *«**» and B 7 « H t teto r d out of « *
             f^rjw-i?       ba inf* to an atoc&ute adrtton.
3.12.40                         z& S & y M               jn                                                                     I

                         T m U z i * , W A § t v9buta* anft *% ether p*?a<a. oauting «totnictLn
             tfcH to w a d an. I f they persist ttoa they tdLU to acnataf m l W efeit
             tr f t* M ilo* Reoa «t»r* ti»y m il to t e l l %tfth * autlinef fa pftx*grifedhs
             4 . : . I . to 4.1.C (Hu m 'fecisonar Ptooass*).
3,13.
                  i» #111 o t r r j                                  tc             B t ^ V St^nduon. ® *se
             t'm fffc * « ! ttw* S t s # lk » w i l l hr            by fm, mu is* •*&* hew* Kht
             HP»*3im»MJIfcy for fw Iw lM j th is p m p n t f , a f f i r m * «tt*4£ a r.ly a n ta r
             tN a * a 'iw * f f ir H «                <af f o t i w ix tJ e i « t « *             o f,    .
             uraf toittM gstttfad by, * «*jr^X£ « f tie iff, fr/tv c * . t h i* «lae>                  to i l l
             uSser «dl%*y jpn^wty f&v'MJ % »iJjjipf settin g s. lines, etc.                                                          f
3 ,1 4       WBEFTwm i m p a i r                               a m g e n i i w anm xricm i
„t, 14 5     * i ^           vrf L%                                         it 4\W » * ' Hf            ^ ”0 l i i l . .             »f

^ H,?                       vdiiir.r m t * f »                         by        L# ^1            kn,,/, ^si V*                     ’
             I* %rJtl*-

             A1             | vtit f t sm          tn m <?*m !)sc                rk     hb., !>>%’         <u*' * i I
                   M *                              .

             8)    W a ® that                       that the iten aay to                                on cxx^letian
                   of the fps* fra» tto                  f o lic *    Pnjpftrfj           at          soar «f the
                   % a trs *e4 <? in       *tw r   « «        ©I                   F c r**!                               fie
                   fc ltt*           fDsi «t thf
                              J to jK jr t f                          w   i   s# t^NS tl« *s I S t a « j f | «   the case       ^
                   flff liwexpool auppoctons.
             C|    X?f 5* •       to tt» {1 » t«bfe mg ii* ew**r% xm*t miA ?§# ef£Juoers
                   *ColI«x m M m t'»

             W               th«t thr                                     to t^r %^«,%»r'ate
                   ? a s f end exiterwS in e^<r                                      ,
•
                                                                                                                                     111


    lift.     f t i i i m t t t lf lf t * f tutey t o p a * ! « • ! piratei* « p n ts I t
              • w r c M . Jtor im o n m im im         to n u tto * %*u I t to |*«k& «£ « » §
              w n tttto f* m trtU i t MftaMd tatty*
    s.tt                      H M W W I

    3 .U .1   **» p u l m j o f lt f eC Iksnftttt In the tsa*4Jjiit viciitfty of A* §r«j«S
              t i l t #£*h*r etowt ih tic frw i**s a»f£«t*ly at land*Sat *«S n r li                                                          1
                                                                                                                                             'r,
              m                 *    'M & ic t iv t t a x *         tfta ra t^ * fo o t t o l l   tv ^ p M tm    * r t s r:
              •A d ts a d .

    i.u.a     ** td£L t o tf«t iwqpHncfbility %€ A ! t t f M * t»f»M § tto f « £ *o
              t t M e £ £ ^ IIM3M        st m   Im   s   * M c ti i m f t t o i p * * * 1 t o w i l t *         i f * k r a r .itM r e f
              fMEMm rM orttag ttoxttD.
    3.15.2    M S t f i » l attar* io n waft t o                             to W         U m tc * f |r««iiJMs§ r i
              (m iita ra tta it gWan I s ms§mhlf                                      p > p l « t » rtmti6 orM ttat a a !«
              a f tto tfw il t o «v&Sant»
    1,11.<    Aloche,: Ji not amilafelt te ■KRfcurs «f tto p l l k im lfe tto fi'xrt.
    3 .If                      4 » W W 1 ®                HCOBtiWS

    3 .H .:   1fttto f » « ef » •mowcy *ju-»tkn ttrifting fi* fins m tor s»311
              tiiMi » / nqwLre cvftruaricm; ef ftll * pet of tto *t*diuR, tac, p c c ^ ^ r i
              o u fc lia a d w a l l t o    fo llc M B i.

3 .1 1 .1     feouaC control mill |am tto felJcwtaf mmmft e * tto f 1 israr.. «nfi
              thU teJl Mteato to fc&ioa ft Tww«d ttot • frwfslciMil 4Nt*?Kcy ««£
                                p * K ^ s » 4* i# fcrev :

                              • she j s r o w r ? or <*< nv^uo* *r                                     » fw ®
                              * m a t t OQMXKL.*
3 .1 6 .3     Omti€ m        » y a y #»<<»£utU'r,                      «                                ant **«$** s&lt fee
              im**        a> M ^ c e ?s'# *ri vi» ; w fcw t * » an* Ref
              •ppc*#,’: Ii^trmnicws » to tin                                       to ie t%Vn&D.                                       1
                   il«   * m ,M     o f «r      #« J 1 e 1^m tm t ia r ^ ttv r. fc J t ^ w i ^ w f 54 ^ « , U l «
                                                                '                                                                       ’
                         %» M        n      personnel ifldioR tins t to t tto c e o e ssity for casrassjcy
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                     a                     » k%JVf*rv *s i                            *

2.ic.s
                                                                                                                               .     ill
              Ev*Gw.z^m                              f«     m r s c f t a pus'U c t t t o                   «r«               c r 4M
                                    serial ard^r .
4             «KaKsganaw

4.1           m m m x

4.1.1                                             of                      if»«,xA # *                           kr            , in
              t»*t-                        tc> tto K'lloe I j » *f ll£ **&r frf t»« fc*f|
              •i'*«st«si »tsi4 tto proua* m IP                                        to t»hen fcr H* Oilier fem. «
                                Hrjftd               SEtJition       tto m%€ #                    #              ftu*v
              * llp o irc (E r* J                    i s a » t esonweaaient.
4.1.2         "*»«*■ WLhides- m31                              in tto asf® f« Urn §c»l« ta^pese ef
              tx«mj3cr^*tic*» ®f p ' i i w ' f m                      « f c c ttwt *t « O c                 m r r®,:                   'or
                         # r# '»«
t                                                                                                                                                           M l




     CI*1 .


                                 !E f                                              tta •rm tlP 'f tit Imp e ia tbtn
                  C f i S *          ? * * » « « * » « ' * » * * * * te « U 1 I M                                to toe feesast
                                    In th* fpratliM , *&** I* f#Ji©8sftt I© tfca p^iim ? msu
                                                       ^   ; , t t < n * »’"A * w t e C f f io r
                                 .'Df. 2 * 'W ! f*,*K * *** ^    • n o ^ V tt* p r i ^ * ; 5fi hf.,
                                 to tf* w rcyxiata jnnt*©* for p ra ^ i^ /tt» sy & ig •
»   #»i.i
                          • p m             Is a m tta d far « a M * t l e ifw m $ &m 'p -te w w m
                                          * * ^ *** •**'»«*§ afflcar to tt» a s prte> •>» ?<*
                                                                                     •m o “         to **“ *                 ^                       ~ i"




                           te M # _ fe r                       p rJa a n a r* an * #           d s a a tio n
                            w l l I # p a r t e d a t aicfc o f th » ts** W i a U t e t f c a * f c r M e n t l n s l
    4 .1 .f                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                           * * n * * * * • * » * « ° } *» f e w c f # . . ^ to                                              r
                                  f - * d , P S U   f *   * * • * * »    n la tto
                                                                         Il a             t o   S   f   e    i   f   ^       r       ^       «              f

                  ill* S l                                          M ica Statioa flii m a t t e to ISMipaed f
1 4.1,9
               S a ^ c to r s « *            ansua* that officers fa w r ^ U tmfc-r                                                      ■^ » v {           a   ,
               «®t *p ‘I f f # tfrf wvtl*%-t                               w J » « if c tie v r . n j t ‘                                ^           r%,

               M m O N B

                                         Jf*       **»t * p « w I* to t?          «•-** tfcf .
                            fa r.fcg—ct> •* tl* P « * i npolatfcm. tte'i te * ju «^ te       I
                                                    tert t r y I*                to tfe W           w        f t ® *:*£: *.*
              £ £ ? « ! l ry*' 'M            J ® ** ,#l^ f l® *5^* fr^                                  4/       ^




                        ar •.-,-«««( p t n « >» tf*i-re ant h»; ,«3 tc -« ,;t *u - .* b J ^
              « '■« * aJU ».v.»1 to th?s t**r»M «, wii) te «Uir*ly                    t r . a , aU
              ^ » i o n s . th e re fo r* , th e staff «1 th,- Chioj » ) , . ( R, ,l;e '.tra e t,
                                 « t l          C X « M 4 tt«sJ    »      tl*                                 '■<«*«,    %   f   r       ^       *

              IV \ * . » M X U      m S m m m ! ! «m M s !              fcl l m r ^ ct*,i$e,
1 .1.1]
              * r tv ^ r « d * K f f c p t            « a» t< te,lt
                                                              ^ S y « ^r I I * a t r i o w y a s «©*f       « w t » r «£ ^ r s o m

              ?     y     tote *                          Own      teir^ iaw«(rf «              * * A > 3 #di ^ i l 1989.
              i"                  ^ « f , « « * « rtt» x ie b tlns a c t t t a Chief S iserin tK stejt *»
              ^ • t^ T           r             in fa n a rf in a n k r diet th is cw ttogM cy a n be put
9s9M%% t f d a tin g M M am v&XX to pa*Md via tutaffiant to found ftra o i
    in «*<ttf that tha WKmiary Delian can %• fjsJywt,
Any                    t e w a*f*anrtad ftaa M t pannt Aguazdian td ll ba
taftan to tlw «tw*tl4P at tha m r of tlaa N»rth Stand, femrrt a n t n :
• f ill than ba I n to n d via talagftvna in ardar that tha madsM aetiar.
c m i t Mfcan.



M l taind pw em 'ty « m te isisipst te tha A M nlatattan Sta* In tha w ra th a .
end tha jciftsfw ognf&etad.


M l  StNrth tourfcahixa feliee Offfear* wiil m a r M l mifoss; I#cl*ui£im
l*3s*t (with chin » i f i p # » f nrxS £ t> a * s. I w b m i l be m m ir
taelaaont uaathar. ftanal* rffiw fi ahnJd vaar tztusers and m t
a& irta.
                    - w u a            w t s p m
                                                                                                                              $


€£floa» arriving |a foliot transport                                        m il   *Xlpt at Gate *0' to
f*rii*to» Road Marti* aw? t e w                                 o f wtn* Vs #1 *a*Jy «#i ^'#*5
              thr       p A i f ^   €4 *   m t M s    w % t ’   e©s>    ^     v„   J r t #w    <*j   %    ^    f*    *<   *   ^       -

l- v r M lo n .         1 5 *t    Qktirmx     w tH               d u ra e t k r     a& f t *   m lxm iim &f
           Qrt &W£>*«tiif of II* §srn, ml
m t\ir 'lm .                                     of ttw
        wtt r*|A«t t» 11* Ymffit Adaani*?T»iter Sc®>, ii; ifse
S^mttftj* to ec&Lact tha mtarle fcr>* it<        fa? tha vetucn I
S^wwj.                                                                                                                            1

h ^ k - t v if e t ^              n f ^ it §tt« <*,<                   in t. ^                       % s                      r
id    13   it jjfwVxf **             ths   3^
                                       a* %, " M a r                                                 «t Q a j - * # ^ I*
I*'*, ftMtarfiftq e r m u ’tatkv' # u > *-t#r u*-* % ’^                                  in tf^gtie «rf «l»— *
jr'-K\lt                fcry*. h<* »*."* w*vt - **'« v H’-’vW sr,                               to t l * l o g i s t i d ^
       *£**? #| kK«t \r* & ,K‘                                                                                %. | t 4



                    (ana hot) m il be pra«Si«l and theae m il be distribute
mf                      Ux m ttm pr\ v,              tc   W*

                                    be taken as indicated an fhe |j^iv«%Ml                                      wj*;aI
« r ^ r «t tt* >*sr**s* stated.



Hays* of thf                          w#    ^msjndlnB araa are included                              la       this    ar^frx
«     U p p r w S M r     *»£».
  ct.i        M *                             Cf#«ir td U b« i*»j*i t# SMgMtan «t«J ibw*»
              A SMiil CMnr wiH b> 4istiibut«6 to all SugMntt.
  4 .9        wm m          i» w          i «
  4 .t.l      R M    M l f 1 ® * t a n g b o n to truffle mmtm m£ p t A t o g ira e *« § # v% # ? t»
              f o r Hut iM » t by fh* W M 1 Mskteftfi O fftear «nl ft* * * Ifj&toft
              •■tpftRMttt*-

  4 .» .2     M l em ant* o m m m i n g t t e M » t anft n p ilM to ffttp trtiit fxw»
              tfc* «a&ia trill it           by Chtof •uc*ri»t*n&iftt ftscfean&»ld
              * e ttaou^i tb t ftns* liaiso n Offict tfcicb 1* ^ S ir th i eactjecA of
              f f c t f a f t a t w t e it P n i t t .

  4.10        £!?f*Anra

  4.10.1      t o y cew pleint* a g ftim t t t a fto lfn t <*‘11 b» Aaalt % ith I n
              w ith t a x * Sfjinfti#ig Getter SS, O jnpU ir«rtt» ti® appnm dh Pali m
              C f f t e c i ••geigiisi cn iK U operation M U be AinKtaA t o tb a Q ffk * r
              *£wm m           JfepanA ix * 1 * .        G a « f> la in ts ihic*Jv®(5 a t H tsw *t?ian ftaad 9feL |oe
              m tM lim ana                               toX ta* S i* 'ta n m i l be t e l l w it* fey th e V \
              ©uty Jaifw etar.                                                                              m
  4. 11       f l M N i u e m

  4.11.1      A-M nnpuriieaf >(*» fafcvarrt to tht « » t wiJi be                                                 trough
              fe m n fl C o n tro l.
  4.02        Itae follow ing WF/VHF channels m U be utUJsert in r*l»tjuz: to lt»>*
                     ions-

              f l»| tttf frt'jt&xmZ ssiAk* fJssffwJi fS w tU be utad % A ll                                               »
              *Kjpertf>Kory o ff* ;* ? * , br»*b in rid e and outtfcAr the grcMnrt.                                       ’

              1C) IHF jpersetsiil zaftio -dbar**! I f *>U tw, M m & % a l l 0 0
              I R r s c m e l ®rjg»gnd m Hurtk* i n ’O/'  ? n ^ « 3*sc
              jpn.««it* parking               m m m .




  € .11,3     *F1* S»jh I* v !a s« fs op* v-^t                          funct* » t m il «t>'? *‘tw* tt i*
              4 » « « iw ro -tt# 3 o n I t i f                  m K      > v 'f* 4,* r* l M

• 4.11.4                t e d it M m il t * It.i^ w f a t tt*                          «#«;icr) te s k i,n t f *
              «eaoasirjn to aJJ « ^ iv i» o r y o ffie e is .

  4 .1 1 .5   S -fttf »4«f        ill* «R>J 4«e wtmtadnafi at «11 tiRBKs. te s s a ^ s
                               tAutt aa |* ^ ib le anS,
              m w i t b e Im p *      m                      tlus I* m s i t*« c « « #
              ftm n i Qonrml h m tt» w e’Tt^if>g option of cutting sho rt «w           1
              t ° » i « i i i m » !>*#%*« t i w o f x m k
  4. 11, §    e f f m m f   Gexttro*.     w              b t   r o n t a c t ^   »        4W r t e r » i i « -    W   l




                                                                                                                              I
W BB U K L   z   JU B B L M N K   h   * w m m    iu w w b m


                                                                                        m iiM m

                 it      tterlftte » • » !           S M ^ t o r Muqphrtat •*«
                                                                                        Is££a m
                 it      (Malt 1M»)                  ln$»eiar Mwooft *r
                                                               ®                        m   * B   it
    • mer        m       (tHrtalii »-»)              SM|«eter ffHi«tt 'a *              te£* II



                 J g g J g fg g . m m           fu w o o u

    Stator 13            CtorMt Jt/»i               HafKtor feioairt %•                f e e * i|
fcb Hnetcsr 24           (Strtols                   StapKter Ellis *C*                 i n & * il1
    Stetge IS            tferl&U » /t© l            feipcta*; fewnflB *c*                         IT
   *»ctoc 1 #            (Striilt 11-431            tM^K^w                       *c*   i*ne* i i



ffigJBCPTIOI

                        Ite te i mi                 i M m s m t i m iter®# *£r
                                                                                       ted£a
                        CSerial €51                 Iwfactoy M a r t * '
                                                                       “£*                 ::\
                                                                                       Mie I*



                                                                                            .    i< .t
                        {Serial* 46-46)            J& epeciw tfcU J*i *%»«             Iraii* I f
                        CSerials 45> * i f         l« i# \ ic>' HMhr^vti ®H3’          iMili 2§
m m * * *                tocwn




#»* t* c tc r i l                 (S trla l* M/SJ1                  SMjpcUK O iw la* *C*                «»*i» jj
 M>     tKtsr a                   <SwU3s J4 M! fiwpKtsr Mu»y •€•                                        India *j


               * . r o g g f n ew o g w m c s -                    hdstocmw kmest



        i t c t c r 23                                                           iRli      *C*
                                 f i t r t j y j i   l l / S l i
                                                                                                        JUUft 13
W   *   S n e t c r   t l        t Serial* St/§©J                    'bwgmr'tM             •c*
                                                                                                              t


f p t i i g    « r g s




fc# t o t t e r - B              f f c x m i s i l 141                           W^IImlw *t*            Inb* »


                                                                                                                      \
mmsm                                                                                      fr*           India 2€


                                                                     iNgnrtca lter»«a *F*                 V 1*1
                                                                                                        ln9ia 2?

                                                 STOALS/
              gomvisiaK                                              Inspects* S o a fe ’ T ta H ic *   W »       »
                                                                                             1




                                           »**•*
     M .<                             >
     *> K ’ r n                 ?* ***,                       ^ ‘ .* /                  Km >:^ s ta b la s - p e r i f i t te r tra c k (B q u id is tn t
     1# K ;* ~;                 *1 ** ...Vw                   V-       **                                                                                        ” * r,„          "lit                     %     ;*M
     ? t *<4 ‘ *            i   -1           „o rth           v ic in i.f           »/ *>>* .*? /                                                               S .    >«*i :\>* . / • - , !             ■*        , >*
                                                              1‘4 ' V                   s * 4, ft* ;<-K ,J-'*1 *< ‘          , t* Ny
                                         t
  • I PC 446 StaM*:                                           <■      ^ r7                 • * : '$ - V r ^   H Ov? , W v . -‘time#*-                                                                                  .


  ?l     ’ ’ *,8 ;v, r,                                       ^ fore M e k*>.Ut                                                                                       ^*1 f^sl * ,* > *! < ;                   «,-M
  •      ! PC 7 0 3 I f e l i i m                   il       **')     fv- .i4* ^ < ***/ H * \ n *:<,     *5 ^    . d <nrest.~
  §I      PC 4 42 Oudcsar.                                   T his m i l be in d ic a te d during th e p % ami s h o r tly bsfoee
151 «X                          ^          v                 ‘ •Mf “ <«1                                                                   ^                    IV                  1 * . >r<;      f,: ; %j u r 'i
  I I I PC 1247 S t m t                                                                                                                                                                               :ic u la r
»? i *■•■>"T          ;•                 i ^                 a t te n t * «.          " .'J,* m 4* 5 ;<>                                                                      i*>, t any parv «               -biiw
                                                              *:jt> C                hj j\lr, ’A-t/^fs, !*,j                                                            ,;:U> v    * ^1,      B *   fa te s
14}      PC      M 22 Latfc                                            •-« **••'>; «<> -'U ri'»< -••jv t            Ia ’c,
♦St              j     ,i              ' > x.
                                                             ”*' ^ ^        ^ ‘•r-’ 'Ur* h   s‘     S C I f ’ACK fT O H E
1 6 ) PC 1 1 4          F x rn e g B E i                     ir.iRACES           t >^u*;     a ^•>~. ^       '-'; r *» u . w
i / J       f*        \ f        ™       (1 * ^ n
                                                                     b w        ~ fffipicAL A ir o n cm i
?r
19                                          ~               Phase 3 (A fte r Match)
20) a            r,   : r            , „ , Frog}
                                                           'As' i’f t a. ^ . f ‘                                                                                      ,•* . , ? ( - • . , .      ^2 *, ?{
                                                            in location until instr
         :i. ni -                        - ,:«


        m
         ber **                     r*        ^ s1u                               '7- 3 ;v>? 1 ;c% J; - - 4                                                                                                    \
                                                            rn f|-,; ^ ^ent ,‘f #'ff '- •» - ,*',,« ’ ,  . v ;} ,            , „) t
        A S PE? KAN* (ATTACHED)                                    ’ ?
                                                                     .• -** 'V V M] m •' > l" ,-t             J4 *       , I r < <. v;
        ippereix »i*
                                                           ’ •*   ^      ^ "*'1 »* 4- * r *"i s * '      ns at th e fe n c e g a te ? ,
                                                             > ‘ • ' » r'             ’ ”* * ’          -   specific message
                                                           t o evacus


                                                                '                                                                 .   ,      wel
                                                                               .-y.-^.^.-.^.^--,-.^-.;.^.-,-^-..-.-.,-...,...... r.-... .. ....-,...........,



        ,ferial 2                                                       1 (Before Match)                                                                                                                           \
        PS 2353                                     «p ‘
11 PC 2052 J a c k s a c                                            ' *
                                                                      “     - '          t ^ > i r , .- , •'--*            , tO-                                         ,


2)      PC                                                                        iferirig th e se p r « iiis e s do no: p o s s e s s *
3|      PC1S2€ f%~MjLimnes,s*                              i t * p r o h ib ite d by th e ground rules (Banners, e t c . , | I t
4}      PC                                                                                                                   *. I v *
          172 Siirpsan
5}      PC3                                                £v           '' '                 ‘ I*' ? •      sic,‘ ->i          ,3-36 to
6)      1C.
          341 f e l l                                      mm\xm item                         showi above, are not brought into the ground;.
7)     1C 15? f e s t
6}    PC 4
f|    PC’ 44 S “                                                    ntain o rd er.
31    I

        PS' 2425 siesx± n ^ ssy                            x '         ‘ > * ? r.'-'; ^                                                             !.*, l «: ^               ?»e rear of terraces
                                                                            *in order .as-xeouired.                                                                                                              **,
      W L i Sragaesae                                                                                     ^ r. *• 1
      d u rifig c e rc h Ik. % to.
                                                           i ‘- j           *1 v- *:                                                  ' 3 up a p o s i t i o n h                         r -jfit 0 f~ th e s e
           >%, v , ;• . j ir
                                                           1^-,        *» K-'»t   ’,rr    i? - u to prevent a pitch immsitr:
      AS PER WZMi & s a                                    >m Z't'tire t h e safety of th e natch i . ^      ^      »,
      m m m m                   mi *
                                          41 2 , \ r i                                   I»t    **« >' ^                       t^ cattU M
       •'i V ?    •>.
 11   tC -§©     QodUy                    * f <*4 ^                                                      - V v .' * * >.<
 n    k      vt ;n »v >-                  I V,  «< <*,                            >1 ‘- V ^ M               ►*       l-
 3)   PC 5# 1 funt
 <|                                        *,                 ' * i n -> *;•,*■        : sv;‘'d ’ v "ti* ;, ;> ^2
 51                                       t o ensi        *>     ', v >^>r> >'          ■>>*> '*>s *' "* J ' l i n t o t l *
 §!   4>;r 1 -,>4 Cc»i’ V '
                                          p w i,
 1 1 PC
 il 1C ; n ? F ;fir s t                   r>      ', , * < %              *" *I ;^i',.’-i                *'■**£ ’* «■'- *?* to
 f)   R" 2811 Hudson                          'i '.tfslii o ld er.
2©1   PC 3341 Mitdwll
                                          ft* *      2 I D a r in g « a t r i|I
                             sm
                                          O f f i c e r s w i l l be located a t t l * e n t m s e s t o th e stand
                                          t o m aintain o r d e r m required.

                                          i t i a s e 3 (A fte r ' a a tcjh )

                                          Remain tin


      I'EM * • Sta
                        ch
      I n Gyro
                                                 t\* . ,, ,.-         .v.v * fl* mt ion arising (Indicated at
                        r b r i e f ing   *         ;u    ,v,»                            f 5 )         ' * " t     ’
                                                                                                                    V              -   i *»
as                                        level of the Smith Stand will ta
            *T*                           xnte * >      ’                     '   i ■* s'* -           *‘- '*’-’*         v
                                          Those cxi duty on 1                                                           sue® tto t uscxt
                                          ,» _            X               »         < s ti <             -* “

                                          F u r t h e r   i                                                         I

                                           /' < 'I J J> <v* • ‘ * j '‘<> -                     £ ’*'                    **'                   ^

                                          O ff; ><■ •%v O 1. ."' -- '' * c in d i-                                            *'   lts
                                          a t the sty."     ft‘ ' •«ty.
   SitidMA H

   ^                                       *e s             „_„™            ^891
                                                               .*^k-as«KaBiSm         iatfBWL
                                                                               &80e®8SS
                                                                                      WS®SS®S®»«S3a*Sw*<^®ss>sW
                                                                                                              “-• * Efei
I I fC 302 a l t e r *                          .
  I] x »<o ^ r . ' ^ r
'%) **' ,r-
                                                                                                          ■ •••* ■’ •                        "Vif.
  #1 * ’ V*i ^        •*                                     . ' . - • > •                                 ':'*- • ' ■■■’ k *
  M K ,;*         ^ to
  61 ,< » fcJ- - »” -: *
  I t PC ;2§21 Hx*i
                                                              ■ « ? «■'>
                                                             ‘; ; r .
                                                                                      „ > v .'V,:*; ^   -x: , - v : W '
                                                                      * v ‘ u ' . ;s. ” si- c ' . v , ' , - - . . - - ^ , , 0
        _____________
       ^ i } M »*fi*'^y                                              t fcowl.
i f ii K k : * i *>•’ ??.                                    Cl        4 PC1* t o p t r f . i n t h e * £«* b e tw s w i t h e § p if *


                                                              «>         * ^                                                k          *v\ff ; : v :                                   t.
                                                               -       ft -                                                  f o r veha*' ‘                * '       -   '   ^
                                                               3*.



                                                               i n t o •*•» ■<->.■,?■■■•:;■:
                                                               ,,f ,-«» ->irk after half t»>                                                   s*enax                             »
                                                                r       tt<?      1    iw«<                                                                                       \              1
       WM*
       & t§$m’'iC*                                                            * ».<• *..»»<«                                                               v ‘ C-,-'^.
                                                                v e h i c l e s un< ■! ■• 5 • . - '                               * '■ ’ •   ‘’ ! ' , t t o t                                 •vi;
       <n*n <n> r>. r * * ‘ V
       p e r p la n a tta ch e d
                 ' * * >
                                                                 m i M s m ® «.                                                              JS!£-S^1
           S e ria l 5

      ..■ . ?,*. n ',fe.       "!                                  B «            1 CBe £ o ( re ,« td b l
           *1 '*-. u
  2 ) PC § 3 3 B o tlc y                                                                                  S S S ‘S                            ^          P* » «
  3} PC 4.99 C a r t ^ r L ^ t
  4 ) FC 769 Mute;                                                                                                                                                                p re « .t
   51 PC 313 1 t o e s
                      I tiictaes                                    . ■«        : -          -      .=■      ■■ • ■          >■       - - - - ' ■                '       1       . .    .
   "   ;     ;   ■»        ;   v   .   '    ’       -   :          C)        *-         *s t o p at*                         '-'        ‘                        '       ' ■¥^S a ’? e^
   ?         ?    .   ' .s r-,-                 )                                           • ‘ ?                          “ ‘ s u r e tije sx s e c u r i t y .            .    > t
   m        I
            ______________



                                                                                      :■;:::■ ;.,vs:..'V, ; . \ . , -: . , »..                                                         '■-•
                                                                               »\ , -                : !                          %          K‘J '' f'
            S e a tin g f o r b r ie f in g
            a s p e r p la n e rta d b e d
                             •T».                                   I M S serial « U 1 be tocatefl In
                                                                    car park and the
            ICAL                                                    W - < f ’ *'* ' »• ^'ri\              ^ .1 J           . -„>» Sout
               f! f ‘ ! >’ i                    t                   'isfl'n, -      »♦ ric and                /W'-~ > ' 1       '    >!
                                                                    Sta,/; i,-i'      1 ' *, ‘ ‘4’
                                                                                                 -'"' '•‘l~  "   . .; ^      it ' '
            i n gym .                                                                      -I’ .               ^        ^ - 1J‘ -
                          r* *i»
}\                                 Tr'i »       ;t4                              .r, i%- *,.               t;‘y* , ,* > *i
31                                  tt             t   «S >f <'*?              , ■>’ ./y V      •'nt'i ,*■* .■* ’ . ‘5 A >t
f i[                               >>'t f       '.i*' *       *   J <*?    '   ^ - i - i I -*t* / * **' ■» ; Stx- *1 r
51 JPC 31§2 fcm                    P & xfc,
41 a              ... #
?) /C W       -                    IV.y --•LI ^           ffflt *’•' -              '<> t,v. H «,«, l»y # 5 * .
                                                                                                              ’                       4. HjJ
81                                               r k4 ^ f o i ' . ^ i .                      > ^ *, t’owt ^                  *ta ste
n                                  mmatm       {i„«. *&th <”i 1 ^ j                                 ‘iteifig.

                                   //* v V s     *%\ I i *                « n t f        i   ,*   ,-te rjv f       .4        vac   ;a t
                                   fcran       ^ '» >„>*, **' -*<



                                   4 rt *« •#-!! ^ (>i it l'i, ‘ Al      >*'• ;s-v                                      */c -*tch
                                   to r , - ^ *>n v ,4icrs ®net prever .      < *.

                                   ^1 ,                ‘ *f<I

       & rfting f           ,,     EtHSl/ V ^Ai / ../ -            V,,/ t>r                  -    v.,> /, J    V    -        r tn £
                 an attached        v t 1 cane m i<-’             o-st «            fy   ,., :< «><*\ ->'■%?             '    •> «.
       (Appendix *T‘j                                  jrs.

       mm,
       5feal staggered
                                                                                                                                      \
                   wm
       in gyre                     :> *** * mat o f such a situ a t ^ 'i ,*                                                        "J
                                      1     ^       •'■   i i • *- - ,•" ’ ^ *'> - . >                                        • / f m
                                   the cer park v^'               *            e    v,>‘                                r-' %',^--igs
                                            ft   v                    1                                                       f ->J
                                                                                                     •dees - erwe.



                                                                                                                                          \


                                                                                                                                      r.i
       M        -1?         »C
 1|                                       K / « ',^11 ** V* *: *1 M                 -\h t u r i , , x , , m    io <J*
 ** ;c nr**-                 v.           ’ .        In ypts1* *o                    *- =»4      ^            >3 * ^ %x£t f ? W
 Jl    ^       J/t«? *, , TV              ' -        ' .*'» - ’                    itf » n ?;%*'«»
 1)    **      ^     <' 4 a               to t V             'A * f>  y *-\           .'l <’5 {- ’utey -*       '»j»to
 ^,    *’'•.   I* -$ ,% f,* *,            *
                                          fr *i ^,1 aC I*'* ^ ’-$A 1 „/ -'"H *»' >
 Si    IK      T.H t%. -a .%•„            -*■*■.- ■*>     *-’*<« A-*«t "f > ^ * .■*j«t ’v                      uf Qite
 n     K       1183 Sfest                 1 . M >■> > n <.5 >u          i’, <. N-.«   - n - i rp        .•**' •« * .
 A} fK r y f:: n>v ...            :p              m ? >*%'*                ** U     ry »             > !»,<•>». f,. -tl
 f i K' »*; *"t iV r t                    ff'»         -*‘ i    Jm-v \.   :*%'>n    >** n                   >?          «** * 4    tTH
m                                                 Lmter I w l .
                                                       I fX?:>r
     ICkLs M ter kidr. o f f
     Mm ®§b.                                    i/i in ground until                       .t*                    '*r«             -I a ll
                                          ‘ '»^       ^

        '>? ’ « f" ,-rb3
 ,'*fr ‘o          ;Al '^.;l

                                          I'trAi %l        .^I t l is A ffv v-i i**1

    PS 1203 Marples *E’                   r                    'j         ^^^*1                                                      *1
11 PC 411 I
                                                 i i4 f*    ^ I* )>',"• * * *               >u*i ^ 42 ^
21
                                           »r, ' ‘ 1           i ' - M to ensu ^ j,* •>* 1; ^ i e r i - v :% |«»
3)
                                          p r w i s e s do not                           ted % the ^ound
41 *• 1123 l « g r M l l
                                          i ^ S                etc., ■•<*     , n '*■’vJ; r«               ■!,
t;     MS Vet*
i l PC 3122 Andrews                       p*                    *_* -,n : ^ r                           i         -if :••<..*<•-: •-
7) PC2                                    s it u a t e d            ■ >, ” *' «. » '6 t o e n s i « th at
8 } PC 1267 IttifEr                                    ' -we a r c not tornwghu      3 th e ^sxm^A,
9 1 PC 3200 t o y
       2656 f&rtly
                                          Y     •^                                  s.*    jv,   •                  t- -    ^'r ^ V

S e a tin g f o r h r ia f i n e
as per plan attached
                *T*)
                                          Ic-'rr-
                                          cn si

                                          Ita e
                                                               ?«      <»•* >' j.-. <. - M t f


                                                      3 ( J l f t a r o a tcS i)
                                                                                  te» e t c .
                                                                                                                   ^ ! ./'- j s and1
                                                                                                                                          V
                                          •’ -.                 1 ■ 'j ,;         _                  n i n fr o n t e f tl*. , P # «
                                                •'4 ' «-        , , ’ •, tr a c k t              ^4 - i * p it c h
           It     Miter   hal f t i n e   en su r e th e s a f e :      ' o ■ u o f'              t ' - , *1 players'.        v
     i n gym.


                                          ;« V*-             o f such a s it .i. : » .»-      *» !>: ’ <■     ••      '
                                           «*. \ h ,n          * .s   j     a .rtio n j ^ '■>       5% . >i3. ^ v- .
                                          ensi).'       ‘         *x *'S *.•' >,,»      Further in s tr u c tio n s
                                                f) * '     \/i» - ad. by eon ,\ ’ ^                          o r r,*-                         -.
                                                    s sy ste m .
                                       f l »       SEMI m m *
                                                     n a a st




                    - tr
4*,--H     -    N ‘-'5 ' <**■*'

■iETi           ■*•     T * -.’v

,                     .'.          - '■•?' -*' >
                                               '*1 %'!"   . .....«*
                ‘        ,   r-'              ^ ' ' -     r “'    ?

'
.’i *•>* -t l         -r \                 *v*




y >e       -    - v .r - .s w o
CSEPK      -
Iffii                                                  - 3
Will
 ■ mi
                          9

               9S                  ‘fc’
           11      2 0 M UMidM
           1? fC a v#«, ; L,,<* ^ fr                   rt I*    '    '■%? v s l ' - *   »-*;-v-«*ife!e f.vi s.,'                    * '* - 1 4 .
           31 PC 147f C^ts                             •fxy v>'*1 ’ o ,im ,                       > . tiring i *>*■ ^ :-•*•-               -V. ic t
           #| ?*,: 33C2 Slack                          „■ >- -'.s item s prohib*^            •)   “>y   '>*           *1 *• ‘ *v ,*>        #      ,
                PC 3211 Sutcliffe                      <•'** ,   [. >f ,                     ..<                  ,     -r,■ j y •■i -t, *..
           § j r ' 173 IM Jjifif                         •"‘   Y< > *» :           1     1 uv * -             1'/ t-“            *oma£.                Eds
           n PC 331 IfcKay                                 U ’ 1 hw-               ;><.junction with Mauni - *r<~                      \
    I      t i PC ; Vi; f,,r„€
           n PC liC Firth
                                                                               t M s location.

          m a*
                    5

                          I
                               3




    I                                                                                                            ranee ’2 ’ >c> i*x *\ „■»
                                                       top.

            '     ' n /• Y ■>-? -.|                    Phase 3 (After wtdh)
           • s p e r p ls r . a tt a c h e d fUpp T)
              PEAL:      A fte r                       At the asrnmenc* r- -» <•*' ^.sse 3 H w       t x                           f i ,' « the.
f             h a lf t ir e                                     # i ,* ,„ t - r* * .j;    i S¥7 buses t                            '    > t
               in gvtr.                                K'zhi,


    I

    I
 I
               ferial 10                                                           scrag

    I                                                  R a s e 1 (Before watch)
           U    PC 3142 ifehfe
                                                       ”   •- * -         **./': V;   >    for turnstiV "‘-64.
            31 PC   §52 States                          V/. <«»               sons ente ~ t? >     £ •* ^ m* < ;
            4} |                |                             s - r: ^ shown above. The y v. r ,*v' ?**.-. 'r* '                                r \
         ' 5) PC    219:; Harris                                    ssure onlexiy qi*i*s axe foaied. This will
         ■• §1 PC   22T?' ifest                        % ><£..•      s f.r- ' -»•.    ^ ‘»nted OffieerE   are
         ■ 7) PC    94? Soiling                        otj duty in t M s location.
                                     sts
           fj PC 32 £ Jaoogatt                                                          i)
          -‘'I   5"-'     r* ,                                                                                                                     1\?
                                                       T            - *, #        >     5.r :      >     . ,• ranee *¥• to tim S p i a n
                                                       lop,
     I         ting for brie fire
          •as p e r plar. attache!                     B « s e 3 (After MStcb)
          :I                  *r*|
                 m*i
                                                       At the c a i i B M r a t of Ptic             r       ' Is ser .*, % s                    t -
                                                       the gn                                           ling of SYT Imises in
            kick off                                   K ) ; ; <-
          ■ in gy-t.




     I
    *                                     . .                           :
                                                                                           T:C p s i € '5
                                                • ^ Y        -M l   >            Y-.v/t,


        «    4>n                    »£*

         .1 mjfimr                              M      R SY           Y » Y ^ in ^ rf   <e M * V ,«*/. >1
3) PC »13 Oates                                 tun*' •’ iI ■'* <* ni  ■*             li-*v <<lirf ttMSt ***
*}                                                                      ' Y. ^ «" * -t? '*>t I'* v* > ,4*Y* Y           Y ;e
' ? »’* . Y Y I    ! * '..* ■   r               pcohib:r *J Yy " V *j„. iY» ^ * * 4'- --^ ?               Yc„,            i$,
                         kill                   m is s ile s J or alcohol.
n       >*   ru    y      *v
8| PC iSl?                                      9|      i '* Y \ k 4 '         M ^ <1 f>?‘- -vi -** Y* «PP»r
9)|
                                                                                itain o rd er, paying p a r tic u la r
10)                                             a t t e n t io n t o refreshmen

111 PC 31IS Ellis

                                                a«i      v *- * *,if V   1 v.,    *. i>«          u   ^     e «     *
                                                to aasiin ».;» n I ' » „oy'ng sp er:*i                        f:,
                                                sefres!                                                                  t
                                                year.

                                                ftja s e 3    (A fter    n a tc h )
                                                                                                                                 I
                                                At       *.?jtimencement of Phase 3 (Ten cfjutes before
                                                ,«*; *~I v .je> *, . Y ^ <-*. ^ Y >'Y y                 tio n a t            \
            Lt A f t e r                          *<t >              >*tse -, Yt f n *~  «Y . r .c i to
        kick off                                         r t E, Y !c r % ® t stp p o r'1> t       « \ •. v2
        If* $>>n.                               fmtering Fenistone Road.
                                                IY Y i      it> " , Y ' ^ 5 * ?r fMr.
                                                             fw'-t ■
                                                                   •
                                                                   ■■   ■i''■'<■•. >'■:: . « ‘■«                ',;...u....-,.
                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                    ..
                                                                                                                                                            •:V'.-:
                                                                                                                                                              ;

                                    »*

                           h   in                  1                            \)   I ♦* ’* *M1 !? " *       a.t £>                                                     of *Vf *0*
                   I   II ,v   if 3 r     %J *,r       -»                       I'-*'** •:* *-      *C  ‘■lit \he                                                         Vf5 ^
                       1! k              ^ ,;ii         t tr*                   tut 'V •  “' '? " '

                                                                                Aj .2 A S ’ " 1 V . ^ l
                                                                                                      - ; f &i ^       >j- 'e '« «U* *r
                                                                                ^ * c* i * , *„ t- t!      v- i. : /?» <r— ' ■* "•* ,«)
           J ;                                                                  tc * *-ist               >^    '.                                  : >-<>*. unrjthorised
                                                                                &G C&&S.

            I tf P
                 k: m *
                  C MM             Heywaod. *D*
                                                       -a*
                                                                                ft        2 K 44              1! '<? *           »    »    ;   -    <r-s     **u . t f t u H W ' - ’ ev
                           PC 3102 fiones ’©•                                   ?j P ‘>j« r * >ssw-* c-.«%3 t o         i>«r # -.f? - j v?ntedlr»g
                                                                                #>e f •♦ In _! * c ' «         <<< !>• ‘ ' M * ^ .L ittd tty the
               I " 61                                                                     4       '“ *. »% i    ?*, 1 ■9.'"' f r / T i ,                      ^ : * - * A k > -H
                                                                                a lco h o l.
               I                                                                C)        4 I'-                     KTs v j !                              I.^r-e k*/#l
                                                                                •,' «> 'n / i ;*srth " ^ -i                                    , <c |%x> jj              ' i: if entisr:
           |           Seat;.>;< f.. - c/ *«** „ >■% as                         to refreshment bars.
                       f*1*. l4 .^i     '.v-y ^'c
                       V*-' a > *T*}

           I                                                                    *l
                                                                                to e .
                                                                                          / F :'s                                a t Gate •O’ fo r dsrtias cw
      •••* vl


                                                                                Si        i f\. %
                                                                                                * -ft.* ^ -<«in a t ca r                            *%C ^ A ie s
        *                                                                       above.

                                                                                C) 6 Remain
       I                                                                        p a y i! w j>- . t s                    ^ ‘ ten' * . -               n ‘ > t e e * * ‘ ’4*

                                                                                Phase 3 {Ifter aetodb)
       I
    ■:■■:> y "
                                                                                                                                                   < n{      \> * --- ‘ :■ \ «-c d
                                                                                v > •* *f'               '< '           ir               l *<“'8C <?f                        *‘ft ,c'*4i
     I                                                                          &     .       “      - * •*' •'              ^«- •?• -ering t e i i s *, j v. ,                 i,
                                                                                                                                                                                  «nt|
                                                                                                                                                                                       '

                                                                                          ‘i •' ^ -<J'               •:> w           -                                                 , •■
                         ‘f> > > .v ■>>-
                         S , ' f' u
                         in gyro.                                                                                                                                                    (11
                                                                                               <% •..>»•            S.' : “> : k
                                                                                « O r + ■#,' m f-' « - .v.* f ,p     * '> g access
                                                                                \k ».*   >*.j>      !^ r-r ' hj.'7^       •* ure these
                                                                                mv r^i

                                                                                O f f i. .           '   <i                          ‘ 4- ?».*•<:.           M      ^ *;>■/ *>■
                                                                                Penist< - ^ i-                        / v , * . <» ,>* t                          . . r,       '^ s e a n
                                                                                ^*n.                                          «n»
                                                                                ftstter imtnctioas m i l be as directed by control

                                                                                s’r ' Ioe* v ■* vT: t.   v^*'                                  -• ■r J8ividim l points
I                                                                               at the sta r t o f tM s duty.


M
     1 1*•



                                                                           Ar   i lL
I
      S beU L    1)                                V '>£ ' ’«%>
I      >$      1                  %1*                             I 8‘
                                                                     ^ fr f - *U%
    1! K' i l M
1                                                 M          i‘
                                                           <\> ^
                                                                                           V          ' - -S >' th e Nartfc «ntr
                                                                                                      v' • 1H stewards ir.
                                                                                                                                                                    <

                                                  tupervisi                                                                                                  *ting
     I                                            e n tr y ©f                                                 - .'tj.,
I
    ?l       1170 F ad xclcu gh                   S|        i ^ ’'5 v*tl v..* 5 -                             <-1 ’11*                    ’ h tntratncae
     i) K     it’lC*   ^.k-.k A                                   *       - * /»s *            M * ’ ’ *' U t »t>                         ^
     '!      1C '-V .\                                            nt*v v ■s’       # ’..xi**-.\ / i‘
                                                                                                   ..r siting
t• :|        ^ H ' * *,, ,                        «n t r y o f uranithorised ' p s r n .
V   * '-8
U I K ,4 '?         ,., w . tl;
                               *
                                                  C|        1 iK (9 *UJ         ‘.-'I ‘•V                                  ,n\<     ♦' V               *, ^
                                                              nt&in c r f e r .

i                                                H       *> ** '<* <»-ij ’
                                                                         ■V          vc m ,. j i «t cf the
                                                 S ta t-i *\ ;>„*!vent miss ‘ >,* ' >ig throw n/Siard t ic k e t s
                                                 l*-.f                  t > the ter * *“ V   ^ 'V- persons
                                                             ^      r- %             <*, lb* •* *v >»: -fr.i
      s t in g f o r b r i e f i n g             *6.'‘ r l \f' . ,»#1                                        |
                     ,: •> ^#,-1
                   'T*)

                                                 H.H « f i ! V‘ t .                                       th e entrw                                                V~ '<d
                                                       n ta in order.
I                                                                 3 f After aatctt)

                                                 Renedn to stand                           w                   :.
I
                              .ck o f f in gym
                            :*'• v i a i l |                          V                        ,«rt

                                                 jr.. 5iv f - f j - t iS •• r.'h * s :                                                        '       lndicat<
                                                       *' ^           '■>,*-                                         .      *•* ’    »'* '              ve u p
I                                                r'■ - ? ®t         r- •< .•» >■ .i* ;                                        f, ,»                 ^ ,1
                                                 fr o n t cxa* - • r ■*', , -»•                                          -v., • -.> , '            » •.
                                                 are unloc ,*■             Ter ofi                                                            • .,      ,-                    •
I                                                                          .r ». >, V ' • '                                    «3         -           , •;
                                                 enst                               - iv                                                                                 ^

                                                 F U r f ■ >- .       '         ‘      <, ' > .m S    *   ,   i‘ -              <    - .-         .   ■: :   rant       . •
I                                                o r pas                                                                       s system.

                                                 O i l i,   - <•                *’             » - 1 Lnai    l,r f r.                         .         ^       ts
I                                                                                                        qr.


I


I


I
 I
                                       SOB-r                 f
                                                  (% •*> <w* #                                                 ••
                                                       '"^                                                '1

                                       U B fO B IMS T O M E NO NSW BCXfiGDE fSOtfttll

    K m i Otmi§GS± *»*                 lhaaa 1 IBafan «Btdb)
    i'C ''«j?        .it
I   ;< fifivi "*    *.#                T*->'•> v% *Vf v*,u ,  f‘at n v p o x t m antaring
    PC 136 SnaUmer.                    throu£i t e w                    tar in jesse ssio n cf
    *< 1 '^ * '* * ^ r                 itam prohibited by the ground rulas (hrsners, etc..
1              \^,.r                           \ >5,          '<>>?• V' ^


i
    PC IS Qoy
    K: ii/ft?        vi                They « B also erne* ocder is maintained on th e
                 ishingtss             t -•h:**&».
§J PC 1964 Swell
   1C 1 Q    ,i «

                                       K :«•                     *■? H *» 1                        iv «’« •               :*t ’-c <‘l
    1 4 j<? r*   V        * T ' . >n   i ' \   » h ,   *»   t V t‘ *    ” *           ^       ♦>   ^    f '   •%*.>•'-?    ‘         V . %

1 ' plan attached (iippendix'T1)       * ‘v'foiiad.

    m.M i                              Fhasa 3 lifte r- a B ttib )
I   After kick off
    in gym                             *'       „ ■* •* v _*           .**i               ters into U-;>                   "•' ’-* »e.


I
I Serial IS                            1 1 1"/ ,/iss *\s_ * . < K t                   w       ** %» t*r.unjfc

    PS 1757 tern *2r                                                              v?i)

I   iy, * ? *»' ^
    PC 1543 Aitkin
                                        r '« - *-»' #•!* *> *
                                               \mm ' '
                                                                                           „v1?rtt-<
                                                                                               ' / •-
                                                                                                          ;i,tersenterajng
                                                                                                        -x '< , -ession cf
                                       ^' --iB prtM bi                 i '-; w              , • »-    ‘       ' '*•>’'*' ■ »«*
                                                                                                     They wi— . al.so caisure
                                       Qjrdfcr is m i n tainee « the terraces.
     ' 2654 M.efa n Ssszia.

i
9).
    PC 78 Booth.
    PC 1675 Rich
              rd
                                                       J |1'f. ^               -,ri
                                       Hhis serial, will be located in the tunnel to the                                                A
                                       Storth ten in tl>.     ''ir   •' -   <    *       c
                                       ocder as required.
                                       ftiase 3 fIfter                 astsfe}
    KBIiLj                              ;                         ;                       t e r s in to              ,         “
    In gym
    a f t e r lalf-tliiK -
                                                             r m s m          >

    Sea1                                        mi. of sud* a situation arisia; indicated
    as per plan attached
                                       at 3.16 i
              *T*}                                  r"i ?                           i-: ^

                                       fXzrther i
                                       , ^ •; • , * ' er                 *                *        c-                      -

                                       O ffj                                                                      v 'id u e l p a i n t s   at
                                       ft*       s ta r t o f th is           d u ty .
                                     fga m m m m §


     1 • *t '6

    fS H I ® P#yo* *£                         1                **k*-M
I i 1C 3066 H utikstap
I I fC 2980 tfci*it                  *“.m     .*) * 'l v u t --a         • / . s i b l e f o r tu , **.* **t A <6,
3; X U-,r %.*t                        ^                                  ^ * -           ■ ', *2         *" <s' * < ’
4               u c k s ttp          ’*     ^ a • :     < - .J h f   IV     r   «r 41         ‘   <: ' ; .« % „ # i C , t
1 > ,<•' •-; & '* t ,f               • -v \ j. -*■' '•*'<’' ,«? (.., *'. /* •*}, *,, j- »v ' .                   ?«n
i l PC §0? T aylor                           \.W *                  V. i5. •/, - *. - .v nd.
                 vans
              D fa te s
 ?' -    nsk. ^ *»t
iCl                                  It .< .v- *| v*0 3 V, ? ' 4 11* l M, C * **- f ^                            V >1
                                     r e l i e v e f e r i a l 13.



        .j In gym                    J,* ‘v . iraencament of Phase \ >*■>" **<     *** t
    cfter half time                   tv - '/V U, ’    v*-*1    ^              *“ v _   >. &
                                     v~< <e opposite the tunv-f.U-* t _ *.«„* ** ,J >,:
    Seeiing f o r briefing                        s and prevent disorder.
     • ,* i “      •- ;
    {Appendix *T*)




    Serial 1?                                                    SHIES

    ?s   4m                   SF2'   H ase 1 fBefcaps watch)
 .1
 1                                           ,>?„ r ’      Ltf •- ;xansible for fuu’^ K l -j- i-L
   I sc 31*27 Ibgg                   f,tv                  th a t . •.                  -t r-’-
   } PC 353 P u lf r e y             ,,  ;•,<"/ -f 1' •*•• ?h j?v- '• - (.*" r *J * -’ ’ < '
  II FC S » E lso n                   ‘                 ain -- •• ’ *: • -we that oraerly
      PC SS3 K h itto n                 . - .«
 J PC 1€ W ilson
 ■■■I p r 43 K irktoy
      PC §12 Moore
                                                                itc h )
                                                                                                                  III
  -1 rT              son                     *i vl w ■\              '      n   *< X* the cent(“-u
                                                              lane te r r a c e s .

 : & z z x f o r b r ie fin g
                  tia c h e d
  see t e t f x *T‘)                 At *- > *f' . 4 > i^t:A of Phase \       1     *j i> k
                                     lesve ti* «/.'••’>*} on\i W"t'   ^ •„•- •?!'*- )\ is                               >
                                     Lane                    X u » :“ ‘                 t*-         i. :«• < >     ,
                     m                                           •vent disoster.
                          m
  Ifcgijiil 1$
            «W5»a*r


                              -V<                                 BaSoni m k m
      IS <” >
II        2961
          w ww              I   T*? •f2*             ~V#                *41 H he             ’. * <e \e #•». > * ■*■’'V                M .
21 fC      J 'l ’ $ r \   . \ m
 1| X- "if’
          S'i*              I o»
                                                     r •,          **•,*# 0->s .» . -                 > tering & K l t %
                                                            ^ ^        v, ‘i*        «.’** v'V        ; *>c.»
4)  m
                                                        ^ .-5i tt-",’-  %* *T         ■*>*; V 1 1 ’ detain
SI  m     ''*{'’- ?' *f 'i
                                                     .. '   ' *1 - ,•*    - / ; '' ^       ' ' *-*
 Vi K 159 Hftnh
7) PC 1834 SdTolfig
 S!
9) PC 29 §0 m m m A x
I©I *v o«*2                       *ir                This —r *a A m il be located in the tunnel                           to        the



                                                     M  I s''- >■?*' '• < *t o f Phase 1  ! i-' <-                      c'- vn * *
                                                     leave tl« 'jr <" u? ».J t W a       * f>r<                         '' -apings
                                                     ;,» V ’         <*     ->    ?' B S t i l f i S 1           '.•     ‘ of
  MSALs         Is*.                                 i ;»v     -> 1^ a'>*        v’-.- t‘         :>rdeir,
  after kick off

 ' *• ' 'i? i -I -'. **,» >-/,
 /*• ' f ’ v,             v-d ', v,,«andix *'” '}


   fe c ia l. 19                                                          fSWFIUES

                                                     Rase- 1 (fcfcae aetch)
     PS 3              ar 1
 1 ) PC i l l B o o th                                             ,        -■ v: , .r ■ '' *- , '                               *5
 21 PC 2963 Sinqh
                                                     easi. •’       ‘       '•' ’ * 4'  ' m *   -^r ,J                      ■ ^ f '•
 3 | PC 1124 P ra tt
                                                     o th e r s e r               ,   -     ' <              5 i '
 4!. ^ 2902 ftobexts
                                                     the            '•*                                                            v i- c v is e
 ,,« n- j., , -»
  7J PC 2 7 6 Itobinsac                                                                                                                    \
  V
  t •' ~ ;' *> j' ■ *-                                                                                               iiiE t il.e s       u n til
1 0 ) PC 776 d a v e s                               I                           taking refreshaants.                                     .ft
                                                                                                                            4
                                                               3 (A fter aetch)                                                '        1 '-
                                                     At the cxxTnenceraent of Phase ;                                                              ®
          Ls In gym                                  t'>                 e ci 4 7> ‘ . * n «■>_ .. '7 ’ ’ *‘ e
   a f t t v - i t -, v                              rouwSAaut                                           itai
                                                     segre^tion of si^f»rt.ers at that locatim.
 S e s tii^ f . h   <-* i ; ^
 t* '        .v s ^ -! " ^                 ^ *T* 1
                     *• S O M K S m & m
            n         <             ;:* c
     I
                               ?

                                                                                             * t \ K:i                             N , ”/l -4               Sm
        II '< -*! M                        • ■
                                                                                  :vc» iv<          ^ .A                       a* i*4 „ V.
       m.»
     Iini
                         > sw
           V.I fC lillWfbmtmz
           •
     I
            II V ^ 1                               W;                to
           ti m m                      mm
           m         i                              i

     I     ^         -**'%                  -Cl
                                                                     ’?'.<*      a »i : \* ^ 1 ^ *;.!>, % r,        .j
                                                                     *«*>♦ S »'S * K** f - ' -T,w f     *1' ;, . ; »> -f *
               MEfcL* B£t% z M A m ff ill                            /-'** *•              *** - ftl| ,4 ^ .h          i ?\> *’i
     i                                                               m & pap***


                                                                   •r>
     i
     i                                                                                                                                              v

     i      ^irut                >%                                                                                                                 \



,_                                                      *E CfcV*
 I
;--JI g1
,<*»        m 'tar   48m<»‘m ti» W8W£S%1,. sa^*,                     I t ’ ^    - - X    ‘   " tU           ?.-    ft   >>-,       >       ». , ?
£                                                                                                 ;. -h   ^ ,- ,‘-.t *■-.:‘-*,h-1
                                                                                                                                , *
                                                                     cm txol best between the South stand                           are
 * I A*              ~ '<-, )      i         i v                     LaaBPlngs Lanm? teES3C©£.
 U          A        *:••/' < ;l*
' M K                ^    <* ’V.

                                                                     Us dbowe.
                                                                                                                                                        \
                     .. .&


           p - -•«' ? «. -                     *                     r ••: -         i' ‘ >■-;* 1 ,'              |, » , ;*, • *Jan in front .,,*: i |
                                                                     fre *»■-                 ‘              perwstfr-^           %'»          %
                                                                          s <*’ ,>< 4,              iiraoiflr                             .*, '»'
            %9EM*t M f T m r half <e~*mm                                           rr■s' .* V ,?' •“
                                                                                                   ;        ‘           ,
     I                     Si.

  - SMtiag'
  I
  ;.
           *              p e r f la n e rta o ® 5
                                        •T’;


     I
     I
     I
                                  ♦ / * ‘#*t| „*> ' *4 • ! ► ; * * / * *r, ' *4 €>-i»
                                  '*~V'V " -"* ^ 'l'& * * * 1* V, v m " =■!.* * <. % * ,’4
             s? r"-      ty             - .*•*              ■>:*1^ *£ -                * v. .                       -vi - 1               1
                                  '/   ' ':    »t ,                              3                   • " * f • -. l i t / •€
    II fC Sli©                    Vif. 16. -•:                        ;*/-¥                          -4 4 ? - ^ tout©
    i i c i f i t im e            Ingaal afclte jhgtiMf
                                                %
                                                i»s32asi9*fg&
                                                            tqB     g
                                                              g“'ssjw
                                                                    wg^ ttmM #<sg$S
                                                                                  wsS'B*g©?'«
                                                                                            ||p«£Ss.
                                                                                                   f
    1 X: f « l


I                                 r*,sf • \ ,,'♦ *1                                                             * *'%
                                                                    !*J                             i«

I
                                  a*                      '•« M      .{              !„ -’'>5                            ^ 5*
I                                 «*s, ”«,', Xi*3 t         '*            v             *„             ’*>' •> e
*S>f * *' h # '           ^ m     *tf'?.:.l‘*c frc **]',;? ~*T •> y.'                          - i ^ r t '*>%* *»►',-. ni
       ••* - •?*? - 'v-C t ’*-#   any d-ssii of R fportei.
             #T*|



I
I
                                  voblic          ® ^pt -                               m p®




                                  »€*» twill patm l la puns In mjmrnrna£ maaS. tx m
m     ^                                     r<- ?.*■--*>                  ~K- *-   .:;■#•/ -'>i -< *>-.   ’ *
€1 PC 21St fean                           'V-,t          ‘           < > *'•**/-' *>.,'•'•» ^   , * > ,■-
                                  J,v         v     <■'     ^              1 v'. ", ^        -»=,   'm il       *          .    s f       1
                                  ^ - - - „ * ' - *. ^                          b§      *>*« '-«            *        ■     -.‘ -'
    1 W C €ftf B m v              local pijJJic hcMBes m&

                                                                                                                         .          .;!
                                                                    day«ii8els I * * , once                          etterisrf b f
t     ting for toifefiae as
       plan attached (See
^ p a a t i x *y*j                                                  ■stdh)

                                         *>'»-’;>'*•       - .s^* ,*‘ *- v           J, f j ^            *t         .«t %
                                                                                                                        r*i I <«''.           -
                                  petm l la location «s *owe, p ^ is c ^ r t l a d ^ .
                                   r              ' :h- V       »          4»'.J ^ f           it V ‘                     ,,4
‘                                 wy, .^<” 53.                                                                                        %
 • * * * * * *

        -ft         >-r«, * n *
                               I            K * » •*« ; ^ - ’4 V                 to             - ** *' <
                               1              v,> T >4        -,•>***, , *„>./* ? '*« '•* * *-                               Vr
                                              t >t , n t          ! v"t *J • < y *>*"'*' i ’Tl ‘                  V ‘~
4|      v f'^; ^ *                                     ?■;>   f -> „** >>■ if in ?'«* » J. ■»'**■:        *• ■ i'*
n       '< ' sti - *► wv
 h      ..<:'-‘
              i n r»     c
 ?|     <c ! s, •* --"*-
 • i i !*: n% * - 5 ^ - A *       •«
                                            v ,f - •       f °n ^ r ,*,i },n                         . \ 4 test
                                                       CZOl.
Saatine for bs&sfiag m per
Z* v ' * > * -J * ’ <-«*■ « * *
     r )
                                            On craroercafnent of fhase 3,       tfhis serial *ill fmstJ*
                                            pitrol                     ^         j'»vT‘3              »tion
                                            t;-               1, > *       „ ,r     ^ ^ %,-a any
                                                                ter*.



                                                                                                                         \
        f e r i a l 25                            .. .►I*#/ .. *.«              a> **-^              r

                                             W k m m 1 CBefacc imatetti

</il                          h              X'iS ♦' '-' jv-* V i' * * . I’' -i' f' '4” ’’ *' ^ 1‘ *'t
        \                     1              >;-,V - r> <-V' r ^          < >tf ^ ’ 3 ^               ^ \
■■3 )   m     m m   snit=.                            > |U                    *■ *^1. n*‘;I           ^ >
■••4) PC » © § M i M                         f c t t o l * m i l « i » 1*       i n th e l i U * t « m # i
■ m
-■*>
.V:t> FC * 7 7 Iteeks
Vl> 1C 1091 F e ste r

                                             llefreshrnents et ® 5t»»s.iwri y iw m auth                              f
                                             -“'i ; ■ ■> f
   >V a 1 - ,; l< ,x ! ’„ , >‘ ,A ,*-
;\.aian attached (See. j^ppendix * T    1    gl«» 3 llftg wtd>1
                                             £>, »■ v.“^ V - w M %*'              3. f» -*                  •*!'! X^SIJfB
                                             patxol. :                                                        s^ m ' -
                                             attention 1 *                     'o      ,« v, f a??y c‘^s' ^
                                             ®yHio«rters.                                                                ^
     .        .      t                                              w » » .j f t t e a a a a
If K                                       *
3 f* W          '*'il *
                                                                    A-v ^>1                     -5i I*.            ’» '■•*>"•> * *■ ■*■ *                   .
                                                                              ^ lf r                         '>/ '* -■?* ' >* > ^ '*>* *w -?                    A
n &                                                                                          ^  *.                ;r "i1 *•       s: :p t
411
SI fc Pit Rite1                                                      c           * v        -“ ^ ^                 n   V    '*,.   :   f
ii t € MM Q nm r                                                    -*«■',•;* -t* ft H
                                                                     , A       v ^          -
                                                                                                       '** "as '• & ‘ y' ^
                                                                                                   n *5^ ■•?     i ‘i t > j<
                                                                                                                                4 A '

7)
«I

                                                                     \> ‘r : V * f                       -* • ’■**   >4             ^                        *
                                                                    «rt                    i 9,*4 V- - .*.> “          /•**> "*'* 1 -*                       ''**
                                                                     "*,ti « 11            *P - m n«     -; ' ‘' * * r     ‘ %‘ ‘'A "



          :'*     •; f n          > '    r*~   V,   -A
 £* «/* ** >                            h" ■ *           •‘ *        ^        . ^ <r-              **f F * * *          r                 ' ^ ' ) L ;‘v *
                                                                              ;n teat: ^ **                                                         *    * !,tf f
 •T*J
                                                                     “if. „ f ^it any c la sh of r l-* I                                                / * f;

                                                                     be m»e& m m em paili.
                                                                     #»<
                                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                     wraaJFC                    -■ IBWISKlEJKj^                              IWC
      ♦V
      KgsswsaBg<
     -S          fiW
               ssS tSS
                     !aesaessIf
                             ^a®®!^

         ___________ l av gM f                                       B M C         1 m s a n j * & l
                                                                                            s- i ‘
                                                                                                 -s                vv,’ if/.                    ' '*              '* '-'r
 2
 z i PC 2SM Musk
                                                                      p ^ « i t « e » * W matforxm. It
 < ? ><* U ? i '■**'<.f t
                                                                      1 . n, i-t #          *« ?'! but                                  *. ^    **           ,     ,
 t: w          \.
 4     • **; v- :r»                                                        ^ Hv        ;«!(     ^                                          / “•              | r 11
 Tj PC 59® Stubbins
 £ i PC 1111 Stottison
                                                                         i|      P en isto n e             *orth/V ere toa d
                                                                         2} Penistone tasd Wocti&^FiAMing
  * ,

  »r* i
                  < ' ,' "4 *■ '*
                  attaciiedi fSee MgpmMx
                                                                ‘        31
                                                                         * >
                                                                                 U p p in g B    Ia n e /V e x e
                                                                                                                    ^                               .       i\i


                                                                                                  ^                               >•   "f ^ •' ',;' &           “T;
                                                                         cv                      -f 5.'»                    JV*          '?' ^ ■'   B            ’*
                                                                         ttiese roads.



                                                                         m x M until *11 « o m & tew c3«airf. m & ««««%*, to
     ten s*                   Wmhxm. zm it&
                                                                                 ^ Vi -'rf. l»i   ^ '■? *i"-‘ ‘ *,                        * r ”         '**4^
     a z a g g e ra d a t
                                                                          * t'          »'.o 1^.1     ’■»                                                           1 ‘-:
         L„                                    '' . w
                                                                          C ^ r*: i i                 lf%4V*            :V V ’ ‘-'--^*1                 "4
                                                                ■


                                                                    '




                                                 aM.                              to impgmiSM* ter ■wsiai
t l
     | ’K /*** C u l A
     1 >1
<    I          Vr^'5 ‘ u'tV *
                                                  ' ^ i "/ * * i-*                                           % *’
                                                                                                                **                          *
         ) K     *0                               -5 ;?'■< ^       '“

I_»> I**c              ^
                      • > «-**
                                                 ii m * M      * ^
                                                 3 1 V « **!" V ?                           ^                ^ ^
                                                                                                                   -- ~ ^

                                                 ll f
I                                                *> *v i- »«                                             ^ '**



I S M tin i      f a r t e i a f i n g as p tr
                                                            „ *> „>•, '. /. '*.. '••• V ■ "•* •V.'                                                    <*»
                                                 , ,     , r f h o u r <•» -S. “ ■' ? ‘ : >y 41 •**                                                     •• ■*
    p l a n a tta ch a d CSae ap p ealiJt
     tt . j
I                                                xeads.



I                                                                                                                                               fit to
     1CJULS* StaggsrwS dcring                                           ,        H j!v^- fc<, t V *> v 'f *-                                    ,*r,v*«l
     aatch »t CUtyuhaels Lene
     •to anaur* ©ever fo r points                 ;4 /                        i’*t ♦«' ^           ^ V                                                          ^
     -.in ft**# 2*                                                          Vi.   V*'       X       *' ** ^                                                |



I
I                                                 KKLXC

                                                  ■ fc— ■ 1 f e t e a » I A 1
           fS    1 5 * 1 fe fim M s   •A2'
     * 1 +< fi-*5 »»!•>'
     v !| 1C I l i S S err                        \ r. t*   i           * ^     &\    vV        v> ' C r ^   ,«t   !'«*      i 1'    - ‘         "     ■   %A
        4 PC 114 B rad ley
      31 PC !§§• fleidber
                                                  pravtfit assess                    if
     : ■» f€ 214 -Qoulson                          1!                          Sane/Shesis ton e
       ■si               am                        21    I^ in p                la n e /E sk d a le f c » 3                                                        »
I    h i                                           ? ^ %,k'                 «r*“ *. ' ^                                                           ,        i/|
                                                   tv„*               m u ~‘* * ' c-: *
                                                                                      .v ■t/-              ' ‘         ;
                                                   to * j ii t a iit . c « * r and p reven t p erso n s s m t m g «t the
I      ^ s a tin g f a r trc ie fin g
                                                   |i*'K >J                   * '•* ^
      v « r p la n a tta ch e d CSs
      :a p p e n d i x *T* 1
                                                   ■ m k 1 IStgfag.
I
                                                            n                             ^                        i,!r ^             ^                    ^ "
                                                                        — >i’ t*        > ?>?'’'■                                 > •'' '!i * r' ^
                                                                                     v v ^ : ’'‘ a iB crfer.                                                   ^

                                                                         (aftnr. aateii!

         ::pjtt5t
                                                                , .^.*1 *Vt .                                                                   — -' to
         ^taggasod a t OayWtaels                                                           ■' 5> v "                    f,’f ! t ' ^ ’ ,'               ’ ^
I        >Mana to ansure ew e r
                                                                        ^                 tJ twT
                                                    tane w tU «U «W »rt«rs. te«e claixwS the araa.
                                                                                                       ,1i‘   U      ', - - l ‘       K£'

                   ts lit R sase I

I
I
i                                                                  ~*n H                    ->V-#2 1-t i** *, . A W ; *! -y»
»                                           jv, >-,** J            V / ^ f                                              *.4 X                      A
*          m                                r,*s,                  «*u <* • ^                -#t u                  -i-*Ai <                           ^ % -ft®
» WC t i l K it wen                         * _* -v*.                                 h                            .* * ,r-« r*. # ■*. r,*** ;rjf
                                                 V ;a| V                      f*Vi v - .* *<>                                   'i ^ *5 *s“                    #t
t    i<:   v#t,f       v ,’~ ^                             H* i*if^ “ - m ^                      ^ ' m         ^        '*•* V           1   ^ y<r*             ^--T
                                            7*^2 -* ^                       ^ .’ * t                  /        5 * .4i                                  5^ '»
                                            vf— # *,>**»***                          *«                       In ~               f-? *^ *,<1
                                            EmAm-imm feiii •§ not fBin asctM to Eapptap I* *
                                            @r Wm&Mtam fesi Iteth.


                                                      *V * f. ^ **•? ' - ?'. ln ^,^‘f / *„-•* «»•
                                            A . ' , ; a yk' f      If        K       vsx r . y    ?   <\i*t'-3         '-«>*’ * - “ I f *              • #■     *} «
                                            ^■«V * , U V* U ’^ 1 5.' ' T.» 4                          '*’
                                                                                                        >«9 >i > -tv~■
                                                                                                                     *

tenting fcr briefing *                per         *< ’ i >** * ? ,                   * *    j. ■* n .,%                <: ui         *              <    1      :>,<?      m
f.v,' r
•ri
               a.   .-j r > *               ItV jr-v ^             *'■> •*'* > r ^ i«t«


                                                                                                                                                              V
S e r ia l 31                               fOKJC

     ' ~ "',1 1                  .’         W a t      1   tm im rn t d > )
IJ   PC 235 E ^ d d w
21   PC f i t L m                            n    *         »<*!        ~        \    l ' t>< ' ‘ l            '            ■n       C*' . i . i - '      f£

31   PC 2135 wnae
4?   >;                                                             •: > i “ >* " ’ *.                    i        V v                               V .<         I
SI PC 139 lengley                           nr>«»j v a :>-. V ' v 'r-.- -r",
#1 K 11235* fcftetiM                        y— r fn * e l — r fsE t Z B f f iC                   to « l l »                                   €*f L iV C Z p o b l
11 PC IfM MLth                              f v ; <■ v^-**                  ’..*% - ‘ ~ '                          >-                  • -'             '' "! :‘;
•    I PC 2 ^ S lisodcacAc                  ‘V/- ^                           ■/                                         -‘           Ik-                  *- ~'r'"
                                            ,        ^                      • “*> ‘ > • .                 m» ?                       -» •
                                                                                                                                                   %.. | |-
Saetinc fc r fariefinc
p e r p 2 «n er^adhed |"
           ix *r* i
                                            *V , n Uw> & ¥.                                                             *       '4           -^                  i*
                                            Tjs'i l« <*! »- «■■♦'                                 4 i              '        i            V     i       x~tz
                                            mihmmym wAll be                                 to C M ^ « 3 s Lane far aael.

                                             & ^        h i ^                           ‘
                                                                *' *                                                               >
                                                                  -H •-#                                      V ' l f > *at <**’
                                                                                                                               - >> > ‘tic
                                                                    > 'fi        Vc» ‘                                      v                  f f            -V .     -
                                             5 %\&j                     ij,,isr I V                                                      ^ !•<%*          # !,"*
                                             »    ^ii^:    f*c* *:               ^?ai- «■ /               trol.
t'
HI                              I             **.#» ~ „ v i               *« ^         - '..• ‘                   ^     ^           -&
                                              r w s *:«♦ * "‘,5 " *                                < * n » ^ »% * n y > ' * * ' \ ' ~ v %
ii i             __
                                              * , . , f ^ * ‘14 *M ’* *5                    j. *'*»»*
                                              %:* A 4                      h                    o *iy         ^       vy
4j                                            r         ‘.,t   - -r; , V '*- f»* ''’••* * ,*» ’' V ' *'            ^
 n         4<    \;< v v *                                           ••**.".* U *‘,^ •* 4 r',« * '■♦ *** *'r '- '' “<
 3-1 *\1               % ‘v\ ',\4X                                        A >,«S,      *1 :1.> <«l     ^ - V - '•'*
                                              :*4         •’-* f ^4-?      yv-« 1 '-> * V       * ' '*           #* ;:: u j
                                              %#                      ^    ^ * -♦ */ .« ***» * te .                                  ***.        -■. «* •
 *•'***' 4 ? #r '>■                   >$ m    ©r atateil.
                                     i **<*
A fptndI* ®T*J                                M         a K** v»t* <;4 w * - *« st ^t* %v •** *                                           * • 5 **' ^
                                              ■x< . *> <              ¥- '%%■ fM o ‘
                                                                                   J 4 < i> *5 *'f                                                      v     *
                                              *4             v\r^ i '            ’'
                                               » . > * *s                  ?

                                              »)        p ^ ih i^          i^f'*                                                                    r-*- «•*
                                                    ^          *v                « »       if    ^    > -^ rir.        ,# ’<             w U -m l
                                                    ^ iw tio n fa^siidM it .r iV                                            a         * r * i i 1 4c*
                                               <*/ '&> ~ t             ”'v ->'         *




                                               tk£m * ' * *                                 > -v ^                       'J4
                                              r^U?iT*r ?««* for                                      #s,st                          v 1 » ^
                                              y^-                 V       Vtti-n i«?             v*’
                                                                                                   *'',<1#        1   -i " r^         ^ n1'

                                               mrnse. 3           (After trib.)

                                                           --      -» . >r                           it '^•r*:,'               *.             S® t O l
                                                     s e -1. •



                       TM*                     wamxc m m                                        wmmmm wammxs.
                                                                                                                                                        \
                       Jls*l




'1    1    ^
                                                T, ,             v' _ i ’ \ i„' 'r; '- r J - /w' ' ' i , t ^
                                                t a u s t o m ■ » § Itactb £td» th e SraweU s e * « t i w S c
                                                2-^s^                           . ' >• -                 •,                 r%V-          r
                      !922 Denton              extensively
- 51 PC 2689 Laoey                              *& *?                           % ^              ^      * 'r’ '/ ‘'* i' ^ '‘‘ **'                   r
                                                                                                 I J*H'itaa*\            * »'                               >‘"?‘
                                                                                                                                                                lt
'•■- •! f€ 2063 Stevenscxi
     •#1       *C if* S>t*V*                    e ^ ^ t e i s A> not        itoms pKtMbitef by the f r a n
     ij        5^ r *•> ><-’-•                  xiOes (banners, « tc .t ^ s , m s s il» a «io*iolK
                                                ocficttcs m lil te looatad on s ta tic points *t the -ha*b
                                                ^ r.                      *V>                        ^                     S'V,^ *' V?
                                                »*’*..                     *•                                                                       *♦
     "vri                n*U     M
£'-Jfcpe«Iix *T* I
                                                        :. -*•, V * , i l       >**i»                                       *,>*3. - U - r              *'! 'j
                                                             »*, v*?.                            ' * ■*, -% * ; t.z-V.-                  •, t"! >* ^
                                                             f*       ^ ;f ?*>; '.^?..>                                         1*1.* f ,V ^            x*

                                                  H imc 1 tltfter 1 A )
                                                  O f f i c e r s m i l be s it u a t e d .in                 th e     l a c a t i c r j as c i% « r; fs :
                                                         :s I
      Iw to i          M
      f t 1241 t a s s s t t
II
il K        1 2   X2 Hon*                   -    ! t   -•         ^ \ l    - •,*>:                -• *   ’ *      "-:         •*
n     iC    V                               wj                >f ,,?,«*     in €N/-? ^                             *     <'*
m                                           Ji j             i# , V t                              % . ia § tfa t
%f     ,<    i   ‘ C   ft                   «>; »#          *> <** f a a «             '* . *                  V ' *S V, ''*
      I                        I            *< ■*- .*                                                 ,v - «, * ^ ' * ~ a
                                            sflf i1 -’*       1   „                              * ' 0 ***; ‘% ♦v4!,
% I A’                 ~A *i       ^           '* ,fV ; > l «T*1 1# .* 3-      ^ - - ' :-^t
                                            S eria l* IS m i #8      WmXMm t a £ .


                                                          m O ayiteels I**# tra ffic fept.
                                            At te lf time m il be pickcd «f» % Sort*
                                       a*   T    <-fev* *. % ** a? : <«►      5 > 'h   « •-» *    t **, s   # j   iK f i-     ijr
;*i       ;s' * , ter'--* ,>jJ f            tMwm m a x to Gktddbax ta f * fo r R s a l j f d u tie s .
                   •T*l
                                            U rn* 3 (A fter artd * )
                                            S u p ir iis t lo&siiisg of R ffo rta s rs ee©                                   i
                                                                                                                    IfeiSGIlPfU*SiijHS«




                                                                                                                                   \

                                                                                                                        t » \i
     '9 m m m


>i        -rVI             . , 7                              r.( -     - ' '4 t n ■, I -           jk*t ^        *' *; -£
m 1C 106 t e s
*$ ^      tr.5 ?.,• s
                                                              *J ■-.-•>*v?
                                                              ^ "J ^-'..a v) cl -X
                                                                                  i h * \ j, ,*■ i s 1* ’* *,
                                                                                         «‘%S y * * " 4
                                                                                                                      <*5,

n\                                 i                          '. »*x» V- %r i- -*—■* J^'A *r ; , f;»*^ >A vV
%!      iiUi          «                                       ^     ^        * 1 ^ ♦v*.         * - *'*< ’*'             r*
'it H V ^ % tfx> *f, >ih                                      %*'       1!* r.«* *"1 ^ * -A * ?.* f *> M J , ?l‘*a
 n ;-e ',>■!? ?.i,i,\ <o*                                           *.<1 **« v. V        ;; *'#     »<• • ^ f*» '***
*j < v $                                                      *5 ^-* *C *•? v . ;fs* ^ *s.




                                                              > *, y« ■fi.     -^V. t f N       i            k:           * •.*
                                                              v t l Swt j , J,k* § i y • > &< > *> 1 V v s
                                                              i«, *r i . >v* *r< ! **-v tn f» r - \ (-« max
V*     U *]   *',■*>   1   * ,^,       '3   a'* ;#^r f'>*/s   *<* l.«* ,v *.        f,v „ *           <?
*m * t ^       ; * l4 v , * . - ’ & » r i
                                                              fh&se 3 CMter »td h )
                                                              At tit* ooM m M flt cC Ita s e 1# r
                                                              V- H •• \t .$,# r.*:*» *. a t ?- </ . * **m
                                                              xwnSftbnit and a s s is t Serial# 1C ca£ 31 in
                                                              ♦,-•*:». , , f             • »"> t *     \«         * '/
                                                              location .                                              te w
                                                                                   '.1   • •.               ‘'    “* 'f
                                                              Ciay^»e.ls t e e to a s s is t w ith eas±. lo&dii^
                                                                 ic s .




                                                              Q a ^ » . l s Xa» m il te Kfcject ~ “Skt
                                                                          « » s fcr its. fu ll Itsacr: oo e l l ^ fe
                                                              Liveirpcol *s          t» ^ff'k - IIIS I         JE i
                                                              WFCHCBD. fciriers m il a lso te rrsilaible to
                                                              p*e^Bt

                                                              t e » s aast te a llo w d for persons working mt
                                                              th e m riaas pzmdses inclaain9 t3te !r®wery «
t j << I? V .*                               :^ -U l              ‘                 /-J         '**'« v w *
 |i ^ ^     ^ v                          <■ * :■-> *         k ?-•;•*« : 3* i., *•••'' t r * •: §
Vi    ?< v,<.* r. ";-■             the t n im • ! th A s lif S to ll* . they v U l » ,» !m ll
51 WC WM4, WmtMZX                      * ;•.'’-*'>* **5 >‘t? *1 V-. -k         V; * \mV *V, ft‘ 1
4|                           *||   law   *»T\        5“i>       -f'f ?*. '«>,* ^ •*
                                   '    * ss        V ,* * *•*! o*t        * .t* •?     **• «
• 1   t C 1266                     *>v *• 4'*'4   %y -’"ft      > *14 I *. V a t *, ->«i '<**’^ (
                                   . V    * n* ,.*.        ?>v. , * 4 «* V ^ ' t * *




                                   HtfrMSwnts nt Q a ^ m la Une.
                                   M ’ ftif't-r® %” *i U                        *< # VJ V i A t'A * - h
V-*- <-'§ *.,; b " #■' •           »»:<? vt*.* M 'Kr*-’ ^                 % ‘~i* ' ' •** t'.; “V*?*.** ?***•
• s p e r p la n * t t & » i
                      •r i

                                   F « r*   »v ' - **Jon at           & * % l v y     f ‘ i*t   ;-*, to *. vsure orair
                                   i« w,r ^                    *-*3 -;>«•.*•; f *» in a                            s^jA




'
:ferial If                         PlMUrc OUBBt - IKSiXS’ SM B*/                                            ■SCEPRCll



                                   fh                *.    *      ■« ^         *>     ►» { ^          r     < ’
                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                      ',!'y}
                                   Officers to «p«rwi*e UtvcxpocO. A^sporters leaving
             -1                        > * j, - , • f <-*     io n . %- «'.• 5 -v -
:BI PC 2547 fcrasfe                the wupportoBirs m£. calf mMmt %kmm to te rn *hen *
                                            m ,->v     *       ,:«.- *«        ^ :        *'•,r-A
      PC 2i© a                     wmxx±ms M il t e « r r a ^ o u t to ensure tt»t-»s»R^ft:ers
                                   •w                     Jt i ^ sion                           y   *i.\            ;\ ^«r
                                                             5 -     f ** '                *.              *«     v    .** -   «'*“ ^

                                   ^Bas aa rial                   Wm m a m ,                                    to tl* fround
                                   b u t » 'w f , ► i ? -r                •r',^       ^ -J ion.
ileal
;^ar plan attached ,&
             “1 “ }
                                   % f,                ls «!                    !'•                                       %
                                   tl . V U          c r ^*«          ^   i!             tS| *f/ ' ^ #V‘.,v
                                   ^                 « %‘             >v %,% L          1/-S- ( «        , k"~.
                                              vndtay

                                               3 (A fter aetdb)
                                   •4- .,            , *- ‘ t V ation te ensure ocder .is
                                    - fttainad and gue>. -   * ~     • ' »-•'•■•- "• er.
f I *•€ ■*' l'i  -V *v^H
I I ■*; * 7i t ;% V/?                            *-.**3 -**U ^                     m *    ^ -3# I4^,v ’^l
1! ;C                        ^       ,.. m       *.* *<A ^ '?• . *• *,4 £ -M !*> :Ji* + ; t ** ?i 1 '(, *
4.  ,K ; ^
                                     V^i                                                                   *v        '■* ;*• ’ '*
"i    *-“•>   -3 !'■• 'h-            I '     %    4 - ’- 4 . i     vl        -r v   ^   >   *   n   .0 , t ; -        ,**?«,
5-I   rC 'VI? ^       **                   - % .-%r * <«*» n .4                  t, £*.'< K
*1 K Mil Mi11

                                     MEmlMHtg at                                  Imm*
                                     it                                 r?# T *.*s •*■                    *u :                 ^
                                     ’              -«! < ’ -A *.* * 1 ,* ■•'*■> f .^« r ‘t; - ritr«N\f


                                     ftsiae. 3 IJtfur —td>)
                                 «   Si* up • position with ferial 20 infect of ttae
,"*   s'v     * t' v . v s                   w    n*^            si t‘« ^ i - f«-r                        u     k,   .         *
              •t* I                  j»;t\j5 Ia%                 ^ '<,.' ,   %          »>"*%         A       -> r sJ’ficials


                                     ■PDIEs-

                                      *v*           *tii >          j~, 5 n.» •*„ rv;.i'%' i ^ a
                                     ^><C •>-3‘J *x,m t-»-;5*• * t ’. '#•«•*               f”
                                     jAT, ¥   jV ,« , i*T S '<T 1 ? "* ‘ ‘ 'h
                                                  «;* tt '\. . »                                ,;-                       .tral
                                     entry.
i t i c i t e wtdMX
m < r:/j                                                       ^ fI *           '! i
                                     M w y r i «*eha* Ik Ifelifax llaai'feniatene
                                                                                                        ^
I I 1C I f f ? fto * la r
                                     ib «i        x a* *»' m <<"   *V’. -
                                     •>♦,* ,*« «?<? -> •»*«*                               ir--       * r, ■*
•1 m wmWmlMf                         ** Jy' ' ** t? -!?? v> *r*f
                                                      m apam             cr alcohol.
                                                                                      h    '?§         V .<"'**
i t ,k    :i
•1 PC S3S tfcin

                                                               lit eiiijw bttls lane.
Stating fo r tociefing *
      5   ’ v* » / - ' ■ v? t/ »*
Appendix *1* |
                                                                    .*• /f v-              '•*«■* ^     o • >’
                                                                                                             .V*..




    f e r ia l 40                    cdmh m a m m                       - wejim nap
                                                                                                                       \
                                     Stese i ««! 2 (Before aatdb moB. fiatim HBtctil

1! fC 2056 taster                    Duties mil he iflemical to and lerkai in
2) PC 3311 Infer                                 •     /       -<   1    v    "**'i   39          r

31
*i    />*, *„,o                                                                I
t, *c **; ^
m  1C 315© Itenfc                         xi *
                                      ,f„: *
                                                      A %
                                                           ^
                                                                ,        .-.It *’**
                                                                    # ^insi           *: I
                                                                                              h
                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                       *" ^
                                                                                                       -■ W        v
                                                                                                                       >t
                                                                                                                            I
7) PC 2338 Hassell
                                      w^mAMhnntt m &        a s s i s t Serials 30 safl 31 Ixi
                                     ■B in ta in ix ig s e s T ^ t a e ® off             a t tin t
                                     lo c a t io n .
                                     passed t h i s S e r ia l % dll Join S e r ia l 39 a n d *
                                      "I--,’; s.* <                          ^ *** i.>»* »>, ';ias«           ..       | *^

                                as
par' plan attached <S©e
                •T* 1
II
1 1                                      >*a ^ * ' * 1 ' * * l \    'Vs^#                                                            C -> ’*■'•*?.<'*
lj                                       S ? > U ^ * * - ’^ j f '\ v * 4.                                                       **   *•'■4 «*s* <* *
II r.          ;%                        In piiie* to artatain asSti:, ate.
                       \<h•"* ,«
1) ^     £'>*- V-s-
ii    JC * n                             **4i .** n v r *         1 a r-rin      * a >! /<» 0 s
                                         ‘W   ;r* t **' ' M * *C?r ’ <1 + ' - * * t ^ i 'h
                                         M5 t- • *• ■» ^^^v4j.! v                                                  >-Nt, to     V. ,’      s * '* ?
                                         for M i l .

      '’.v* f-.*' v>'-u ? l *
^                  - * x* <r;
           K *T I




             42                          imic c                        m           - H               »            101®




      r-    •"i?*                        ? .►*                                 .j D                                 ?%%l ’a> W             "
ill #C : « e„            f-*r            **,, #■ r 5 *5 £*.‘ *;"*« >•*; ~ .>), ©ff< x s                                                        * I *** v?
it    **:   'J J   A * ^ ’l              |r                                    --fx. ‘*-n,t >h la t , e t c .
51 K 545® M o u itfo r d

7)
SJ                                                                           i 4-i                                • >V- . t *‘
                                         ta K                 3 (Jlfler Mfecb)
                                         ajjmfswaasBaaiSBBMgigaMgsaSi^Mggaesaiftaaaag^ssgwgssM^aisgaBgBaaas^sM*


Bmk£s s fo r teieS in g                  fa ts o l location ©utliued atx**e.
• 8 per pLirs attac£»d CSee
                   •T                                                                                                                                 \
S e r ia l €3                            WMJg « B . -.MLXFNt i 0 »
                                          r-1 > > , * ^                                                      !        'Y> , ,    X      ' > >\
1!                                        ~V              i     f                           ''       *     *■ '    'V ,                      1
1>                                                                                                  coder, e tc .
31
€}                     M t b
SI
m                                                                                   a t t e f f i c Itepi.,                                      Lane.
1}
•1                                        a — a               1      tm           * - m srn t)

SkpU'x         f .,-               *r,     K r'i                                                         1   «•’'"j
p e r p lg r e t t a c t a l I See
JlIWfl&E •T* 1
                                                                                     offliceea M U amuse tte t liw expocl
                                                                              - m ? :'' ■                         in f ~                                    ^
                                           %-          r^ h Ir                                                    .k, ^              ^ « te s.
                                              '"'a '-

              MA
 XSSS^^SSSSt..J3FW


1,      * r^                 'VI*
 11 K ‘ ?:*i ■*. *■:-«<.. ' 4 *%,\i
-if , < m   v    «          hi *            V»*                 ,<f, „r| ^         * ,«{ y u % , ?.& *'“■’>>      -   ‘* 1
Ipf                  ^*<4   ,*   a*        *••*,■?;* cfr< , , 4              *>fe *n#         a -/ itsM m m
 ?*     *. ' - i      ;—         %1
                                            *'* " * '-    »V> “ * :,s * . \ >|                                               ^ 4
                                           ,„* ** V*\-s ,V-        * :• t ;< ''»!             v .»v.'
1||
                                                                                                         1    ,


                                           x;**v    J>* v * ’;* <$ j & U v*              ^ » t **i           m
t *)                        ?{ > M ^
   I «<* i <;5 o s      ^        %\
                                                     \^ '> ’*<* * 8 ^ ' <**^?            *4   ^!‘- V i , ,v« ,v4
                                            :<'Vt »*«*             .**■«* * €     *:,»! .j? ?*♦ s
     1 > ' ,2 n f ; v - £   t|                 '#!,. « V ,1    fc,* •’.*      i’' s 4 i ' ; t U* ,«»■                  '?4 *
                                           eumt.

                                           '£ * ,f % ? #,l «<!            ’■**#.            ‘ ft! r’^,
                                                   * * f ' - ' n ~jf %’
                                                                      * . ' )%t         t !*« it*f influents
                                            */      *• «tj .<*               fc* *A r*T'      /-~V.?^ action
                                                           Y «'*•*                               %      •*
                                           tV ’ W» **-* f* -t, „ M } \
       ?>. > 1 far                    „*
        plan attached
             ,f ,|
                      (SEE                 ♦.*>1      ^ 4 - <\ -&              -%..•*, ^ »„-< >j *f , a
                                           V' ^ t , ? #,n                      ^ , -.% *             #: r ,           t»3
                                                   -i >iv f ■-??    pxiA^c                                    ^ U)




                                                              ^ ,t? * ^*;ic SJept., ^ I ,                         r\ ^ -

                                                     3   (After aatdb)
                                                      e'^              -> i ’ tMs^                   ^ I ?‘
                                                         l t # 90   and 31 a t l ^ p i r ^ m             trs ffic

                                                                                                                               \
                                           *^ ^                       tt*ih. >*«       ^ ; v' , '-fv n ‘
                                                     if             ^ On         >Uh                    *» *•'*£
tfSf'i -               ,** : u              ,\} -;* *v .*                        *~A* ,vf *»<*
^ - s ”*       'V    ^       ,      " >- ' \ i   I   ’ '<' *>                 "C ’ f   ^                * t
' - *;* > -                  V * * ? *r.* *-                    * •* ' %•"! n
•ttfBTtlKB.
'A ; s ^ « it                'IVx4 f-a ^ :t O * ^ 'e v ^ M i « !i.',/ 4 1
 **.* «*           !^r *A ?f« \*‘t, %*'t           ?K* if*A                                               t   «
a€   rt. ~ ?«| ,*■ V*      ' v,t^ >»ff *”>>.*•<! * *3
ooMiteraft f i t t® ottaal th is m m t.
O • * iv * tl '< ■'* *                                          ^    -         * ‘U f :•'■*in
n> <►      ' t >    , t;     -* f    Y       Jr;'    .if    ?S,rt    !« \i|   V if lW O O S ,

             > ■* ♦* .’.. v* > '* 5^ n!'^ . >- ^ " ’*'5 *’>-ion
               t''|r       *>«; .      *>            , ^ ' » , ‘? ? * ■ «         ^        r a i r# f
ttMn to the smarmy.
Ml sV ‘^* \ \ll *•<>    *,     Vt/J- hB * 4 *!''«.'a
{L^ %l !x / a/ »' >a x 'V a f »*'<'- >*.1 u tV      \
                            ^ <« t iff ->‘1% ’*                                        tt‘ HifVfcA’




!ir>:. v, 'fltS at ' .*rH                                  'W*>,                             Yk*fr
 lt4? t* -,*■•, * * !% ’ ".If] «.'.<• I’-i-'O Cities
       j ••*',.  f . , , ^ 1 1 ^ * ^^-Jjeursit.

Ehasse 3 flitter aertdb)

Imujct Sa %Rdeers3cy « s acMXe ailt»
 Pi-
         m      t m i m u *m*
     1 »C t t § l flMftte
 i   1 PC JO ti Murrllcw                            fM » a t r i a l m m p t u a i ttw StocUViCid* « » »
     1K         31 tt f w «
     I X 1011 Hsrat
                                                    paying p u tio ila r «t!*ntion to n e u r a l irv*;*»s
                                                    w d to «a4ntain o c te .
     I #C H I


 i                                                  fefnafonntf •! C^f#»tls Lam l . ) 5 p l , l 5 « 1
                                                    fettlM* paUfll 3*1%*!.
 i
 |f » t      t e g fear* f e r t a f in g M   mr    ftatzol to * » *» a*u.>»d in                            vimm           i„
                             is m
         1




                                                    IfJJIM,, « « » - om„                        sicn               u p*
 I    *s «8i          m m      ®i 2 s                          L J * ! * !                                                                      |
       $83 Cfevris
    *1 K
 21 PC 23?® W g^ster                               This fa ria l will Pfttrel the SmmcmrML^ *OwHny
                                                   * » , ^        p a rtira te ' attantion to liaess«l 1
                                                   piw tises and to a&itttain order.                   *
 51 *C 2628 Q w :if
 I
                                                   lte^ieshnenta »r                                    La*, «ftr«t!wt                       .
                                                   *%■ &.a             Kill,,           ffcfTuI |>< .,a1* tO <|T
 I                                                                                                                           »




                                                              3 (After Hatch)

                                                   ftetxcxl in araa * out Iin*                         w Tbm-t- 1.
                                                                                                                                                    \
 iT ,           48                                 MA'iK                                rw,>
                                                                       ......................   f.im      ">”*aW    nnwar
                                                                                                               «MK l»g» ®®»8WSS®



l                                                                                        tdh)
                                                                                                                                   %.       i
                                                                                                                                            I|"*
*■ ) ^        l? 0 Hi ants
                                                   Tbrs M'tial          m     if p**wl the tfadsley/Kiddlewood
     ________ Staoc                                                     p a r , 4/* d a ; « * t e n t io n          to      J- *? ^     -
                                                   p r e m is e s t o a f t in t a in o icd er.
in

 I
                                                   tefxafitaanta at G a p te e ls Lane a t 3.15pc.
                                                   f c s a * p atro l a t 3    an above ansa.
<SSrff ti’<g f o r few xe,.T;urtu *ts p tt                   1   m tm mltf }
IF-                         { W     %fiewJjjt
                                                   A strol i s area as                 out H ;* * J <et# * v * ,



 I
 I
     •V


                                                                                                *****


                  n m i                    •Q    1
1    11                                |
     m m » m wuxtmm                                                  »»trol FwhUl # m . saj-tng spatial »tt*-jan to
     m m J33 Q tflv u                                                U c w ta A

 i l l        Jc                                               **

                                                                     WNstl at !,!%» at Or##nli x*», tn&Sis ®ipt.
                         *wr f e r U f **                            fettm pttMl at                 ffeahiii/ftwftan C r » m * .

                                                «*»
                                                                     P itm ) is* arm #* w i l i f ^ In f»*r* I ,

 I
 “ r b d 50
                                                                     £***«#§ ,W » ** CMl SIGN *1RNGD FIVE*
      %       2     } ? ? 5     H a H k r * * * Br Sc*
      1 1C 1624 Lurd                                 fen#
      1 fC X*2 Sttitell                              | tTl'«
I                                                                    Putfol Pferson Q w i » , payxng *p*:W:
                                                                     to M oca**! pranovn to mMtmim apSer,
                                                                                                                                  liters


i    ■1 WC 1106 Ttottob                                  sdi

                                                                    3 0%«r            M m & €jrms/Fo*MJJ ajr*a.
L         itifaj, f.ir !>'i e f i i »                               *"
                                                                              « * 1 Ger/dmis iMvm, fruff »r ter. ,
                                                                              jptarol <,30pm.
 J p t " plan
         J&SO »f t & :? • & )
       „^.v
        ' ~ M' 'T*)


                                                                             i»tjroi * fwtiliwr! fe                 l»
 I
                                                                                                                                     \
                    51
                                                                    ffWU/ J f W .      <             '*& m \     H \ ‘
          ***                »’» I* *t*y    c^i'«
                                                                            1 CBedEote *tdbj
1         2 :£ p
          9 C S M 7 "*•
                         7

                                                                    ffctra3 €ro aside are#, psy-yic
                                                                                                                              i l'3
                                                                                                                          attention to
                                                                    li«'»*re &"1 jpry*r, *.*. auI ti wnw ,>*i   i k, i*
          *"1      :'7'* ^.k»!         B        StA
          SPC 2fc-09 Mai-sa.% jfc Sdh

A » t ii*y f*»                                   #s                 3 . Pip- «g»#J   Clayuheejft i » * , Tyfcffu: tfert.
                                                                    3,€5f« jsewtP ptiuJ
Pjr plan attached (Sm
* | f * « * i x •T»J


                                                                    Arpxa patrol as outlined in R»s# t .
 I
 I
 I
p




       M t i t tojS&i&smim *C*
 U K m
■ft  i m % »»                      mil m s m            m   i   uptrvSii* th»             «e * k , n b & m
p i 9C l i t § M t L               tte m t mmtwm «t                         iM*| ** Gfcup? vc*t *3l
  J i * l* « i t a « t             «n»ur» fla t tqgxM tart 2am im § tfw miAss*  ^
J S ) i c m ? *#*»•-**             frmi«» its** prahSbitad fay tte pm**! xulae I t*
                                   bm naxt, M v c m f ■&»*?.*» «r *2**t»L
" » ) K I50» Mt»ii
|*    *C W  OMrlng                 tS   L ^ T   S   S       **2 ? € tm rl—         J*A « the UortH
                                   #M* ©f ftecrlas fea9 Sc*wth anff fetaor Jfcrtoj l * * .


             fc r fe y w fi^ *
I p e ' fiter attached (sae        I M W w i r ^ * *t                       |»*#          j*.*,       ».
    %P«*4ix »f|                   ftwif'timr v i l l be p ic M t? by SV Vok^x e a c h md*
                                  titers to fenistcne Hand Pfcrtti mmr t© Gate *0* SKrC
                                  f a atandty duties.

                                           1 (Jtftar aettlhl
I
                                  & l* r v is t ^ r f in g of §i^poart#re onto

I
                                                                                                  *
          53



I   # fv %%1                     ® »s a erial w a ll sv fe rv ise the w t A fi * ■•; t>i **>rt
                                 ftesf.f oa«#»» *t Hen ir% P,<&$ Hur Qtritje. ¥*,?** will
          l€3 L m tM i           •m m * tt e t « c p a rta a leaving ft* tmdbm dc no;
I
§3
      m mi -                     P « « itij« ponhtataA b> thr pr *«»• m?«*r i . e l
                                 ^ ® * * x s » *&apons( rtsille?, tM #Ii'>,#sDt. Any ^ . w 3 /w
                                 w i l Ip* tftwurf to pat* ^ ?>*>               #7i   |lf    Lir
I                                Itesd South m i few*** % %**>, %^
                                                                »tdb)

       r«r *er bi         «$                    a t C l a ^ ^ l s Lane, ftafi                   111
     jpLr. *H^ciaw 5             M   half-time nill be picked up by S? P, inp cr*c? a^,
                *TS|             ta k e i tc f%'Jstcfr R-ar?         I#,!!    f,-. r S-m'X
                                 f« r 4tA’»% AitMS.

                                          I f^ te r astch)

                                                loading o f                     onto o»dhie£.

                                                                                                  %
                                          ' M m m k » » * armi               few* * I I t #
                                              to H ? ^ k » ^ * » « ? if« ttciM, wt, jf,           t*
                                 • i^ ir t ly            It*            l« p? i«#.r #, ^ ^

                                 SW             w jj              «' H en     9km^ »   r*» c f;o » .te
                                 aid* te tt* ir gKPsge.
p
                                                                                       f e M f V

I
           lo w r n m                      M t U I « U «MME» t t * t t e n * I M                       fe u *
N          t i l l rnmm            ftPftlM ck ar of M l §«%*t i* *                             iiUav H*
                                   I E ™ 4*#®* ®Tf t o * * a w r * ^ f e t t l e d * § « « % » ,
                                                 A H qnXcud an th t fbrtfi » tit #£ this                        jpw*s
1 1                                JjjwJf* J m m r n          * ? « t F * » U t w » fNgj fj-* the
           » « « fcit*                           Stttlan.
           W04 tfcylor
                                   ®»3f *dU BHpuviM                                   •id «nr«* tr*t
                                                    « * got to                           o f Hums pPsM M tuf
f              fo r Urlftfing     *y u» pnasi xiom i.«.
        pit flan                  *    alcohol.
                                                                                            m § g o m t rn S m U m

'{to* «c*at*AU « n
                                  9 m f  wLU «Uo Mpc*tf*M th t wOoaiing of « y
                                  It* f.in£ww ©Mtdms wht uny f» 4lr«.'ftd to unload and
                                  P«k on tf» hard s l i d e r in thi* im* (truth side)
                                  as an im k r O m fra®other parted loorions.
                                  tefM liW t* «t O qr***l» t e n , Traffic Dspt.
                                  M    M W - t w m will be picfcw! qp by S¥ f^lk*
                                  and tafatn to VtanUtont fto*! 9ferth osar to SHFcY
                                  CM* *0* ft* itanAy 6utJ*a.                       \
                                                                                     *
                                  ftffeivi** kfttding of M|)pox tisrt arto coachas/buMs


               86
                                 52b?*. * € T S P n , ^ ^                     !TJ^ S W H

                                                           t c 1^—
                                                               h lfat
          2467 Q irfccr *C#
          ISM                                       m il be ten,f«® #1 the > * rtjrn o f I
                                 » r i® t            mg           ta&l &vfJ* ti; « m ff« tha\
                                                                s?r$' \ r ^        #; h? &,               fcir
                                                 to the *        perking n o s a t B n bus gozage
                                 m                            A-       w . K f l w i C , ’ I* lUffc             *c
                 ta ®
          33? BaJLdwin           fcwson S|»r3J»s
                                          . . . fcad .                                                ,    ,< t
          ?»    fetes            Wxii ,t e # s ,  - r                  » v i i l    be 4.*»nst't«f to the
                                 p s ^ ^ n g e i'e ^ if f t e » v f , S jjr iiK t
    "                            f c / Will * f t i« ll«t                                     TO? W i]^ w itil
            faf t * f » f ln a   «**y -en? Iji tlr                                            «t«.
           pi**- m t i m ’M
         %TPwi3ix ®fs|
                                 tefimffww* at Cl«yMl*ael« L&ne, m affic t o t . '
                                 I f ftfelf-tinfc w H be |**r>«d «p bf » W i«
    I                            •nd W m to
                                 Gate *0 f fot
                                                     Iteiston e
                                                                   A & im ,
                                                                                           * a r te

                                 Wmm 3 fu ffia r t c i i l
    I
    I                            &^f’
                                    #»-.„?te'
                                            rri#s                     'U>      U   Jr*     f^r»t.' *$$j

                                  '          ^     ,* *
                                                        L
                                                      T' »
                                                               * ’ 1 * * ‘ ‘^
                                                                 ' •*% **'' T" -'
                                                                                  >:v' w      t. 5,„ '
                                                                                    Coerhes v i P be
    I                                                                               r --.;- --' ^ ~ . I
                    *^5                  #en     ’ <8 r v W i > - « _             »RDC HQ ®


:»1   2    ' - ?W 3 T<iif
  ■   jC     C tO !>?/,{-                       ^        ’* " *
                                                 r *4      vi U                e?t yVk^i, J i ' i
             li$5                       ??*,>U^cv •» r^ H           ^inj t v r & s to fc^e-s i \ i n j
                                         Rwti»
             §??
* 1                                      K ’« « i n m       m      eat i w n m         Um-jg
 P-7, ?:'* i 1'-:-"                     **» tu u « do not p x u s i l t n j*sMfc.ud by
 ’ * - ^ ^ %i^ }                            p o r t zu&m !.«» banmrs, mapcrai, adssils*
                                        or alo o h o l.


          fr,| #- c N i p ?             W T v & n *:tU      n     C k ; taut* t o , f y ? ^ c
 ;f ,'                              .   M M M -tim          wiH i t pictasd by Sf Poli=e coach
'V                            • 1       mti tmkm to ta ista n e Hand ftartti mer to SWPC
 I                        '             Gste *©’
                                                    3 fA f tr u t t l
 I                                      Supervise loading ctf“supporters onto cm±as.

 I
                                                                                                         I

 I

  I
                                        S ^ *" • *Blis 10883                be subject tc
                                         Jfc>              ©x^s          only sinl Ixbk i
                                        • tc .r ^ U ! b e «Ua«d to „L k. t a S L I I m
                                        also be sv siM » k for erection at tee « t r s »
                                        to this road to control entry.
  I
                                                                                                             \

  I
  I
  I
  I
  I
  I
I
         msmii
I          m irn Jetattan* *C*
        II PC 1113 Rockatt
I       i'l> :* .* m                      Thiu hitisl 'rill fet
                                          R m 1 '« toad PC’S lii r*ixit tors r * «?*'*">
                                                                                                for f?>ux’ilimj

        I I IPC M15 ftsrtasfaxi
        <1                                wfc&jtt to tet FS' ?, W w PtMAc &xsfst to
        S! PC 26M                         w d n tain ©eder aid ensure th at jviy
I       *1
        "5    'c \ t m t A i t ' ..
                                          g s » a lc ti« » «r& setfoix&a. fiixvct Sbttinghan
                                                      m r f t T s t n a P% ^ivete vaMeias to
        91 fC 1539 West                   p u tt J a location* to sid t roads.
I
I                                         Jain W M i c a ee*cti in P n iste n e icaS N v th
                                          m a r to SWFC Gate *0* for standby firtias w i l l
                                          half-tim e tfe * wiH be taken to CLrj'ahrols Lane
I                                         fear s e a l.


I           Stating for briefing
            as par attics** plan          Ftlrol In the ansa outlined stove r : eaintain
            CSae Appendix *T*)            ortler.
I
                                                                                                                       \
I
         r^rial 58                        W MC CKSJI -• POSES E3W
    I      PS 2928 Wi,l.laanson Pros,
        11 PC 1966 Mitten
                                          Yhds serial mJ 1 I* respectsft le for
    I                                     Barrie* fetuS IK's ia pairs) feast =ae R v t Axches
                                          Pufaiic ftouse to the traffic isle n c saz tt* ^unciion
                                          with Mbonshine lane/Shiiediffe *asf to mintMm
    JJs! PC 2323 Kitten C                 crfer and ansure tot any p&rfctoa rssrttirtions '
                                          ace enforced.

    r                                     D ln e c t H b ttin g h d flp F b r e t l f n p p o f t e r r i n j r i v a t e
                                          ears to park in locations in side se e ls.                                  »| ¥
                                                                                                                            '



                                          Ite       2 f   During      a e tc h )
    i
                                          Jain S¥ P olice coacfi in Penistone lead tb rth
                                          near to SWPC Gate *0' fa r standby f c i a s u n til
    i                                     h a lf^ tin e tiisrt « J 1 be teJetn to tt5 3 * a e ls Lane for
          S eatin g f o r b ria fin g
    r       paar plan 4EltrtlIIZ9C53C^3
           fSitt                 #l f 1             3 tltfter ■ateb)
i
                                          P atro l Iit tt* area w tlineS above ~ casdntain
                                          © rfer,
    I
    I
    I
mIF*u
                                                                                                     •e*




 I
u                                               •C*a w O l prtwol in p t e In feniatom toad from
                                                Itokalds 1te® a to Horau^ Ibad to aaiAtain cfdtr
I                                               anfl pKvwnt any darih of aicpoctaxa. Kj®ct
€1                                              •ifjporturB to aide aecaat parking and sintain
                                                •eaacity e€ taaimas fcwriaat. qpadal attantion
I!                                         m    to ba givan to the anforansnt of jpMidfia
         1C 2169 Honey
                                           m    BaatsictlaM an fenlatana load.
                                           m
l
                                               «kin Kf fcolioa coach In Anistane fe*i Rsrth
 i                                             aaar to ® * C tote *0* for standby Axtim
                                               until half-tine uhen tcLM be taken to Gap#**!*
                                               tane far aaal.
J e t i n g t o t d e f in g                           3 t a f t e r a a tc h )
•a p ar p la n attach ad
          %pendix         •r* i                to oamancanent of ftusse 3, ttd * a e ria l t t U » s i» *
                                               jpeteol to location as above and prevent any
                                               of                                                        T
 I
r_




                                               hblxc    onst - ® a 5 T o t worn
                                                                      aatdb)


    ■7
          ^ 6   tJUrtaEr A 3
:-£E 2 ? ® ^ M ^ a i A3
          ~ f * 2 l» 5 S « = lii3
,llt M9] Stanifsrth m
                                    •r »


                                    A3
                                               PC*a miH p etro l Su pears in Renistone »oais3 from
                                               Ik»w^3h_jlDad to Burtcn Street to ■euLntgin arA^r-
                                               and pceueat any tJasfa of                          B£zact
                                               ■a ^ p o rtie rs t o * if c street p a rk in g . M aintain
                                                                                                              V
    *C 2593 Kijssor; *3                        •a c w ity of business joradses.
         €112     l o w e El
                                               ftiasie 2 (Pttdng aatcb)                              4       111
                                               J o in SY fbljuoe c o ad i in P e u s to n e Hoad fo rth
                                               B ear t o O fFt to te *0* f o r standb y A rtie s u n t i l
                                               IhftM t i a e tfvsn teLU be taken t o CLaywheels iMrm
                                               fo r s e a l.
    I                                                  3 C^fter awtch)
  W ^ m fo r hrri*fir»3                        On eanraenoonent o f Phese 3, t h i s s e r i a l         zeftsne
'.-^per p la n • tta ^ s s d                   p a tr o l l a lo c a tio n a s *fawe and jsn ew n t any d a s h
*oe % e o l s x          *T#                   o f s u p p o rte rs .
    I
    I
1
ill*-




MmmM


                            ItetnA (Mtifftaiv/llMpttaA sm *. b§»j
                            • ttn fttfa i to m M m S VCw ,m m             S


                            I.ttfcn p t n l <M*i*<rt/NfcM{«OTS ttfMg.
•M rttog f a r tariftfing   4,(Kfc»4.S(fe» « ■■! •             &**, t m f f i c
• Jpur p t o fttt*£w £             I tiftr
IN'® 4R «ndlx *1 • j
                            H l^ « 4 III «CM *   QUtlJjM* I k R u t I ,
a u m   m


M o c t l « t iNfKtflr M   l   •

t§   mmmm
K M      lt t

®C M U t a t e




tb?*Ct J«ft SMjpM$«r fta ift * | / t
* M » s*                S a e t t o w m to              m fe U n si

M PXSB


                                      W A l ^ f fti‘
                                                   t % i flhdlnwgr H * I $ s b

                                      1           !aw IteifA c l u tm i
                                      I t o s J M ft        A    9tik

                                      I           te* turarti1m

                                      Mr>It^oav Staft/fttfteife fe«*§

                                             #t4t«t W r n i m ^ t M M M ®ymf

                                      inm$m trap                                          .1
                                      *wi*fca«» M          to €tt# C t e m

                                      M M C a N n o l m m iM B iM m m g i © § « * ?

                                      m m in te d                        1m    m




                                      S,trj^V%V ^               tttW

                                      fefcterstoy



t#<              ^      *few#   *** &>*v.*n*toprtfc*r idtb *wqp3tfxdm&* *^g*

» U   p e ^ r ie «   m^ifrnM                 I W s i i l S t t A y * art * n       « r.

15th %j~il iff® fe              ft# Iftit^ii* «f «t* §rt»#tf
lftrt«M» 9& Wm ft»f«f ftrtlon mill to ftpltgv* m fbUouii
          /




   •                         tiffffip Uni

  it                         fcmlAtij* % n f Ifcst* t t f m U U i

   •                         w m 'kts tr% t m u * « » tt»tt® »
   «                         m m rn       M *       '   .




   <6                        jfcyyjjwt flMlt*




  13




  • At ftutsr ». tne MMtMur* «£     mm m w 'M      SaKrtkm w§41
  ft*            V  toJJtfhWK-ujp % t %     f e gvm tti&'sVj %W«,
  «rll * a o   .f # p»,« |?jr «rt                 t i ’w J 'fM fjr*»^
K    S M to K s tm T




                                                                         tC I M I J M I t t U
•c                                                                       Hr§ f r * M & *




5WE «a» $ 2
                                                     1                   OMfcftt
                                                                         '        li      « t il l Hj » «
                                 I   fcP$£#ti€S C U p A t t U I M *
j*            flkhatt            l




              .   dte■at                                                 ••   wm         m jw



■r •jtm                                                  -               t.   96 sas iomu*


Xfj^aic^s IfcJkmi
»       CfcU«v
I f 13§ “

*C 1403                                                                                               _ \
                                                                      Olfimuntf -       K »5* JfcrV**?*
                                                                          Im iT iw p $r)wy                - ,
                                                                                       K      f e s        !<*
                                                                      * § | *«3fut}fl & * £ -

                                                                              JU fhase HI Mar 1 *r*5 f to
                                                                              take if potfivior *r b%f J®p Uwe
J€ S"?i StapNc^*                                                              SKNnteKwrt waft M&,3 to Ck’jdKbttt
 P C i. M         Csn^twcylc’t                                                lam Mtjaccni is f*rk t© fra rtJr
                                                                              f c " ^ r f fcK&Attf K IM S I f
I n   n       s   fc p fftiliii •       W mpmm




                                                 m   m   m

                     m
 m m m s r n                                     M m m M m rn
 m        m       *m : i                         I t l U f B m h o ft
 m        k m              %                     m m         m m
                                                 M   M   l   &*&*»»


                      k w      )i m *   mcrigw


  ts§ mm                                         m m         mtstiy
  m       iv m                                   m   n m      nujyaM
                                                                            mmm




9m m Jm faw         to t                 m M ls          pim MUOji *r       M *Ulm
Wifeft » # f t j » t w i n g i         o d foai pranftit

i.       i n t . - *%&*&!»                     M#»t*

t.        Mlfta             /RMtar ttqr11*
I.        M U D m M / V f e M U tat »
«.       fc itfw                               im n

1 .       iM k is tm    fe w i It a r t fc /llu T it t       a w t li 9 L

I,        P t e i t lW ta * /? fc f1 * t* l * * # I t

1.        M t t M l taft/l»iiSfS#VI *3*5                                             t

••         ferlfttra                             br»                                 ^

lfc»ft&TOl&(ENft* 6 to m ttM t foiufei wlU jptiti* *t 1ft. M * m IS
Jfccil lit* fit tfeft tomtit M a M m Miet feriviag tdtool, fc£#**i^ farm*
             ft* itfuffJiiB * r        •*»<« p r t * «® t*f*3yiM t. ta f
ferfif Hf^i « mil U »p«t%i>lt fm mmtimg mS uw^sm^w. to
 «n£                     gm^U.
I

a.
                     ts» tv » m txjfii* M I M i p Itotot m t f a n m *11                          m WMmM
             vm      tom® t&u ■ * i t #*fclMfeX* Ifltftl Hit mull Of UK MR&^tMt iftl
                 ?g§ii itft             m   toi#f&* 8 »

     1 tnrin i*» * m em lts «f $». •
4 * *•*» • * Hamit flpietal                  U * * m      U   littSMKbt t f tin to* few to tt» p » i .
     •w itt i w to * * * ftwii tt» s tr tlM i to tt» pw w t HftUg • sw to •!««§ f c r ia u m                  9m&
£ wtaftAtaf ts NotIm fc*4 fewtti! th*M 1mm util te tutor *pt*er cyclc Mean.
I            » natofe m M ftBm « p u * tto w m fe te     to satt*® H A tfe# * ? fm m t
                   to
                 «to» PtU)«y *t#tle#8 * lemHi* In ferti* tom fenl fcrtli ffp * if» tit*
p m » § anft to ta g «» ftfenUoftl imAi tock to tin tu tto n .
                 tJftist % illl to                m • » li r ta f la r

r       i» ttwi fw & tlty f© §#1®j Hb Imfett fc ©* *w»t ef »i#m II* to                                  $Uy*3p



I     BSSSBSS&                                                                                                ^
      qpAeS*i tn tin * » iffla § LlwMpnbS mesueton *411 «rri»t *t toJkUy EvS^t
Mfttoo       M     t$»«c j*t to to                                  »   1J   awrtte           «t fcris^iog.

       in,Mt ft»» %                         <& ‘* n m ,


f c p i r t w it tSam uttJJ *k*e to gf*aB * t H e

                    I# <* fw riM tf to <to\a* tfck simf« to tt* * « n t of «ttr» i-tUR toii »9                    ^

ft       »f%N*rt f"m" L , i t                        It l» n*r*i              tfcuu **4v* t*** ^ j i
         &w                   t\rm m3 1 g*rt* v f tJar ^rw.trf                             s.#t;v»
*“          »t* fers«-                   m fc  §<tr & ± m t r r i ^ i ng «rt H
                                                                             >        Swi' ^ Ui
            <&k» S' T           te, H-#-      fey # m i -           r»f€         tl€ i w»«J    ft fdUNW
       t               t r w J U f ^ iuMtmii           luad.                         mS ( n a ^ w 1
                 te n * «faaunr th e y m H vnloaA .
®    tto
     tto «              t!to fpn*. W           Ii m m » m i l to i « M l i to ft^am           r * n » « i w f in
y f* ^ w w                    ti< the                  lto)«« 3r                          m U to Ioupjk0 in
                                  m     n*      »f0 city*                    « t a i * iterJ#* i*x»5 %»ecyi.1 Mrr-sl,



I
I
I
I
           m m

le a a s
m w m it w m 0 %tc.                   U w j w J                *11
i t an&MFtgHB I t U w al v is      IW « * 10 i © t« » p
        t t a la&tar at Auction » (Ifcrfcanlay)*
                          tfevtt w
          I t I* «**«aatf tte    inA* v«tftl«Si8» *11 ftlao
             *»                         m m A



M t wtfufe** * 1 1 tea atagptf « *
m m tM M     m     m m m   ttat t t « r «         aanjfli*
tf e tM . an# • » p « f* « « t» 1*» * * iw w sirf tt»
* * » to • aK&ant ifcara tfeff «®» irwiEc

AH psswiitpM * M i t «§»€§#■« t» anaur* tf»t ttnir
an    fc j u i M w l »     of ttd*ta>

                                                                           |
* » vrt&Elaft * t t «*» fr«p»* t© ttea_ * ftl# » ta d                          V

                   anB mull to tha frew®.                                  \
S t l s t t A fM tifete to a tttfv t to cfnrwal audi
aafcfela* He*-*** m m                        f lx m t m m
l l «*tt tea tte» #Mff af n il a*"*'* »» #/ffes m r n W            t
W m ataAtaa to aonitar an0 diobk avdh vaftiidfi* anff




I t o l l m g m ^ c l M u r n l m , * 6 t h e e * iewSsif teaan
#*sffap« » tfer « * » f i J i . utitA I* fwwtf to tee                          \
'fifcn’y iag jkawtfa^psr*. without                  « S*%ter*s*t> «f
 fSst l#§kljBrfe» at'krt.fe* to tt#> mirlifgpr #*d
                    af            an m*i< te «£*>'* log w r u
 f i t , &rc*jrgf             « J I t r fe#wSMrf l « « j f .A t r «<
 i» to nrtw idaif tl* whiicAe to tte                         for «st»/f;
 I f w m c m s k m r f, « * feiwar anfi pawcngiir* w U tea t e n
                                                                           I '. i
 with few tumefs of Ilia *»)*v»t U $ z k l * X u * ) b* w*
 trf auaarm • aoLTwat. #y»wdant or tJ*m 1Mbtifar~
 m&f t i o i i .




                                                                           %
                                                  wm



fev»lt mm* *ie* wntft* **ti##*p ftotot ^ ^ n * w
*§U 1* «m*mk<9»6 to tfiw il H i ®» « « * tt* g r
fa**!#* tern U t to r a J y w ite » (T&mfey).

tMBUw ftfetat trill Is M ip t «* feHMtfftf m n M
to « M »      M l ttMQT « w tot ttrftfng o t a M ini Hit
               I m w * « m r m A It* S B * to iR wtorit
ifunt Itov am #nank»

M l mmmmmw,     v U l to dbtctofi to « m m thfet Ihty
    wmmiMMmt^rm >al:
•EC t o pOCMttlfiB O f tktett*


» • VlMe.UK w ltt «*•» frcecaft to t*» inmlfwH*!
g m M m §   « * •   to   to r n *   * r b «   M    * * * *   p iM # i§ M t
mill #M#*i a r t i a t t to Hi* grwnfi.

Zt is act t e i f e t o to «t t » v t to d M r m ) « d » wfctetot                     '
ttaoutffc m u                         m i ttoicrocc I t w in to C*
Arty of MU w c U t m §(MJm spt»Mt C* *tm U m m
            m & & w vk »#* r m t l m              mS mi?      wn&mtt.


B m M mw m idfM m aim , vSHmM in rfj»t§ t»®&
cfocM m Wm w ftcfcim , tMsti I* «r*wl to to
j m m a P k s «itto«it t Jctets cv I* % m m L #f tht
 Jsi§t*JM J» acU tln e to tto «r»*i?p «afi w m iiptSiE
 or •tadhni *§ «Mt* to cpnrti;ns «mni*» tta n fic a ri
 O m t n r i t*tM t o tofanatf fear              • to
                                                                                      \
               *to vcfck 1# * tto ***>»«• y ft* **.■&»•t.
 I f wkwcwj**,, tt o « r i « ««5 p e ^ ^ r - ^      to **'-♦
 v»t>» fcs tow *. of tto fclMss^                                     *** ef           .
 m m m m m mrmsi, Itef^AiPt a»                           usft-uH^p!           .   ||j
 flotrtiiSoft..                                                               *   1 i*




                                                                                  %
&u   m    m

     1*1 St I* in affm a tor m tfamtar to toCMtagly wny fl&Klal
         « r altar it to fct aoKiaA ®ft • pMLIc tofvtes tahteSa ar alai ion/
              mm ar tAla* ate. tsiaatofef to                         m    tu r n   i fotftoU ao te.
     (•1      St •» m w i t m m to foamo atodioS • • fiftMc Ntvftot afitela
              «r aM toaAvi ar tsaSii, tie. «tn» t»t11If»§ to «r toae « feetibAll
              ■m t s f e a t t » t o # M f c # o nw stj •
     I€ |     * 6yg§%iM *      m v    a ft* i                  ‘          t t t o 9M « t e n M d i , * «£ r S
              ism#1!** * tn ln ate. itsKt to )b* «ust*tifelo pm#A It •nnpc'i
              tit a M i» toting aarsM.



     (A)      S I l i « «f fanes to potft*t« s&cstel ila r cntftring * a tte s t fee
              • a t * ft to o tta ll pm*f§.
     I»)      I t is w affanoa to antar #r attaqpt to antar •                                  ir n m m    §g m s£
              Ja fooaaMion af tattlas, m , ale. I * fa n af} «Mci» * «*p*aslii
              a f aaalag i*#*?-              •* » inclm?!** S rU h S n g gjlaosos tot a r #*t"aia»
              €v##t».

     IC1      rn. G a m im t e m g # m ? it , m p g m m m   to « ; • cti 1*                                    tr o t a r
              9 9 % f w i i *rith        artfctaf m u tionatf.



     I t Jw *®                  to «w*w* »»**■§# to a » t« n# to I# a tefctoi! f t i ^ l                              \

     |A|      JOostelSr **«* wmy « 2f fat aoM to ttese purt* of tto ymjma
                                                                                                               . i\?
              4to^iy**.«rf *#»,«*♦ 'm il to «u? af v k r af cl« jtttcto W fA ’ mr
              an t to fain© am af tto fetifnatad a n a .
     IB)       A €to*tt*/te to a u lfta a My &a«i* a to*- £r a far tto U §r»T? fc
               d ia im if to taMirsiies, tt* aontiiiuind sale af ml&efr&X it fcxjjsrnfcT
               f® fp«i wter at pfrllr aafaty*
                                                                                                                     %

     St to a a rff**?® to fMJi®** fim w ts, «*wfe* tx*C*, #t<r, #ien in w
     m m S js a Q fM m M i§ • ® o ® * t o U p » w l „




     fc                       #Jfcr p w w t     snI   f c a rf i,* , #   C ? r* U 4 V   « s^   * » * !    #n
                         m 1$ * ' to ?                     m       & flrv--             <t      )r ‘
                                                                                               im




1             ttw fiteriM * pcMm an                                 « ltta l t o m r
               mp* tthk MMM of §Uff«

                 £?S K m s r s u s f is s r
».            « » •onratUai                      _
                 p tailtn jt wfe to atfhxlN t
                                      *dtfe fist %»ftJs§                      i .          '
                 JOaftol) let l i ® .

«                fliVMMrto, v e t o eonliton, M                     U    m    . !&»*"•
                 « M , flft* . IHMII. ’fBh* « • * « * rtrtlKT
                 orttelas «r             toddling oiytfetao
                 «hfcfe crtltf or ml#* te «aft o» » wip®. HR
                 met fonlttaft n4tM» tto fR«w«. *«® * * P * s
                 Id              id wdb am* octicto or •e tA l* '
                 My in mBmA m r g m 03*1*06 tn» « ■ frmiet                                                A
ft               M r a» cfcmmtiiMto to it p*iiitt«* to « * » agr                                          1
                 unjust lute tto «* * * •                                                                 *

i                Hqr *omm m® taUo to w «ty **» tortiuetiso
                  Chew •      ms to o jaeto d I r a n tt* P « i A
1                Jtoy                  *«> r « r „ » 1* » fp '•?««% W> ** *-* *•*
                  ttst p w i S ,

    *            tti a * * a a o r a o tte *i#*t to
                  t o o r otfoet     p t r * * * Oto t t t o m m to it m k M                                  I
                  lay • fcsOio* O K ieor.                                                                     |
    H            Bit Qjfe         tto* tight %* it*             m £ t f /e r r t *
                 tx> m«w» few tit** gra-jw* !8Ft> f»TTW?f- *& #** *rt
                  «nMpl»                                                *t£                    It j*              ‘
                  one!      m & jX t f w * *   otf tta fcwCtwll              «£ 9 » M $ * U
                                (pp            §Kne*4&£&on tt* Cfcounfl I* * cxlA 1 *•
                  m » M i i A 1w fea» C & M fX 'U M ) Ofr t t # i l t i t l l t i J *9 •   IK ^ X * O f
                  ijr^ptf» te w o * or Minr^wtx t© «t%J* rpbci* ^ .


    WCm-i      It** 9 Ofcwi ouUfcwft f c           • p m e s t lutwfcw tto
    K Z Z*mt\ mxmKtmr m* tte Clifc. I t inns* not «o»to * pm t’ to «ooreh
    • r f m s m * ^ mmt te ultit tior       of tte *ott«ita:.ft«snrt*r,
    A r f U H S fa w x « l y o tax to m & m z i m ^                             oatf oe* o rJHinol o C t a o .
                 to *§«Syct»3 odth eianMOl, i t I» » oau^< rtM ri t%e
    OM%iM of tlo ItaliM ^             IrfJifW *p* I*M. tr-io n I I I I of f c
    fin                 a n off tetri® wite # toourt ef tto         4» **if ins ?P»tai»
    It S     o     t       o  T    m i t o m m ^ I m p oeoto m m d m ss * m m m       m
                                §mU «*tiM» th i» « « » » .                            U m x '-tx x v tiw #
                       to                 • lta» H C * / *♦
•Us p*s%iutf m m «AU fe* §§««§ In m M M m i m S o w llm prior to Ism
«R f e ^ j f t e l i f t % rfl l i f t % fsMMai ttaff vnStr # » ftLeoctifln of JWJiai
           in MXMrf
11         M ittal fen# • « * o f d tp hn» few* M em €r»» HMfi
           t§tepr I M l .

tl         1MMJ1 toot * «H o f e it f Sow fcm M i t e ta d to

II

€1         t a l f t t n t a d Itoftti - f w Ctertfwl* tant to M l*qr
           jlHUly • jfc«Hh O&dMI

 t!        Gbfr&m&M lorn (IikImAU^ «st wqr                     tam tam
           ta d t a tli to timMtjom ttsttaft tarn {loth c it e )
«i
 #1        b fp ta g i lono • fcrtli oidto.
                                                                                          t‘
 *1        MuTioB t a d - €*«■» 9md%tam in«S Marth te Wx&Mae&s,
           JMomk - lo th #iStf*.
 f )        ta rS n t t a d - ifeK ^crtli Jhoft» to                     ta n ! I***
            tw » pound uriAk only).
C l

11!

El
       '    >Kxto            Itoufth • tot* u b t e .

                          ta d .
                                                                                               \
1^1        liiM M , % riis g !c«S - tooth Aides.                                               i

M1         VtotoiAi Pood - frwr PmUteoe fcmfi to Gm&tat te w
            *    o&dr only-        •SnapsAdt p u t .
                                                                                          ill
li I       COtrtter bunt £w» fejfcMdr toad to tOlfu.'V*Wnr - one
           »td» only - o lo n p ife octnoft.
1€ I       IbdttoMood feusi - onr »Mfc m i f Ufcngpidi port} ttwt
            t a t e l d * tad m tafcfrtey A m r .

1 *1       fc a J s te * t a d N a r th /ta ls u n e fens - feoth o i t e   fra            .
            lo p p tag i te n t ftoland to tagaMnd t e * .

it:        M>o*«ij 9uwi - «*r ftlfii to®                          ittifi «*r py% mnwrnm,
It         fOnSotone to ad *sntis> - fftn*KiMtief iosii to Ifcnr            tood   -in tid e
            Sow t» i® cwnod idtfc *A a te © » » * ,
|M   pp»     € rm ra              jg g g g

1.   Mwury                » i f d If M       to ecnNttaUm «tth                  and tefiie
     Uwmrn,
2. J6?«*I3S SayfSftldK OMMuaad * Myiltet* t»             xw*» fooartl
            ttaffic l» to foliar. H2I to it gftaoad «ut tey Soad fcufific t e ia i
                    m m     «* I# % rU t i l l
1 . M »/H§lf te 1* flat** Ib tontka *y a it# * afCi****
g p g g j g f t ..C T w jD B ja i a t t c m . r a g
AXl ■uttln^c: ftoraat vihicto iriU we a fo*» fins* tha         aazrint at
1*10**16* tea®. At thia p4»t# curs will ht linet*6 along tavilla Itraat fi»t,
fetberland l ^ i t l , ®Miar ttratt* fef»gw«* IM« NLaa                        fctlftmS km£ to
M M v w m d bum.              '               *   •
CfcwcJw* and m n t *£U tr*v*l n a l£u*ll ati**:# Rurwla wid lanrins fci£ t®
praunft.
Vrimry rate* w ill m i s te s i m d I v M t e CHMdtatJflB »ltti <feara%£si wid fkaffie
Btorisiok.
H & 1 itic m l *t»r?s SM ic*tir »9 <ar                items » B te i*> jposxtion tr.~ It I?- «t. ftmf
t»ali to ptao*r„ «uv % < w liw                                  for pk,rif*ft§ ^sms*



                                                                                                     \

                                                                                             . i\i


                                                                                                 V
             ^ # 1 m im wJU Is on i« tf Ip                     *tth thi* f*mt to
        *«rc»At «s» m ^ a r n O t t t o m .   9 rn       ** p « t t « 3*f it In*ftv«d
lit K r w c l t o i n ilh tfc# « ® l f ^ **f iia fffe **tf f*«* tt » fcwiAUt*
v i ^ s t t y fit f c p m m ® ,
                                                               %

« * r milt pg»#i ®t t.«9a» to r n ^ m m i m § m ifS#f4«« m S                            qp
tfc»£r tuftlM *• toon m possible.
m d '** *****      * U m mmiirni* §m m                         % m *U§ m   « /* .
as*? <« m %       m    t* **t **« t»             «f # * % * »*i c ^ i n x i***
•wangr.                    *•#*%


tut                   m t T i m m M £ - M K m s i w * A * p a «viM pfcrtdfff in
                       §i#* w ^ k ««t !«iglaj,» ltoi»fl «wi feijiciiJff
                       a»t»t«* %
                               gr w i i t # i fcn*t « a « t * j i .
 ffcl                 U n g M t t fens * m o m m m « * i f c p w l * * p i A J » 5 in
                        ft* a ro i t e t w e t# r# * tt fcrf   md   W i » J **S

 tc)                   W*v&£tvi t m m *             9% m * w i m p*vk*% tft
                        tte m m «wuf* ttM p a «,«** to) m * t lft£un> Rn*»t


 |# |                   fto lifo * ftw S - * * r « e » p m ogm r¥im p^rtusr to
                        *iae* ^ m & k m P » W ' Cfv.*fr/*flduU » t * % 9* tey
                                     wwusfttx*.

 |*|                   m m n i i r f teMd - wax/mmm^ ««S awpexvise psrMfig In
                        ♦sdr «*3s or ftftktiXf* ^ v,**r,,o<J                             ^

 |f)                   iteuniet Itoflrt Iwft - patrol length of riwtf fstr
                        ftpustram luari JfrMth to ? » lyT#* to ptfWJit
                        puttn| of               m t»rf £hc*£ti»i* tiwftv *■**» I
                        lSh\* A'f’f t» « w s « f irt i6.30su
                                        IffM




           iL M J




III       6&vi*kft of sta&ltfi


fMI                             *wl          m m *




till)     Soetor    I

iiv)      ftyit&tfmffanftt smvtm         onfipyftdsf i



fv!       Sector 1


1*1)                    f w l ^ « . * » |S«e^rf 1 § 3)




f t4i 1   U v jtU m *   «f wt,i V m itt f*1 Tf01



                                                         i.
                            jpy
                              ? 3 -fi
                    p
                                  §6-72




                                          4 S -5




                        I
      c
      ■I




Con
           ! §-«•
                                                                                 mu.nx.!&*




                                           G   p 3 w   tf - W   &    * r




I a d s l e y b r id g e                                                               *°»rHe.
                         vmmm
                             rU U jlB g lj
                         wodiicif &?.¥««

                                                                           m m je s t e d r* _ .   _
                                                                           m ^m xm m m - m m           #




     m s e u m   MMt   w m x x m   f




                                                                    « *
                                   y
    \? o                               a
 > > ^ o
                     M w v




     \




                              ^ #   j




•#




                                        J*JBEi
                                        I
                     fc

         %
             ,   %

                       %«    &
                             y»"
                                                     .1




                           MXfn*   **°




                                            TlNSs_>: '
m   a m   m                                 V iAO uC •
                                           JwftCUU*       “




                                   □             SOUTH




                                     F

                  4 «<©3




              &
                                         §#*§§
                      wimrn                  a i i « i i i
                                                         n a m i




               } > * * i¥5 » i r # t#ki&t* *, IT)
 wtew jjli •
               I           1 It t IC*t          Jtf                 i K » r . h r w B t # i
                                                                    I * • K % (nvtel § »
               } Jj8! 1 5 • * ' » (m t Sa! ST)
•»»*>          1 * 1 Sfc’a fftrbg »                                 l i l r i l i i t t i !
4b»)l      •                                                        ift9fr»Cs*i£|t)
 WS&r 12| •

    c ^ *• J ^ # K * * I O i r * l M r t a 4 % S i ^ )
fWlfew
                                                                    t ta» > » • ic* t a d 91
                   * * « f * * » I T * l» r « W ll* )
  im ® •
M              . !» 5» !i ■**•
                           r i t e M «
                                         *»                         s i t l «r» («**£ * )
 ! » « • » **• farttt pi                                            lft»S»tltt C m w H )
  9fclfef <jj|fe *                                                  Ifcfiliminpttil
               J i®f t m U K ' t t»fM P!                            SIKiSOi rITk tartA sn
         ! : 1 * » 1C** £a»rf^ X I                                  w         « § ■■* ; »


     m
u              !           ! » £ • * * » t « r M SO)                l l l r » CaertC » t
     m         1 m § Jf® tmriiC. S)
     m                                                              1 K « JC*» Car*: 9 )
               J JNp i K i r * CarteS m                            sis»ic*»ti«tft£«r)
               » *    • pr» iMtid * i
                                                                   S I S 9 I T * (M ritf & )
               i ta|> l i l IC’i (arSa* *1                         I IS f IC*« (M riH 9 )
               } J * * » R » r * ffuriil 2D)                       i i t r #          (* * « > a i
           “ * » » KT* tjftrfji' Ml
&          - J in # i m m i t * fjs n w m i
                                                                   I B i r * f«rW Sf>
                                                                   1 PT K K * > <*»<£     17)
           “ f f H I K » fT « tarlal H)                            1 If- * ' » C # im rb> m
           - » IS ® KTm fcwri*; i»
                                                                   1 Imp I B t f r * tiurM 1 ?)
           • I •& 3© PT#« t*e*M; K)                                I tar I m m ITt fm rM 11)
feu SD - 1 IB » Hr# fairm i l
                                                                   I tap 1 It SO!T§ farM |)
ft:;:
®5h' f1•
        ‘i 5
        *1 *
                     § ^    « * » ■ « t>
                     m K ' k 1 tap              II
                                                                   i ta p i ® » m » CMrt»3 f
                                                                   1 B 1C PC** CmtH! 5) 1
           * * » * '«               fi                             I l f RT« Cwi«l | |       1
          ;1 s » } i i ? r ‘ * • , r^ * ,t 1)
  5
* » •*
                                                                   •ifc * <
                                                                   Wk± bt CTFieer*
t s                                                                                            * ill
 I

                                                                   ■a * z e - * t e   f
                                                                                      j              Q tr
                                                                                                      v
                                                                                                            »##«•»**»»




                                      KfcF.                        • aw J-e : te                     ii l
 I
 I
#




    tI '|-#
         l




    %
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                               F' DIVISION

OPERATIONAL BRIEFING NOTES                             FA COP/SEMI FINAL

                     LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                         SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989

       INFORMATION

       1.1    KICK OFF TIME - 3.00 PM     GATES OPEN - 12 noon
                                                  /
             In the event of a draw after 90 minutes, extra time
             will be played.                 &

      1.2    This is an all ticket game and^a     capacity crowd of 54,000
             may be expected.             $

      1.3    Liverpool supporters have b^en allocated the whole of
             the Leppings Lane terraces/ West Stand and North Stand.
             Entry into the ground for/all Liverpool fans is via the
             Leppings Lane turnstiles^

      1.4    Nottingham Forest supporters have been allocated the
             Spion Kop terraces an<T both levels of the South Stand.
             Entry into the ground^is via the Penistone Road and South
             Stand car park turnstiles.              •:

      1.5    All tickets have bfen colour coded - this is shown in
             the attached Appejadix.

             Club colours      5oth normally play in red/white and,
                              therefore, the great majority of supporters
                              may be expected to be displaying identical
                              favours.

                              The teams will play in the following strips

                              Liverpool - Red (normal)

                              Nottingham Forest - White strip

                      LIVERPOOL

             Priva            (A)   Private cars may be expected to travel
                                    by the advised route M62/M1/A61, arriving
                                    in Sheffield on Halifax Road. These
                                    vehicles will be encouraged to park in
                                    side roads, well away from the ground
                                    on the Foxhill and Parson Cross estates.
                             (B)   Private cars may also be expected to
                                   travel via A628/A616, arriving in Sheffield
                                   on Middlewood Road.  These vehicles will
                                   be encouraged to park in sice roads off
                                   Middlewood Road, well away from the ground.

    1.7.2    Coaches               May be expected by the advised route -
                                   M62/M1/A61 to Halifax Road or A628/A616
                                   to Middlewood Road.  All coaches will
                                   be directed to the aesginated parking
                                   areas where they will unload. The desig­
                                   nated coach park is Claywheels Lane, with
                                   any overflow on Halifax Road dual carriage­
                                   way - out of city-lane.

    1.7.3    Mini coaches/         May be expected by either of the above
             vans                  routes - they will be directed to park
                                   in Wardsend Road North (opposite Wadsley
                                   Bridge Station.)
    1.7.4    Trains          (A)   Special trains to Wadsley Bridge

             All details           1   Arrive           Depart
             vill be supplied
             at briefing           2   Arrive           Depart

                                   3   Arrive           Deoart

                             (B)   Service trains to Midland Station

                                   Those arriving at this station will be
                                   brought to the Leppings Lane end of the
                                   ground on SYP vehicles under Police
                                   escort.  After the match PSV's will be
                                   parked in Penistone Road North opposite
                                   Claywheels Lane to transport Liverpool
                                   fans back to the Midland Station.
%   1.8      TRAVEL - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

    1 .8.1   Private cars          Private cars may be expected to travel
                                   along the Ml leaving Tinsley.   They will
                                   follow a route to Firvale where they will
                                   be directed along Barnsley Road to Rutland
                                   Road to arrive at Neepsend.   A contingency
                                   also exists to direct them along Herries
                                   Road if excessive congestion occurs.

                                   They will be encouraged to park in side
                                   roads off Neepsend Lane, Penistone Road
                                   and Herries Road.
1.8.2       Coaches         May be expected to follow the advised
                            route via Ml, leaving at Tinsley and arriv­
                            ing at Firvale.  They will be directed
                            along Herries Road to park in the SYP
                            bus garage in Herries Road with any over­
                            flow parking on Herries Road South and
                            Rawson Spring Road.

1.8.3       Mini coaches/   Hay be expected to follow the same route
            vans            as coaches.  They will park on Rawson
                            Spring Road.

1.8.4       Trains          Special trains to Midland Station

            All details     1   Arrive                 Depart
            be supplied
            at briefing     2   Arrive                 Depart

                            3   Arrive                 Depart

                            4   Arrive                 Depart

                            5   Arrive                 Depart

                            Service trains carrying Nottingham Forest
                            supporters may also be expected at the
                            Midland Station.  All supporters arriving
                            at this station will be transported to
                            the ground under police escort on SYP
                            vehicles unloading in Herries Road South.
                            After the match buses will be parked in
                            Penistone Road North {opposite the ground)
                            to transport them back to the station.

INTENTION

2.1         It is the police intention to a l l o w this event to take
            place with the minimum disruption to those not involved
            and to ensure public safety both inside and outside the
            ground.

METHOD

3.1      The event will be in three phases:

         Phase 1       - Before the match   10.00 am - 3.00 pm

         Phase 2       - During the match   3.00 pm - 4.30 pm

         Phase 3       - After the match    4.30 pm - until stand   down*

               * subject to 30 minutes extra time
BRIEFING - MATCH

A briefing will take place for all officers commencing
at 10.00 am (parade 9.45 am)

GROUND SECURITY

Immediately following the briefing the ground will be
searched for suspicious objects or unauthorised persons.

CRIME

All complaints of crime will be dealt with by CID who
will be on duty at the gymnasium and Kammerton Road Police
Station.  Complaints will be directed to the most suitable
location.

MATCH CONTROL/COMMUNICATIONS

This is located within the ground. Personal radios will
operate on channel 25. VHF sets will operate on channel 2.

PARKING RESTRICTIONS

Where these exist (either yellow lines or parking cones),
they will be enforced by all serials.

REMOVAL OF VEHICLES

This will only be done when absolutely necessary.  It
will be authorised by a supervisory officer and arranged
via Match Control.

OBSTRUCTIONS - OTHER THAN BY VEHICLES

Street Traders, ticket touts etc, will be moved on.
If they persist they will be arrested and brought to the
police room for charging etc.

PRISONERS   (General)

All persons arrested inside or outside the ground will
be brought to the police room situate under the North
Stand.  On arrival they will be processed and detained.
Arresting officers will be required to submit a short
file only.  There will be NO requirement for arresting
officers to charge or complete any administrative procedure

PRISONERS   (Charging)

Following administrative procedures at the police room,
prisoners will be forwarded to the following stations
for charging etc:


Liverpool - Ecclesfield

Nottingham Forest - Hammerton Road
SEARCHING - TURNSTILES

Where persons are searched at the turnstiles, property
seized in accordance with the ground rules, then the
following procedures will be followed:

(a)   The seizing Police Constable must supply the owner
      with his collar number

(b)   Inform the person where the property may be retrieved
      after the match:

      Liverpool fans       -         Police property post at the
                                     rear of the West Stand

      Nottingham Forest    -         Police property post in the
                                     Owls Shop - rear Spion Kop

(c)   Affix a label bearing the owner's name and his own
      collar number

(a)   Ensure the item is taken to the appropriate location

It should be noted that the ground regulations allow
cameras, flags, banners etc to be seized. Discretion should
be exercised and only items likely to cause a danger seized.
Such items may include large flags, banners and poles
but not small flags and cameras.

SEARCHING - COACHES ETC

All officers outside the ground should carry out random
checks of such vehicles for breaches of legislation.   Where
officers at Oughtibridge and Tankersley have checked coaches
which are in order, they should affix an adhesive label with
a tick thereon to the windscreen to prevent further
checking. Where offences are disclosed the appropriate
action should be taken... Items seized as evidence should be
deposited in the gymnasium for retention.

EJECTIONS

All persons ejected from       the ground must be processed
through the police room.

GROUND RULES

An extract of the relevant rules is attached.

SPORTING EVENTS   (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL) ACT 1985

An extract of the relevant sections is attached.
3.16    EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

        The procedure relevant to this ground is attached.

3 .17   FOUND CHILDREN

        Kill be initially reported to the Ground Control and if not
        claimed taken to the gymnasium.

3.18    REFRESHMENTS

        Two meals are available.  The packed meal will be given to
        serials immediately after briefing and this will be consumed
        due to the extingencies of duty.  The second meal which will
        be cooked will be taken strictly in accordance with the
        instruction shown in the serial order.

3.19    COMPLAINTS

        Ar.y person complaining about police officers will be
        referred to the gymnasium or Hammerton Road Police Station.

ADMINISTRATION

4.1     OVERTIME
                                                         Special Event.
        All overtime claims will be clearly marked 'SEMI FINAL - /
        Liverpool -v- Notts Forest'and submitted via the officer's
        own section in the normal manner.

4 *2    REPORTING OFF    DUTY

        Supervisory Inspectors must report the whole of their sub­
        sector off duty and account for any person not present.
        They will go off duty at the following locations:
        Ground - Gymnasium, Public Order - Claywheels Lane.
         (Serials 1-21)                  (Serials 22-6*+)
        Prior to leaving these locations, they will submit the
        de-brief forms and ensure all radios are handed in.
I                                                               rfrSDSC M*<1)
                                                      BECENCY AM? EWQKT1EH FROCHLFES
I ^ ^ e'-erit °f ®n enervency situation arising in the stadium (ie fire or hxib call) which ta^ require evacuation
■ of all or part of the ground, the procedure outlined will be followed:
      (a)        Control Roan will pass the following message -
I                The attendance of |%» Meadae Is urgaitly required at Bailee Central
                 This vill be o,.->=r the PA systera and will indicate to police officers that a provisions.! emergency and
                 evacuation proc*±jre is in force
I                In the event c: 2 -. emergency evacisticn being necessary, an oral message will be passed cy the police officer
                 in charge givirx specific instructions as to action to be taken by the public
     (c)         In the event cf ar. all clear situstier., the following message will be passed:
1    (d)
                 Mr* feadews
                         )   j____i_____      •     . „ ,. „
                             is nc longer required at fblice Control
                 Evacuation proc*i_res for various parts of the ground are shown on the appropriate serial order
I                                                              APPENDIX 'A*(2)
                                                              CTCLH) RHULATIEKS
                Irajchcrised perzy^ are not perrctted to enter upon the field of play
I            The climbing of r.rodlight pylons, stands       orother buildings in the^p^^^Ls       forbidden
             Tht ccnsjnptacr.z:intoxicatinglicr_crs is permitted cnly in s ^ ^ ^ ^ e d places and in accordance with the
I            Sporting Events  Zonrroi of Alcohol etc) Act 1935
             Fireworks, sx>k* canisters, bottles, glasses,            ,banners, poles and other sir.'.-.r articles or
             containers inc:.-_ci_-.g anythingwhich cajla or        used as a weapon, are not permittee within the ground
             ana any perscr. i_- possesion of such. a-, ar^^rear container may be refused entry or eje::s-i frar* the ground,
         lender no circuvi _=r.res is it pernut^^Lo thixv any object cn to the pitch
    13. Any pjrscn who faj_s to ccrrpiyv^^zjistructicns             Tran
                                                                 a steward may be ejected frcra the c^cund.
     5. Any person who rss-ins in ^o^^«y.may be ejected frar. the ground.
1       office’'" reserves ~»=         ris^rxo
                                          refuse a±dssicn to or eject any person who refuses to be search fcy a police

    ^ ‘        9-u^.f!psgr'-'&g ^ ^ ^ i g h t fa* its servants and agents to remove frcn: this ground any person who does not
I           Fnr?«n~i

            source
                               "
                                   •**egulaticns and with the Rules and Regulations of The Football Association and The
                                    «-*3se presence cr. the Ground is or could reasonably be construed as constituting a
                                   nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.
                                                               APFEKDIX ’A* (3)
I   1. VEHICLES
                                                SOTOC EVENTS (gyDPL CF fiUUUUfiCT 1905

           A)    It is an offers for an operator to knowingly carcy alcohol or allow it to be carriec cn a public
I                     service vehic_-i travelling to or frcn: a football match
          (B) It is si offenrs to possess alcohol on a puhlic service vehicle, including mini buses etc, or train
              vhen traveiiir-t to or fran a football natch
       >
       (C) A Constable be ; step and search a public service vehicle where he has reasonable grands to suspect
      alcohol is beirx carried

I      BftBV IKTD GROUND

       (A)   It isan offers to possess alcohol when entering or attempting to enter a football ground
       (B)   It^isan offerjre to enter or atterpt to enter a football ground when in possession of settles, cans etc
I3.         lor part of.' wt_ith are capable of causing injury. This includes drinking glasses but not thsrros flasks.
       (C) A Constable n=; search any person he suspects is attenpting to enter the ground with articles mentioned
       CONDUCT IV CRGL\T-

I      It is an offence tc -zr.ter, atterrpt to enter, or be in a football ground when drunk.
       S\LE OF ALCQDL T\       »r>
       ^                     ^-T-      only be sold in those parts of the ground designated which will bt out of view of
I               tne pitch.    A1 ;rxol may not be taken out of designated areas.
       (B) Any Constable ir uniform maj’ cause a bar in a football ground to close if te believes the continued sale
           o* alcohol is detrimental to good order or puhlic safety.

I     F3vERS

      offenci^unde"3the%^-WSrS 10 searc*1’ a Constable may arrest any person ccnr-.itting or who          hasccrritted an
I
I
                                                                                              Anoendix




                              F A CUP SEMI FINAL

                               SPECIMEN TICKET




                                             4? U V E R P O O L ^ n .f ^ ^ 1

  •■SEAT!^?.;




                                                       ^ - / A y . 5.., - s e a t : - v ^ v r ^ . ? -
                               £Y;rr-^-3tT^i^X»TtS ^ ^ ^ T » r:?-' = f •- -*■«
        H 2 3 2 Z 2



CODJUR COOING - LIVERPOOL

BROWN    -      NDG3H STAND

RED.     - \CST STAND

PURPLE    -     LEPPINGS LANE TERRACES
                (also overprinted “LIVERPOOL AREA*)

COLOUR CODING - NC71TENGHAM FOREST

ORANGE -        SPION KOP
                {also overprinted "MDTTINGHAM AREA- )

BLUE     -      SOUTH STAND

GREEN    -      SCUTVi STAND (UNCOVERED)
   s n e t f i e        l d       W      e d n e s d a y   f ®     Q   m
                                                                                                               Police

           Hillsborough Ground                                                            First-Aid Room''
                                                                                                               Room

                                                                                                                                ° “v z \ \ \
                     LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS
                                                                                                                                VA,   V'          ,
                                                                                            Oymnitkm
                                                                                                                                ■V&V  X S A O '
                                                                                                                                                        '7 7 -0 0
                                                                                                                                                      * *\ ^73-76
                                                                                                                                                              55-72
                                                                                       NOHTHSTAND                                                                     \V    * -.
                                                                                                                        £LL-o                                         - \ o eV ' -
                                                                                                                                                                      y\®' '
                                                                                                                                                         /.-p
                                                                                                                                                          **X) / /
                                                                                                                      >«                                 %,

                                                                                                                      15


                                                                                                                      <4

                                                                                                                                                                             * \ \ 5.

                                              c
hq     y Fa n s E n t r a n c e
                                                                                       Tunnti'
w ,.
                                                                                                                                                                                   **•
 and Enclosures
                                      -----------1—

               Police Con tr ol                       19*22                           SOUTH S T A N D ^
                                                                                                              raSui
                                                                                                                                       37-42
                                                                 Offlclml 2 3 - 2 8                          l^32Nj3-36           1
                                                                                                             Car

            Kf Y
            TunNsnirs ...rzzzzt                                                                                            NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS
I                                                                              APFPiHX S~~ 1 J


I
                                         S M FINAL 198»q

                                       SECTOR 2 - LIVERPOOL


                                                                            HALIFAX ROAD




                                       LIVERPOOL CAR PARKING -
                                       FQXHILL AND PARSON CROSS ESTATES1"




f
      VADSLEY BRIDGE
                               WADSLEY STATU
                               LIVERPOOL

                              B ritish Roil
                             Wodsley Bridge

                                                                LIVERPOOL KIKI BUS/VAN
                                                                PARKING - WARDSEND RCftD fCFTH

    KFQQL COACH PARKING




              LIVERPOOL CAR PARKING
              WISQOCD AND MARLCLIFFE
              ESTATES




                                                                                           o
                                                           FOREST




                                                                              Notts Fbres
                                                                              Coach Park




                                                                                 Notts Fbrest
                                                                                 Coach and Mini bus
    o'                                                                           park

     p o e m           bo‘° - _ 3
              C » .L T O H    .0 . n




                                               P A R K ^


I              l *»K O X      ft 0   * 0


                             »CU0          3      borough
                                                                              Owlgrton
                                                                              Stodium
I        W r» r * * 0 «O40



                             «0   3

                                                                    rs Xtt/
                                           \




    %                        -°o
          *         +*         °      o
                                                          APPENDIX ' A d )1


                          SENIOR OFFICERS DOTIES



Chief Inspectors and above will NOT use a call sign but will be identified
by their name and rank.


OVERALL CQ*ftND                            Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

                                           Liaison - Inspector Sewell
                                                     Call Sign India 26

GROUND CONTROL                             Superintendent Murray


Sector 1 (Ground)                          Superintendent Greenwood

Sector 1A                                  Chief Inspector Beal

Serials 1-10

Sector IB                                  Chief Inspector Craaser

Serials 11-19

Reserve Serials 20/21


SECTOR TOO (LIVERPOOL)                     Superintendent Marshall

Sector 2A                                  Chief Inspector Waring

Serials 22-33 and 44, 46, 47 & 48

Sector 2B                                  Chief Inspector Purdy

Serials 34-51 excluding 44, 46, 47. & 48


SECTOR THREE (NOTTINGHAM FOREST)           Superintendent Chapman

Sector 3A                                  Chief Inspector Suimer

Serials 52-56

Sector 3B                                  Chief Inspector Price

Serials 57-64
                                                           APPENDIX •ACii)'



                                 BEPECTORS




SECTOR 1A - CHIEF INSPECTOR HEAL

                                                                      Call Sign

Sub Sector 1       (Serials 1-3)        Inspector Eerling 'F'         India 1

Sub Sector 2       (Serials 4-6)        Inspector Harvey 'HQ'         India 2

Sub Sector 3       (Serials 7-8)        Inspector Calvert 'HQ'        India 3

Sub Sector 4       (Serials 9-10)       InsDector Booth 'E'           India 4




SECTOR 1(B) - CHIEF INSPECTOR CKEASER



Sub Sector 5       (Serials 11-12)      Inspector Woodward 1F 1       India 5

Sub Sector 6       (Serial 13)          Inspector Bullas 'HQ'         India 6

Sub Sector 7       (Serials 14-15)      Inspector White 1F1           India 7

Sub Sector 8       (Serials 16-19)      Inspector   Sykes 'F'         India   8A
                                        Inspector   Purdy 'Trg'       India   8B
Sub Sector 9      (Serials 20-21)       Inspector   Delaney 1F1       India   9A
                                        Inspector   Beresford         India   9B
                                                                   APPENDIX 'A(ii)*



 INSPEC’UJKS (CCNT'D)


 SECTOR 2A - CHIEF INSPECTOR WARING (LIVERPOOL)

                                                                          Call Sian


 Sub Sector 10          (Serials 22-25)    Inspector Hunphries 'A*        India 10

 Sub Sector 11          (Serials 26-29)    Inspector Selwood 'E'          India 11

 Sub Sector 12      (Serials 30-33)        InsDectcr Millett 'A'          India 12




 SECTOR 23 - CHIEF INSPECTOR PURDY (LIVERPOOL)


Sub Sector 13       (Serials 34/35)       Insoector Townend 'A'          India 13

Sub Sector 14       (Serials 36-38)       Inspector Ellis 'C'            India 14
                                                      f‘\aa-K
Sub Sector 15       (Serials 39/40)       Inspector BesnKsr—             India 15
Sub Sector 16       (Serials 41-43)       Inspector Brocmhead 'C*        India 16




COACH RECEPTION   SEARCH SQUADS

Sub Sector 17       (Serial 44)           Inspector Wardle 'E'           India 17

Sub Sector 18       (Serial 45)           Inspector                      India 18



MOBILE UNITS

Sub Sector 19      (Serials 46-48)        Inspector Walker 'Cps'         India 19

Sub Sector 20      (Serials 49-51)        Inspector Robinson ’HQ*        India 20
                                                         APPENDIX ’Adi)*



msracTORs (o c n t 'd )



SECTOR 3A - CHIEF INSPECTOR SUMNER (NOTTINGHAM FOREST)

                                                                     Call Sign

Sub Sector 21         (Serials 52/53)   Inspector Charles 'C'        India 21

Sub Sector 22         (Serials 54-56)   Inspector Newey 'C'          India 22




SECTOR 33 - CHIEF DSPECTOR PRICE - NOTTINGHAM FOREST



Sub Sector 23         (Serials 57/58)   Inspector Bateman 'C'        India 23

Sub Sector 24         (Serials 59/60)   Inspector Burgess 'C'        India 24




MOBILE UNITS



Sub Sector 25         (Serials 61-64)   Inspector Wallace 'E'        India 25




LIAISCN                                 Inscector Sewell 'F'         India 26


AEMINISTRATICN                          InsDector Bennett 'F'        India 27


TRANSIT ALXOCATICN/RESERVE SERIALS/
COACH SUPERVISION                       InsDector Scarfe 'Traffic'   India 28
                                                                                                        AFF5=vn;x T

                                                        SEA3HC RAN FCR BRIEFING

     Seats 167-178                                                                Seats 183-19**

     Row- 38 -     Specials
     Row 37 -      CID                                                            CZP
     Row 36 -      CED                                                            CID
     Row 33 -      1 Insp. 2 PS 1' PC’s (serials 61, cl-'                         2 rS 10 PC’s (serial 6 ? il
     Ha-; y* -     1 Insp 1 FS S PC’s (serial 5?'                                 1 PS 8 rC’s (serial cC)
     Row 3 3 -     1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 57'                                 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 55?
     Raw 32 -      1 PS 8 FC’s (serial =5)                                        : FS 8 PC’s (serial
     RCfo* 31 -    1 FS S PC’s (serial 53)                                        I Insp I FS 8 PC’s serial
     Row 30 _      ? PS’s 10 PC’s (serials 5C i 5D                                - j_nsp 1 FS 8 PC s .ser~~ .
     Row • PQ^-    1 Insp 2 PS’s 10 PC’s (serial ^ 6 L V )                        1 Insp 2 PS's 10 Pi’s is=rr^&2 «i    ^
   . Haw- 2 S -    1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC’s (serial & )                                1 Insp 1 FS 10 PC’s vserrail -^3 )
     haw 27 -      1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 42)                                        1 PS 8 PC's (serial -3)
     Row 26 -      1 PS 8 FC’s (serial H O )                                      1 Insp 1 PS 8 FC’s -.ser^-" C l
     not-: 25 -    10 PC's (serial 3S>                                            : Insp : PS 8 PC's .seriaT 3 c)
           2i J-   1 Insp 1 PS 1C PC’s (serial ?6 )                               1 PS 10 PC's (serial 37;
  §pbow 23 -       1 Insp I PS 8 PC’s (serial 3^)                                 1 PS 8 PC's (serial 35)
     Ra-.- 2 2 -   1 PS S PC’s (serial 32)                                        1 PS £ PC's (serial 33)




      Rev 2 1 _ i Ins? 1 PS £ PC’s (serial 30)                                    1 PS 8 PC's (serial 3D
      Row 2 0 - i PS S PC’s (serial 23)                                           1 PS 8 PC's (serial 29)
      Row IQ - 1 Insp 1 PS £ PC's (serial 26)                                     1 FS 8 PC's (serial 27)
      R w 1 8 - 1 PS S PC’s (serial 23)                                           1 FS 8 PC’s (serial 25>
      Row 17 - 1 Insp 1 FS 8 PC’s (serial 22)                                     1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 23^
      Ra» 16 - 1 Ins? 1 PS 10 PC's (serial 20)                                    3 FS 10 PC’s (serial 21)
      Row         “ a FS 10 PC’s (serial 18)                                      1 PS 10 PC's (serial 19)
      Row .A** - 1 lr.se 1 PS 1C PC’s (serial 16)                                 1 FS 10 PC's (serial 17)
      Row               Insp 1 PS 1C PC's (serial 13)                             : PS 10 PC's (serial 15;
      Rcv 12            PS 1C FC’s (serial 12)                                    I Insp 1 FS 12 PC's (serial :^ )
      Ra-. ** - 1 FS i: PC’s .     ‘serial 10;                                    1 Insp 1 PS 10 PC’; '-serial 1 *>
      rvOU : c - 1 PS 1C PC's iserial 8 )                                         1 Irsp 1 FS 1C PC'; seri-_ 0
      r.c**.’ C -     ■’S c PC's (serial o'                                       1 Insp I PS 10 PC'; .serz^l ~
      P.av c -        ^ 1C PC’s 1 Insp (serial -•                                 1 PS 1C PC's (serial 5)
              *T _ -1 FS 1 C PC's (serial 2)                                      1 PS 10 PC's (serial 3)
" U R e * t - 1 Irsr 1 PS 2C PC’s (serial 1'                                      as Row 6
      Row 5 -
     Roiv - - Senior Officers                                                     Senior Officers
     Rcv: *




                                                           BRIEFING AREA

      Seats 167-173                                                               Seats 183-19**
                                      'F* DIVISION


     FOOTBALL DOTY:      SEMI FINAL                             DATE;   15 APRIL 1989

                           LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTS FOREST

                               SERIAL NUMBER

                          DETAILS OF OFFICERS        EMPLOYED


    Sergeant                                               DT/OT
    1 PC                                                   DT/OT
    2 PC                                                   DT/OT
    3 PC                                                   DT/OT
    4 PC                                                   DT/OT
    5 PC                                                   DT/OT
    6 PC                                                   DT/OT
    7 PC                                                   DT/OT
    8 PC                                                   DT/OT
    9 PC                                                   DT/OT
    10 PC                                                 DT/OT



    INCIDENTS AH D COMMENTS REGARDING DOTY (INCLUDING ARRESTS BY
    MEMBERS OF SERIALS ETC) MOST BE SHOWN OVERLEAF
w   Signature of Sergeant in charge

    THIS FORM M O S T BE COMPLETED AND HANDED IN TO THE SERGEANT
    IN CHARGE POLICE ROOM PRIOR TO LEAVING THE GROOND
I            #A
             *                                                    Q ~ ~ T C I A L N'OTIC£

I                                                               r.=nr\-n R E G U L A T I O N S

■ i l l r n a - n e s are p l a v e d         in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h     the R u l e s     and Regulations           o f T h e Foot ba ll
Association                and T h e      Football        League      a n d the L a v s o f t h e G a m e .

-Play         ca nnot be g u a r a n t e e d to t a k e p l a c e on a ny P - t i c u l a r d a y
■tine         and the Club r e s e r v e s the r i g h t to c h a n g e its a w W . t i s . d
     and w i t h o u t l i a b i l i t y .

|io       refund of any cas h                mission            c h a r g e p a i d at the        t u r nstile will be


     Refu nd s « U 1 be —                   i» « • » “ *                     &! ° “ ^ n l n (j: : : “ r o f n v (,i;n'1c a n r t, f c h a i n e d      .
     m at ch is p o s t p o n e d ,       s u b j e c t to a t x a e      limitation, de-a-ls

I    from the 3ox O f f ice .

•Unauthorised                persons       are not        permitted         to e n t e r u p o n      t h e f i e l d of p l a y .

"vi'th the e x c e p t i o n of a u t h o r i s e d p r e s s r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s h o l d i n g                            * “ ■ « . the
  taking e f p h o t o g r a p h s o r c x n e p h o t o g r a p h y ^ n s - d e .he G ^ c u „ ^ i s                             p u r p o s e s and

                                                                                                  —        «*> 2                     - * « « * -
     "W * w r i t i n g   by the Cl ub.



•s i
      any o t h e r art icles.

■                                      >,   fhiit f r o a the u s e of R a d i o set s a n d b e h a v i o u r like ly to
      U n ne ces sa ry n o i s e s u c h as that f r o a t he u s e                       a b u s i v e l a n g u a g e is not
      cause co nf usi on o r n u i s a n c e of any k i n d i n c l u d i n g f o u l o r a b u s i v e l a n g u a g
J permitted in any p a r t                    of the G r o u n d .

      The c l i m b i n g o f f l o o d l i g h t     p y l o n s / stands or ot h e r buildings                    in t h e G r o u n d is

M      forbidden.

       T h e c o n s u s p t i o n of i n t o x i c a t i n g   liquor,        is p e r m i t t e d   o n l y   in a u t h o r i s e d places a n d in
-accordance                vita the S p o r t i n g E v e n t s ( C o ntr ol o f A l c o h o l e t c . ) A c t 193,.

     ■F ir eworks, s o o k e c a n i s t e r s , b o t t l e s , g l a s s e s , cans, f l a g s , b a n n e r s .                     ^      !'n "    a
    J'sKnilar articles or containers, including anything w i n c h could o r “ 8h-                                                            -
■      weapon, a r e not p e r = i t t e d w i t h i n t h e o r o u n d , and
          articl e or c o n t a i n e r m a y b e r e f u s e d e n t r y o r e j e c t e d f * o n                   the G r o u

■      under n o c i r c u m s t a n c e s      is it p e r m i t t e d to t h r o w          any object            on to t h e pitch.

      rAny p e rs on w h o f a i l s         to c o m p l y w i t h      i n s t r u c t i o n s f r o m a s t e w a r d m a y b e ejected froa

f| the G r o u n d .

       In general           the right of         admission          is r e s e r v e d   to the C l u b m a n a g e m e n t .

|      Any        pe rson w h o r e m a i n s    in a            g a n g w a y m a y be    ejected         f r o m the G r o u n d .

       -he        Clu b r e s e r v e s   the r i g h t    to r e f u s e a d m i s s i o n      to o r e j e c t a n y    person          w h o refuses-to
I      be sea rch ed by a P o i z e ? erfic**-.                     ..        .....

       All p e r s ons e n t e r i n g       this C r o u n d       are admitted only               subject      to t he
        Regul at io ns and to the R u l e s a nd R e g u l a t i o n s o f *he          ™ t ^ - u t e                                  u n qu al ifi ed

■      The Football L e agu e.
        acceptance of all
                                 E n t r y to the G r o u n d s hal l be d e e m e d to
                                          these Rules        a nd    Regulations.
                                                                                           con s



I       The Club r e s e r v e s the r i g h t            f o r its s e r v a n t s a n d a g e n t s to r e m o v e ^ i ^ r° ,*nd
■       any person w h o d o e s n o t c o m p l y w i t h C r o u n d R e g u l a t i o n s and w t h ^ e
        R e gul at ion s of T h e F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n a n d T h e F o o t b a l l L e a g           ±   a
■       presence on the C r o u n d is o r c o u l d r e a s o n a b l y b e c o n s t r u e d as c o n a t i t J t
I       s o u r c e of d a ng er, n u i s a n c e or a n n o y a n c e to o t h e r s p e c t a t o r s .
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            REF:                         Fl/SRS/MJ
FROM:   Insp ec tor Sewell
                                                            S T A T IO N / D E P T . :   Hammerton Road
TO:     The Chief Superintendent -        'F' Division
                                                            DATE:                        9 August 1988

          SUBJECT:   E M E R G E N C Y E V A C U A T I O N PROCEDURE - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
                                                                       GROUND



           On Tuesday 9 August 1988, a meeti ng was held at Hammerton
           Road Police Station to re-establish further liaison with the
           Fire and Ambul an ce Service in the event of a major disaster
           occurring a t .the Sheffield W e dn es day Football Ground.

           The meeting was chaired by Superintendent Murr ay and attended
           by Superintendent Marshall, Chief Inspector Beal and Inspector
           Sewell, D e pu ty Chief Ambulance Officer Hopkins and Assistant
           Chief Ambulance O f f i c e r (Operations) Jones, South Yorkshire
           Ambulance Service and Assistant D iv isional Officer Rowlands
           of the South Yorkshire Fire Service

           A senior a mbulance officer alrea dy attends all home matches
           at the Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Ground and is allocated a c o m p l i ­
           m e n t a r y ticket for the South Stand.      He is in direct radio
           contact with ambu la nc e control and in the event of a major
           dis aster at the ground, he would be the first line contact
           w i t h ambulance control.       Contin gen cy plans are already in hand
           for the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service to rendezvous with
           their v eh icles at Herries Road bus garage and the senior
           ambulance o f f i cer alreacV at the W e d n e s d a y Ground would control
           the ambulance v e h i c l e s in and out of the W ednesday Ground.

           Arr angements have been made for the senior ambulance officer
           who attends the W e d n e s d a y Ground to meet the 1F l 1 Liaison
           Inspector outside the players' entrance at 2.15 pm, before
           each home ma t c h to re- est ab li sh contact and also contact will
           be mai nt ain ed wi t h Mr Lock, the security officer at the
           W e dne sd ay Ground.     In the event of an evening kick off,
           further a r r a nge me nt s w il l be made to establish contact time
           w i t h the ambul anc e service.

           In the event of a m a j o r disaster occurring, the senior
           ambulance o f f i c e r at the ground would, where possible, make
           his w a y to the g y m n a s i u m to direct his operations.

           It was c on sidered that this ambulance officer would be better
           based in the North Stand so he could get to the gymnasium
           without problems.     However, the senior ambulance officer who
           attends is off d u t y and the Sheffield W ednesday Football Club
           only wish to allocate the complim en ta ry tickets to the ambulance
           service for use in the South Stand, so that the club physio,
           Alan Smith, can signal straight away to the ambulance officer
           if an ambulance is r equired for a Wedne sda y player.
      (2)




      that the firp ^ S1° nS "xth the ^ire Service Officer it was agreed
      ^ e f d i ^ c t    ? o 3T i f e -W O U i- attend by the ^u i c k e s t possible 9
      £o w S d e ^ o S s     i       immediate scene of any fire and as such
                         p o i n t s or pre-arranged routes could be determined.




      9i    ^   0 n N00 s t 7      ^ i l r l \ £      U        i l nL a: t       d u t y Ugt




                                                                                                              s s j i l -k                1-



    I n sp e c t o r

•a.              n
0   W\A^                  .   M ck (

<V*                                                            **>                                                   V M rk^JovS,

                  ^                                   %X\'vdLX v ^\Vhj3\V\C^                         a        ^   0 \Ct      \V\tAc\^.



'Au*kaWu               ?fc\*wuJt              U ? h \ 54                     1                c ^ o \ .


            ? a w v />                W »W             CX%.V^d              W\ Ov        ^ V v v ^ ^ t /A ^          ^ -O t> c l   © 'i
                     SA

                                      U       f   ^            W-\xJ(           o£       ck\^d                                             _




                                                                                     S S Q g g ^ v T.fpfcrgy "^ *!
                                                                                                                :
Q^ u - W x A^. c.\                        k   W    jI
                                                    /vo    W        a   .

                                                                            u        .
                                                                                            — ----- ^  '-ji
                                                                                            .Divisiqry -p
                                                               10




                                                                                                                  ____
SERIAL   Reserves - Mobile (Call sign -
         TANGO 2)

         Phases 1 & 3 - Before and After
         Match.

         Patrol in a personnel carrier
         on the away from city side of
         the ground, giving particular
         attention to public houses on
         Penistone Road North where away
         supporters vehicles may have to
         pass. If directed escort away
         supporters to and from the coach
         park or railway station.

         Phase 2 - During Match

         During the game the serial will
         remain on patrol around the ground
         to ensure security of parked
         vehicles etc.



         Meal details at Briefing.

         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

         In the event of such a situation arising
          (indicated at Appendix 'Al' in the serial
         Order), this serial will go ininediately to
         Herries Road Bus Garage. This would be a
         rendezvous point for Aatoulance vehicles.
         '111.is serial would then give assistance to
         Ambulance personnel in the movement of their
         vehicles in liaison with Police Control and the
          Senior Aiitoulance Officer present.
SERIAL   Reserves - Mobile (Call Sign -
         TANGO 1)

         Phases 1 & 3 - Before and After
         Match.

         Patrol in a personnel carrier on
         the city side of the ground, giving
         particular attention to public
         houses in the vicinity of the Owlerton
         Stadiuin car park, where home support­
         ers gather on the forecourts (these
         contain saiw of the known hooligan
         element). If directed escort away
         supporters to and from the coach
         park or railway station. Follow
         supporters towards the city centre
         after the game to prevent damage
         en route.

         Phase   2 - During Match

         During the game the serial will
         take up a position in the area
         between the South Stand and Spion
         Kop. They will remain at this
         location for use as a reserve for
         deployuient by the Ground Carinander.




         Meal details at Briefing.
         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

         In the event of such a situation arising,
         (indicated at Appendix 'Al' in the serial
         Order), this serial will return to the ground
         (if not already there) to give any assistance
         to the Fire Brigade they may require in
         relation to the movement of fire service
         vehicles.
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                 REF:
       FROM:         Superintendent Mirray
                                                                 S T A T IO N / D E P T . :   Fl
       TO:
                     Chief Superintendent Jtole                  DATE:                        14 Kay 19S8

                   SUBJECT:       FA CUP SEMI FINAL - 9 April 1988


                 1 refer to the enclosed correspondence regarding the above event. I have
                 liaised with the officers concerned with the preparation, control and
                 supervision of the above event and we have noted locally the lessons that
                 were learned and the improvements that can be made for anv similar future
                 event. Generally I was well satisfied with the event and I will confine this
                 report, to matters which effect the Force Operations Room and F.oaa Traffic
                 Department.

                 COMHUNICATIONS

                On the day more use than normal was made of the radio link between ground
                .control at Hillsoorough and the Operations room in atterootinc to contact
                those units equipped with both ground control and UHF radio.” This was
                entirely due to difficulties in personal radio transmissions which were
                efrected for most of the event by breakthrough from local radio. The
                Superintendent (Communications) is aware of this and an immediate survey
                of the equipment was made after the event, but the fault could not be traced.

                TRAFFIC FLOW AND CONTROL

                Transmissions in relation to problems with traffic, frctn mobile units and
                the spotter plane were being received at Operations room and were not
                monitored at ground control. It sesns sensible to me that for future 'semis*
                all matters relating to the control and movement of traffic should be
                supervised by Operations rocm, with the exception of the local arrangements
                made immediately outside the ground when the final whistle is blown.”

                FOOTBALL TRAFFIC SIGN'S

                Purpose made signs have been requested in the past, but for financial
                reasons have not been approved. Such signs are extremely beneficial and
                ^ ^-s pleasing to note that Superintendent Brougham is looking into this
                aspect.

                SEARCHING OF COACHES FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE ETC.

                The effect of alcohol on football supporters is well known and I would not
                wish to see any relaxation of enforcement of the laws relating to the carriage
                   alcohol on coaches etc. It is appreciated that this can cause some traffic
                congestion, but surveys are being carried out on the major roads approaching
               .the city to establish where this can be carried out to cause minimum
                inconvenience to traffic flows.

               CLOSE CIRCUIT TV LINK WITH WADS LEY BRIDGE STATION

               A TV monitor was sited in the control roam giving pictures from Wadsley Bridge
               Railway Station. This monitor took up valuable room in the control area and
               was of little use and I wculd not wish such a system to be implemented in the
               future.




EN'2
               Superintend
                                                       REF*
P o l i c e Se rgeant    1392 H OYLAND
                                                       STATION/DEPT: Operations Roo-m
Chief    S up e r i n t e n d e n t HEROL D            DATE.    llth A p r i l .1988


   SUBJECT:      items for de-briefing re F.A.          Semi-final 9th April 1988

  On S a t u r d a y 9th April I was duty sergeant in the Operations
  R o o m and I wo uld like to submit my observations concerning
  th e f o o t b a l l match.

  1.    O D e r a t i o n a l Orders

        Traffic             - no problems with this order other than the
        fact that no call signs had been allocated to the three
        p u b l i c ord er patrols at Woodall Services, Ml. It was not
        u n t i l the y came on the air that we knew who was on this
        detail. It was neces sar y to then create a d u t y rota on the
        c o m p u t e r and allocate callsigns (X 1 0 1 ,X 1 0 2 ,X 1 0 3 ). It would
        have been m u c h bett er if this had been catered for in the
        order.

       '’F 1 D i v i s i o n - no problems, other than the fact that Operations
        R o o m did not receive a copy of the order. One was obviously
        c o p i e d from ano the r held at headquarters.

        ’D 1 D i v i s i o n - this order catered v er y well wit h 1D 1 Division
       i n v o l v e m e n t , the precise details of pri mar y and secondary
       r o u t e s b e i n g useful. One problem encoun te re d was that the
       t r a f f i c signals       on the Ml exit slip roads at Catcliffe
       w e r e not turned off; officers were work ing traffic against
       the l i g h t s . This m at te r was s u b s eq ue ntl y resolved but should
       be c a t e r e d for in any similar operation.
                                                                                   t
       D o g Section - Operations Room did not receive a copy of any
       o r d e r or duties in relation to duties at the match. It was
       a f a i r l y le ng th y task creating a d ut y rota on the computer
       for all the dog handlers involved and in future advance
       d u t i e s for such operations should be supplied in advance.

  2.   U s e of s p o t ter plane

       As you kn o w we did have            problems initia ll y w it h air to
       g r oun d communications, but once these problems had been
       r e s o l v e d the assistance cf the spotter plane became
       inval ua bl e. Prior to the match. Operations Room were given
       g o o d a c c o u n t s of traffic flow into Hi lls b o r o u g h and traffic
       ho l d ups we r e reported. It was then po ssible to give
       i n s t r u c t i o n s to officers on point du ty , v i a other match
       contr ols , to ease the hold ups.

       Ironi ca ll y, there was a              two mile t ai lba ck r epo rt ed on the
       A 6 1 6 at O u g h t i b r i d g e - traffic b ui ldi ng up through Warncliffe
       S i d e to Deepcar. The hold up was on L ow R o a d ,O u ght ibridge
       w h e r e p u b l i c or de r patrols manned by the Un der wa te r S earch
       U n i t w e r e s t o p p i n g and se arching vehicles trav el li ng into
       city.
                                    -2-

      Af t e r the match, the spotter plane was of great assistance
      in i de nt ify in g w h y traffic could not leave the area of the
      ground.

      One ma j o r p r o b l e m highlighted, and r ec t i f i e d by the air
      observer, was that officers on point dut y w e r e working
      against each other- One would have re lea s e d traffic whilst
      the next officer in line would be sto pp i n g it. It was then
      p o s s i b l e to s y n c h r on ise their instructions to traffic to
      keep the traffic flowing. One point that s h o u l d be made to
      beat officers on traffic points is that a f t e r the match they
      sh ou ld give p r i o r i t y to football traffic l e a v i n g Sheffield,
      giving long runs th ro ugh junctions. This was not the case
      on Sa tu r d a y and I had to make repeated r e q u e s t s , v i a Match
      controls, for this to be done.

3.    Radio Procedure and Transmissions

      U n f o r t u n a t e l y there was some confusion r e g a r d i n g which Force
     -Radio Channel was bei ng used for the match. As far as Operations
      Roo m was concerned. Force Channel 1 was r e s e r v e d for all
      mo b il es engaged on the football duty. ' D 1 and 'F' Division
      w e r e e xp e c t i n g c h a n n e l 2. This matter was rec t i f i e d and channel
      one was used.

      C h a n n e l 1 m o n i t o r e d all motorway patrols and any vehicle with
      s p e c i f i c duties in relation to the match. A total of 87 mobiles
      were w o r k i n g on this channel and ob v i o u s l y at this level
      t r a nsm is si on time is at a premium.                   was the controller
      in Operations Ro o m and I choose this point to state what an
      excellent job he did.

     As always some o fficers were suffering from 'verbal d i a r r o h e a 1
     m a k i n g life v e r y di f f i c u l t for the ra di o operator. Officers
     p e r s i s t e d in t e l l i n g Operations Room e v e r y time they saw a
     coach or took up escort of it. In m y v i e w this type of
     tran sm iss io n is u n n e c e s s a r y as it is v i r t u a l l y impossible for
     this type of i n f o r m a t i o n to be recorded and ret ransmitted
     whe n coming in t h i c k and fast. The only t r a n s m i s s i o n of this
     type re qu ir ed is w h e r e we-have a coach c o n t a i n i n g unruly
     supporters, etc. or w h er e' spe ci fi c i n st ruc ti ons or enquiries
     are given. Perhaps this point should be ma d e at future briefings
     and included in o r e r s .

4 • Press Officer

     I am aware that S up er int en de nt Pratt had been detailed to
     d e a l w i t h the m e d i a c on cerning the match, and we had speech
     w i t h Mr. Pratt th ou g h o u t the day, but it w o u l d have been
     us ef ul if there had been a press officer on d u t y at Headquarters
     thr oughout the d a y to take care of all the press calls.

     The Op er at ion s R o o m I nspector and Sergeant act as press
     of fi c e r s out of h ou rs and like any other S a t u r d a y numerous
     press calls wer e b e i n g received. Some w er e in rel ation to the
     match, others w er e r o u t i n e press calls about incidents that
     had oc cur re d F r i d a y night - Satur da y morning.
                      -3-



A press officer on duty at headquarters w o u l d have allowed
bot h the S e r g e a n t and Inspector to give total su pervision
tc “ttic•Tronning of the Operations Room and football detail
instead of h avi ng to keep breaking off to answ er press
enquiries.

Generally, the operation went well and was c e r ta inl y an
improvement on last year's operation. This report is
r e s p e c t f u l l y submitted for your information.




Op er ations Room
11th April 1988
                  S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E POLICE   - MI N U T E SHEET



                      FILE REFER EN CE                                                    H 'P -T NO
                                                                                  MINUTE SHEET         ^


                     SUBJECT                           -VcA.      w    v y y


        c    l.     CuJc w lw iX


       < U                             &<!_n^UL~eb                    '~T?

                      iO   Z jU -                                            ^ c e ^ A -



     |\V 0                                    i t
                  nf^j-r


 S O U T H Y O R K S . P O L IC E




                                        PV
CHIEF S'jPERINTENftEN
O P E R A T I O N S *< T R A ' r i C




            GEN/1
      SOUTH YORKSHIRE                POLICE - MI N U T E SHEET



          FILE REFE RE NCE                                                            MINUTE SHEET NO ?


          SUBJECT                F.A. SEMI-FINAL              -   11.4.88

                                                     -2-
  Assistant Chief Constable (Ooerations)

  The r e p o r t a t 1A i s p a s s e d f o r y o u r i n f o r m a t i o n o n l y .          I t makes a few v a l i d
  p o i n t s a b o u t t h e p o l i c i n g o f t h i s y e a r ' s s e m i - f i n a l w h i c h n e e d t o be b o r n e i n
  mi nd f o r f u t u r e e v e n t s .

 T h e r, e ,i s , o.n e a s p e c t t h a t I______________________1I s p o k e t o me^ a b o u t w h i c h h  uc e h uc a as 1IUL
                                                                                                                               not
 i n c _ u a e d i n h i s c o m m e n t s a n d t h a t wa s h i s r e q u e s t t o t h e SYMAS C o n t r o l Room a t
 R o t h e r h a n t o be more s e l e c t i v e i n p a s s i n g 9 9 9 Ambulance c a l l s t o u s d u r i n g t h e
 Saturday a fte r n o o n .            Our i m p r e s s i o n on t h e d a y w a s t h a t t h e y h a d r e d u c e d t h e
 n u m b e r o f c a l l s p a s s e d i n c o n t r a v e n t i o n o f t h e i r n o r m a l p o l i c y a n d we f e l t t h a t
 was v e r y b e n e f i c i a l .       I n f a c t , we now know - f o l l o w i n g o u r m e e t i n g e a r l i e r t h i s
 w e e k - t h a t i n f a c t i t j u s t h a p p e n e d t h a t 9 9 9 c a l l s w e r e v e r y l o w t h a t d a y and
 t h e y p a s s e d them a l l .          A s y o u k n o w t h a t r e q u e s t o f o u r s w as o n e o f t h e i r g r i p e s
 at our r e c e n t m e e tin g .           H o w e v e r , by n e x t y e a r o u r r e v i s e d j o i n t p o l i c i e s w i U
 obviate that area o f d i f f i c u l t y .

 I have      a f e w c o m m e n t s o f my own c o n c e r n i n g      the p o l i c i n g   th a t day a s         fo llo w s :-

  You w i l l a p p r e c i a t e t h i s w a s my f i r s t s e m i ' o u t s i d e t h e g r o u n d ’ , w i t h t h e
  r e s p o n s i b i l i t y fo r O perations L T r a f f ic .         By a n d l a r g e i t wa s o k a y , b u t I t h i n k
  t h e m a n a g e m e n t o f t r a f f i c f l o w c a n be i m p r o v e d .      Many o f t h e o f f i c e r s d e p u t e d t o
  t r a f f i c p o i n t s i n b o t h 'D' and ’ F' D i v i s i o n s r e a l l y had l i t t l e i d e a o f what t h e y
 were e x p e c t e d t o d o .        Many a p p e a r e d n e v e r t o h a v e w o r k e d t r a f f i c b e f o r e a n d
  t h e i r s i g n a l s were s l o p p y and ga v e a poor i m p r e s s i o n .              Many I s p o k e t o h a d n o
 i d e a o f t h e o v e r a l l t r a f f i c s t r a t e g y an d h a d b e e n d e p u t e d t o a p a r t i c u l a r
 t r a f f i c p o i n t b o t h b e f o r e a n d a f t e r t h e m a t c h w i t h n o u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f how t h e i r
 a c t i o n s m ight in f l u e n c e the o v e r a l l s i t u a t i o n .        I c o n s i d e r t h a t o n e way t o
 i m p r o v e t h a t m i g h t b e f o r D i v i s i o n s =to p e r h a p s be a l i t t l e m o r e s e l e c t i v e i n who
 t h e y c h o o s e t c d e p u t e t o k e y t r a f f i c p o i n t s , and o n c e t h o s e p e r s o n s have b een
n o m i n a t e d , t h e n I f e e l t h a t f o r t h e p u r p o s e s o f t h e o p e r a t i o n t h e y s h o u l d come
u n d e r t h e a e g i s o f T r a f f i c a n d a l l a t t e n d a p r e - m a t c h b r i e f i n g by o u r s e l v e s s o
t h a t a l l know j u s t w h at i s w h a t .            I w o u l d e n v i s a g e t h e u s e o f maps a n d a e r i a l
p h o t o g r a p h s and v i d e o s t o i l l u s t r a t e t h e o v e r a l l p i c t u r e .     That would l e a v e
D i v i s i o n a l C om ma nd e r s a n d S e c t o r Commanders o u t s i d e t h e g r o u n d t o d e a l w i t h t h e
crowa c o n t r o l , p u b l i c o r d e r , l i q u o r , e t c . , e t c . , w ith th e c o n t r o l o f t r a f f i c
u n d e r a s i n g l e c o - o r d i n a t e d c ot cmand.

S t a y i n g w i t h t r a f f i c , y o u w i l l b e a w a r e t h a t a t o n e s t a g e we h a d a t a i l b a c k o f
some 2 j m i l e s from T i n s l e y t o C a t c l i f f e on t h e M l.           Had we n o t a d o p t e d a o n e - o f f
c o u r s e o f a c t i o n t o r e s o l v e t h a t , many N o t t s f a n s w o u l d h a v e m i s s e d t h e s t a r t o f
the m atch.          We w o u l d n e e d t o c a t e r f o r s u c h a c o n t i n g e n c y n e x t y e a r .




                                                                                                    c o n tin u e d




G EN/1
               S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE - M I N U T E SHEET



                   FILE REFERENCE                                                             MINUTE SHEET NO                 3


                  SUBJECT                    F.A. SEMI-FINAL           -    11.4.88



           1h e m a t e r .   s i g n i n g ' on t h e m o t o r w a y was p a t h e t i c , a s was t h e r o u t e s i g n i n g f o r
           both s e t s o f fa n s.            We n e e d t o c o n s i d e r t h e a c q u i s i t i o n o f LARGE CLEAR a n d
           e a s i l y p o r ta b le sig n s as a m atter o f urgency.                    We w e r e t r y i n g t o e n c o u r a g e
          N o r t h b o u n d m a t c h t r a f f i c t o u s e o n l y t h e n e a r s i d e l a n e o f t h e Ml N o r t h a f t e r
          C a t c l i f f e a n d t h e o n l y s i g n s we h a d w e r e 18" s q u a r e p r o p p e d up a t i n t e r v a l s on
           t h e h a r d s h o u l d e r where no cne c o u l d s e e them.                 We s h o u l d c o n s i d e r f l e x i b l e
          s i g n s t h a t we c o u l d a t t a c h ’ g a n t r y s t y l e ' t o t h e o v e r h e a d b r i d g e a t t h e A 57
          j u n c t i o n Nor^h (and a l s o b r i d g e s on t h e motorway f o r Sou th b ou n d s p e c t a t o r s which
          g _ v e c l e a r i n s t r u c t i o n s t o v i s i t i n g f a n s and w hich t h e y c a n n o t f a i l t o s e e ) .
          S u b j e c t t o y o u r a g r e e m e n t , I w i l l a r r a n g e f o r S u p e r i n t e n d e n t B r ougha m t o
          r e s e a r c h t h a t a r e a and r e p o r t r e l a t i v e t o c o s t e t c .         I do not e n v isa g e any g rea t
          s um b e i n g i n v o l v e d .

          T h e s p o t t e r p l a n e was - a s a l w a y s - a r e a l a s s e t , b u t a l t h o u g h we t h o u g h t we had
          i t r i g h t t h i s t i m e a n d t h e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s w o r k e d a t r e h e a r s a l , t h e y f a i l e d u s on
          the day.          Ke w i l l t r y a g a i n on S p r i n g Bank H o l i d a y when M i d d l e s b o r o u g h c o m e t o
          O akw ell v e r s u s B arn sley.

          I f y o u a g r e e i n p r i n c i p l e w i t h t h e s e v e r y g e n e r a l com m ents, I would i n t e n d           to
          c i r c u l a t e t h e s e p a p e r s t o t h e D i v i s i o n a l Comma nde r s c o n c e r n e d f o r t h e i r
          i n f o r m a t i o n and f u t u r e d i s c u s s i o n .




      r           ^—
     ]■ C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
        (O perations & T r a ffic )
       '"THQ/RH/SJE               26.4.88

                                                            - i -

                        V1          Q & -




                       1cr-y>
  SOUTH YOflKS- POLICE

                                                                                                            4
          2j[APRI?88
   st'CL-f
C H IEF S U P E R IN U H p g y f
o p H & H fc fc s & t r a f f i c   /?   '
            S O U T H Y O RKSHIRE POLICE          - MINUTE SHEET



               FILE    REFERENCE                                                          MINUTE S HEET N O     4^


               SUBJECT                           &CS/7            <£ztn / - S~-7/v/n.
                                                                               i               //.


        ’
        ■                 ' <Av.




                                   ^                  >4 . ^       v

                                              SrTci     .




                                                                         - ‘ i-'il 1988    )           ~ — r^.l ^ b r-




      - 5 -y fly 1988

O il E F &JPER >ffT t, -J3CNT
                                       e                    X 7


     ‘F' prv?si5~                                                 -sfr




                                              N *\f

                           $J(         QjlS




                                                      lv l # ’




    GEN/I
is

     SOUTH YORKSHIRE     POLICE - MINUTE SHEET



       FILE R E F E R E N C E _________________________   MINUTE SHEET NO   5_


       SUBJECT           F A CUP SEMI FINAL - 11.4.88


                                       -   8   -




      Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) HQ

      Sir.
      In respect of vour memorandum concerning the above subject. I forward
      herewith a report by Superintendent Murray and endorse the comments
      made therein.

      Mv onlv additional comment concerns traffic, and I would agree with
      the comments made bv Superintendent Anderson that in future at such
      events, i.e. semi finals, there may well be merit in traffic being
      dealt with separately from the policing of the football match. I
      would not be adverse to this suggestion and feel that it would be
      beneficial to all concerned. However. I would not wish to see similar
      action at normal football matches and feel that our existing
      arrangements are completely aoequate.

       I submit this report for your information please.




      Chief Superintendent
      'F' Division
      16.5.88




 G E N /1
m .


      S-TLTH Y O R K S H I R E   POLICE   - M I N U T E SHEET



           FILE   REFERENCE                                     MINUTE SHEET NO   6


                                    F A CUP SEMI FINAL - 11.4.88


                                                _Q_



          -Hr.ief Superinterscent,     ’D' Division

          Tr>= comments cf *F’ Division are appended hereto for forwarding
          ~c the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations). However, they are
          ^    forwarded for your carments before that action is taken.




                  Super intender.
                  v xs i o n




                                                                                      |

G EN /I                                                                               !
                      S S filliS                                        W &im m *                        r«li«                      ,^ v

                              msmsmmmm


        in i
          mmM

                               ilfti

                                        i»a^»SSS                             & B38

MsSissSiSsiSii
     M
                                   siliil®
                          isii*a®iisil«ii*sw»
                                    lilt ©


    SMiS                                W&W&

                             M&m
               «&#<


               t& fe ?

                            IS IS S !
        » s »                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '     -?



                                                        m tf^ .
                                                                           W^Wms                                                                                                                                                                 SlSStfJ
                                                                                    ss&p S©

                                              sllM -S
                                                                                    ^1
                             SWSfi
                                         sfcliilS
               I8 S
        i
        Siit*
          ii*tsi
                                                                                           wisp
               m m s.
                                                                                    Si 0m m                               W '^S S


®1S8S1S®
#|»15Si§ifi8Bll^^
                                                                        fiMsim
                                                 au«i»sii
                                          ;-^S#,i£c:'
                                                                                      llllli                                                                                                                                                        $?s*A-

                             ISiMSi
                             fw fl
         S5»fS


                                                           « S ilS ii»
!»%3S§isli                 ■%iiSllilPi
                           ® S m gp




M i® ! ?
                                          M irim ;                        IJMl
                     aHBMB
                         M M w iS


                 PfBlPi1
                       ®!


         StSflSISl
«          »




           S « s
                m ssm m                     tnm ra
®;.;j?f®tWfi

                    pMffmm
         SMimwlM

M   S
                              illlttiS li®



        >■${SvftKfe
        ’                                                                         .....   .**&
                                                                                                                                  iM ^ M A                                                                           mmrnimmmmsmmm
                                                          ;« & ,
                                                                                                                          IfJ W                              ivS fiS ^® i®                     fef*SSS»sli?                 S4i<w6
                                                                                                                                                                                                           8®BW§8WM:$M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #?®£M
                                                                                                                                                                                 :.:i ;..'K;a-iV.f
                                                                                                                                                 i8lS#«B
                                                                                                                                              ysa $» S M ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                   sM sm        *|gP^
                                                                                                                                                               litm1                                                                  » ...
                                                                                                                              '     s       ■^v 'f"-a                                                                 Iw ^ l
          :?v.^r                                             ■Jffo.ii      ?*,S,«Ee!z.Hti'^41Ml'1!,;«r
                                                                                                          i-,Tf.'«tfiri                                                      ’-- .              **,, v ..              f'j;1t’,*Ml*t,   r<i*1*$
                                                                                                                                           s'<2»c*£iw                                                     ^?r-.;jfn-'-'-r^s^T;'*'i
i. l£i_fprw»tipn/Intentlon.

1.1
    The match will attract a capacity crowd of approximately
55,000 spectators. A large percentage of the crowd will travel by
road, either by coach or priv ate car. Special trains will also
convey Liverpool -fans to Wadsley Bridge station and Nottingham
Forrest supporters to Sheffield Midland station.      A convoy o-f
buses will transport fans arriving at Sheffield Midland to the
ground. The gates at the ground will be open from 11am.

1.2
     It is the intention of the Road Traffic Division to assist
the free movement of traffic and the segregation of supporters
both  before and after    the game so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible both to persons attending the match and
to the general public.



2. Method.

2- 1
    Superintendent Brougham will be  in overall command assisted
by Inspector Scholey. Chief Inspector Shaw will be in command of
the sector north of the   ground i.e.   the Liverpool   routes and
Chief Inspector Lax will be in command of the sector south of the
ground i.e. the Nottingham Forest routes.

2.2
     Traffic Division night staff on Friday   14th April 1989 will
remain on duty until 8.00am. Unless instructed otherwise the 6
— 2d staff on 15th April and all officers involved on duties re
the match will work from 08.00 until     approximately   20.00. No
officer will retire from duty unless authorised by asupervisory
officer.

2.3
     All intersections on the motorway and all key traffic points
will be manned from 10am. There will    be car patrols detailed to
sections of the motorway and motorcycle patrols     covering other
routes.  All  officers  must ensure    that football   traffic  is
correctly directed. Officers on static points must ensure that
priority is given to the     heaviest   traffic flow which will
obviously be the football   traffic.   All officers   at locations
controled by automatic traffic signals will be issued with a key
to turn off the lights as and when necessary.There are bound to
be locations where traffic will  build up and delays occur. This
could lead to frustration particularly by anyone not attending
the match. Officers should   therefore   deal firmly but friendly
with any complaints re traffic movement.
2.4                           !
                              ;
     Thera aro no car parking facilitiss at. Hi 11 aboro football
ground and alt  driver* ahould ba ancouraged to park up whan
within walking diatanea <jf tha ground. Thara will no doubt coma a
stage whan aupportars will make more progress by walking.



     Eight personnel   carriers have  been aquired and will be
driven by officers shown at Appendix*B*.   These vehicles will be
used to transport. officers on static points, delivery of packed
meals etc.


2*6
    There is a remote    possibility   that some supporters will
travel on the A57 -from Hyde to Sheffield via the Snake Pass. To
reduce the possibility of this,   during the    night of 14th April
1989, Barnsley Traffic Section will collect a diversion sign from
FI sub-division and transport it to the Junction of the A57 and
A628 at Hyde where it will be positioned     to divert traffic away
from the A57 and along the A62B.     The officers detailed for this
task will inform the police at Glossop of their intention. After
the kick-off, Chief Inspector Shaw will arrange for the sign to
be re-collected and returned to FI.


2.7
     Coaches will not be searched en   route   but will be searched
on arrival at the parking area


2 S
     A public order detail will be present at Woodhall Services
to prevent any disorder at that location. The detail will consist
of officers shown at Appendix *B*.


3.     Br ie-Fi n o s :


      A briefing will be held at driving school at 9.00am for all
 those officers on static points and all motorcycle wing officers

 3.2
      A briefing will be held at Woodhall  police post at 8.30am
 for all officers  shown on Appendix’B ’ with the exception of
 Inspector Walker and the Transit   drivers who will attend the
 driving school briefing.


 4. Communications:


 41   All mobiles equipped with VHF radio will operate on channel
 one. Personal radios will  not be    issued to those
 static points shown in Appendix  *D*   except at certain strategic
 locations, in these cases portable VHF sets will be issued.
S. Routes

5.1    Llvrpppl
     Segregation -within the ground dictates that Liverpool fans
Mill travel via the M62 ■* Ml “ A61 and on the A628 ■* Ml.     Those
supporterb travelling down the Ml will     exit at Junction 36 and
will be directed on the A61     to the g r o u n d . In the event of
Junction 36 becoming heavily conjested, Liverpool traffic will be
redirected to junction 35 and follow the emergency route shown in
Appendix •A’ .This diversion will   not be taken into use without
instruction -from a supervisory officer.


     The Liverpool coaches will be parked    on Claywheels Lane and
Halifax Road  by beat personnel.

5.3    Nottingham Forest

     The Nottingham supporters are   expected to travel north on
the Ml motorway where they will be directed to leave at junction
34, Tinsley. From there all traffic will travel along Attercliffe
Common - Weedon Street - Brightside     Lane.At the Junction with
Upwell Street traffic will be split.    Private cars will continue
along Brightside Lane - Saville     Street - Sutherland Street -
Gower Street -   Burngreave  Road -     Rutland Road — to Neepsend
Lane where   they will   be advised    to find parking.    Coaches
mini-buses and vans will  be turned right at Upwell Street an
will then travel via Owler Lane to Herries Road. These vehicles
will then be parked at the Herries bus depot.



     In the   event of the     primary route for cars    becoming
over-conjested there are four secondary routes available shown at
appendix *A'. Some traffic may   be sent on the coach route. None
of the alternative routes will      be used without consulting a
supervisory officer.


5.5
      Despite the above   instructions any Nottingham supporter
 travelling by car and particularly wishing to leave the motorway
 at junction 33, Catcliffe,  and travel  via the Parkway will be
 allowed to do so.


 5.6
      Supervisory officers must ensure Operations room are      kept
 informed of any traffic diversions effected.



      A reserve of eight officers shown in appendix D will remain
 on standby at Driving school.    If implementing the emergency
 routes necessitates further   manpower these officers plus     e
 motorcycle wing should be used.
6 * Brlmecs.

6.1
     The Doncaster Brimec crewed by                   Iftnd
       will be on standby at West Bar from 09.00. These officers
will take a meal at West Bar.

6.2
     The Sheffield Brimec crewed by                     ind
         will be on standby at Claywheels   Lane from 09.00. These
officers will meal at Claywheels Lane.

7. Mr:a 1s

7.1
      All officers will be provided with  one packed meal to be
 consumed on location and a hot meal will be provided during the
'match. Officers on traffic points and the Motorcycle Wing will
meal at Driving School. All other officers will meal as shown in
Appendi x ’B' .



8. Force Coaches.

 .
8 1
     The coach based at Claywheels    Lane  will  be driven by
      1 and will transport officers from C Division to the ground.
He will be at C2 sub-division for 8.15 am and at Cl for 9.00am
am This coach will later park   up at Leppings Lane/Catchbar Lane
between 2.45 pm and 4.30 pm and will   be used to hold officers on
standby.

8 .2
     The driving school coach, "driven  by Mr. Armitage will also
convey officers from C division to the ground. This coach will be
at C3 sub-division for 8.15am and at Cl for 9am. On completion of
these duties this coach will be parked at Claywheels Lane.

8.3
     The coach based at Carcroft will be  driven by Mr Hutchinson
and will transport A division officers to the ground.  He will be
at A1 for 08.30 hours. This coach will be parked up on Penistone
Road, near gate 0 between 2.45 pm and 4.30 pm to hold officers on
standby.

8.4
     The personnel carrier,  B90 CDA,   based at Claywheels Lane
will be driven by |           This vehicle will attend at El for
8.30am to transport officers to the ground.
    9. Cell Buses.

    9. 1
         Sheffield cell bus manned    by PS804 Webster     and   PCI 185
    Krajewski is to be at the ground, gate 0, by 9.00am.

    9.2
         Doncaster cell bus manned by PS2514 Naylor and PC1467 Gover
    is to be at the ground, gate 0, by 9.00am

    9.3
           The new S.Yorks cell bus will  be   manned by PS526 Langdale
    and              .The vehicle must be at FI sub-division by 9.00am.

    9.4
         Derbyshire cell bus will be parked up at Ecclesfield police
    station by Derbyshire officers   who will   collect  it after the
    match. It will be manned by PS1579 Nunn and PC1404 Ackers.




'   Superintendent,   Road Traffic Division.
                                  A P P E N D I X ’ft*

                              A L T E R N A T I V E ROUTES


Liverpool;

          I n the sve n t of HI        Ju n c t i o n 36 becoming  blocked traffic
s h o u l d tom rs-dirsctsd south to                Junction 35 whsrs the foil owing
s m s r g s n c y ro u t s M i l l be signpostsd:

           T u r n r i g h t at J35 into C o w l s y Hill - turn lsft into Nether
 L e n s - Hill L e n s - turn        lsft     into Church St - straight on to
 G r s n o s i d e - t u r n lsft back o n A61.



 N o t t i n g ham Forest;

 1.       In the svent of S h e f f i e l d Road, Tinsley becoming blocked
 t r a f f i c can be tsmporarily d iv erted along the following routs:

          U n d e r t h e viaduct - t u r n lsft into Headowhal 1 Road - Barrow
 R o a d - turn left Tylsr S t r s e t - Holywell Road - Carlsile Street
 E a s t - into Gower Strset (back o n advised route).

 2.     In the event of Wee don S t r e e t          becoming blocked traffic say
 be div e r t e d as follows:

           A l o n g Attercliffe C o m m o n -   Attercliffe Road - at Norfolk
 B r i d g e turn right into S u t h e r l a n d  Strset - Sower Street (back on
 a d v i s e d route).

 3.      In the event of Hinna R o a d       becoming        blocked traffic can be
 d i v e r t e d as follows:

         U p Barnsley Road - turn left         into          Norwood Road - turn left
 s t H e r r i e s R o a d on the coach route.

 4.      A n y Nottingham traffic leaving the motorway at Junction 33 -
 S h e f f i e l d Parkway,     will  be    directed to leave      the Parkway at
 P r i n c e of Wales        Road — S t a n i f o r t h Road - Attercliffe Road —
 S u t h e r l a n d Stre e t - back onto advised route. This route has been
 s i g n e d by t h e A.A.

'5.      In the event of traffic tailing back onto the sotorway at Ml
 J u n c t i o n 34, traffic will be diverted north to leave at Junction
 3 5 s n d p r o c e e d as follows:

           T u r n left into Cowley Hill - turn left into Nether Lane - at
 traffic           lights turn left o n t o      The Cosmon —     Cross Hill -
 H i g h g r e a v e — Barnsley Road — L o n g 1ey Lane — Herries Road.
                                  APPENDIX   B




Not* r* meals: DS     «   Drivng School.
               WE     •   W o o lay Edge Service*CNB)
               W      *   Woodhall 8*rvic*« <SB)
               CWL    «   Clayw heels Lana                 __
               Buy    *   these officer* should purchase a m*al
                          locally and claim appropriate allowanc*




Call                                                                  Meal
sign    Officer(s)                    Duty

                                      Officer in overall charge        DS
GHX1    Supt.  Brougham
         Inspector Scholey            Assist
         PC2346 Leek                  Dr iver

                                       Officer i/c Northern sector     WE
GHV1    Ch i e f   Insp. Shaw
                                       i.e. Liverpool routes

                                       Officer i/c Southern sector     W
GHV 2   C h ief    Insp Lax
                                       i.e. Nottingham Forest route

                                       Supervision Traffic South       DS
GCI1     Inspector     Cawthorne
                                       Supervision Traffic North       WE
GBI1     Inspector        Brown
                                       Supervision traffic points      DS
 GCI2    Inspector        Walker
                                       Supervision Rotherham           DS
 GCS1    Sgt. I iyhtfoot
                                       Supervision Sheffield           CWL
 GFS1    Sgt. Myers
                                       Supervision Doncaster            Buy
 GAS1    Sgt. Dawson
                                       Supervision Barnsley             WE
 GBS1    Sgt. Baxter
                                       Motorway patrol                  W
 WC11    P C 1603 Hoiderness                                            W
          PC 207 Williams
                                        Junction 29 - Bar iborough      W
 GC21     PC2637 Richardson
                                        Junction 31 ~ Aston             W
 MC21

                                        Junction 33 - Catcliffe            DS
 MC31     P C 2864 Marshall
           PC 170 Stevens
Call                                                           (teal
SiQn     Oficer                Duty


                               Junction 34 - Tinsley             08
HC12

                               Junction 35 - Thorps Hesley       WE
MB 12

                               Junction 36 - Tanksrsley          ME
MB21


         P C 1367 Rowe         Junction 37 - DocJworth           WE
HB22


GB21                                  A616/A61                   WE
         PC2134 Brown
         PC25 34 Stephenson
                               Ml Barlborough - Tinsley          W
MCI 9
         PC 878 Scott

         P C 1 8 3 0 Webster            as sbove                 w
6E11

                                  Ml Tinsley •     Haigh         WE
 MA21


 GA31     P C 1323 Axup               Patrol A1                  ®UV


          PC2326 Rumble         Patrol A1 A1(M)    S< M18        Buy
 MA31


 MAI 9                                 as above                  ®uy

                                Patrol A616 Sheffield - Flouch       CWL
 GF11
          PC2 6 9 6 Radley
                                       as above                      CWL
 GB11     PC2532 Wilson

                                Mi for escort of turned back         DS
 MC22                                                                DS
          PC 736 Radley         vehicles. Effect slow lane
                                closure N. of Tinsley efter          DS
                                match to facilitate entry at         DS
 MC23
                                Junction 34.

                                Patrol Ml Haigh - Tankersley         WE
 MB11
          P C 1831 Grimshaw
The f o l l o w i n g officers will   fore   a public ordsr petrol to cover
tioodhall Services.


      Inspector 8teele                       All to work Bae x Bp s and
         P S 1069 Wilkie       t             attsnd ths briefing at Woodhal1
                                             post at 8.30ae.

                                             Doncastsr ssction to arrangs
             PC28 39 Barker                  collsetion of their Transit
                                             froe Claywhssls Lane during
                                             Friday night 14/15 April 89

                                        «    The Shsffisld contingent Mill
         1                                   travsl by Transit from
                                             Claywhssls Lane and Mill call
             PC2B92 Smit h                   at Rotherham on route to
             PC1651 Wart in                  Woodhall to collect these
             PC2705 Band)erson               officers.

             PC19 29 Law
                                             All officers to seal at
             PC2344 Hunt                     Woodhall Southbound Services
             P C 1284 Wallace
             PC 344 N i chols on



The fol lowing officers will parade for brief ing at Driving School
at 9 am a n d will drive personnel carriers.          These Mill be used to
deploy          officers    to    static points, distribute pac ked seals,
r e f r e s h m e n t vehicle a n d  an incident back-up vehicle   carrying
e m e r g e n c y equipment. O n stand-down these vehicles must be parked
up at Driv ing School a n d the keys habded to Inspector Walker.

      Mr. D Parkin (refreshment vehicle)             PC2267 Somerset
      Hr. A. Oliver
      ---------------------------   ^                PC 116 Bell
                                                     PC212B Cranswick


 All a b o v e officers will M a i     at driving school.
                                 ftppsNpix..,»c:.

                          motorcycle wing duties


Call
sign     O f fic er                           Duty


MHI1     Inspector Cooper                      I/C Motorcycle Patrols

MF81     PS536        Walton                  Supervision Nottingham Forest
MCS2                                          routes

WASl     J»S2730      Dilcock                  Supervision of Liverpool
WBSl     PS2397       Farnsworth               routes

WBll     PC1419       Marshall                 A616 Stocksbridge -
WB22                                           Oughtibridge - Hillsboro

WB21                                           A61 Tankersley to Niagra
WC12     P C 1677     Wheat                    as above
MF21     PC1319       Hodgson                  as above

WB12                                           as above ♦ duties  re
WA22     PC2449       Mirfin                   Barnsley v Bireingham

WA13                                           Standby junction 34
WEll     PC1B69Bullivant                       re diversions

WA21                                           Catcliffe - Parkway -
WA33     PC2555       Zalad                    Park Square

WA12     PC1796       Scothern                 Prince of Wales Rd. -
                                               Staniforth Road

WA32      P C 245 9   Thomas                   Sheffield Road - Attercliffe
                                               Common/Road - Norfolk Bridge.

WA31      PC24 5 7    Cooper                   Sheffield Road - Wee dor. St. -
WF22      P C3 7 0    Shelton                  Brightside Lane - Upwell St.-
                                               Fir Vale

WE12      P C 2 1B2   Fenney                   Fir Vale - Herries Rd
                                               to ground

WE21      P C 1744    Pulfrey                  Brightside Lane - Sutherland
                                               Gower St. - (Brunswick Rd. -
                                               Nursery St. if necessary)

 WFl 1    PC1820       Bingham                 Bower.St - Burngreave Rd. -
                                               Rutland Rd - Neepsend
                                        APPENDIX* D*

                         DUTIES RE S TATIC TRAFFIC POINTS


N o t t i n g h a m Forest - prj»»ry rovttl


Location                               Officer               Pre-Match   Post-match

J u n c t i o n 34 Island                PC737    Par-fitt         yes         yes
o / s P lum pers A r m                                             yes         yes
                                         PC147S Lath               yes         yes
                                                                   yes         yes

A.T.6.    Vulc an Road                   PC24     Earnshaw         yes         no

Bhe-f-f ield Rd/Weedon St.                                         yes         yes
ATS

B r i g h t s i d e Lane/Weedon          PC63     Kelly            yes         yes
Stract.

B r i g h t s i d e Lana/                                          yes         yes
Upwe ll Street ATS                                                 yes         yes


Upwell St/Hollywell St                   PC7B6    Emmerson         yes         yes
ATS

O w l e r Lane road works                                          yes         yes
                                                                   yes         yes

O w l e r Lane/Rushby St                 PC609    Parker           yes         yes
Roundabout

O w l e r Lane/Firth Pk. Rd.             PC632    Hawker           yes         yes
AT S

A.T.S.     Firvale                       ________________ |        yes         yes
                                                                   yes         yes

 H e r r i e s Road/Moonshine             PC745   Waterhouse       yes         yes
 L a n e roundabout

 N e w h a l l Road/Brightside            PC806   Bray             yes         yes
 Lane          ATS

 S e v i l l e St. East/                  P C 1032 Cameron         yes         yes
 S u t h e r l a n d St. ATS

 S u t h e r l a n d S t ./Gower St.      PC1718 Howell            yes         yes
                                          PC2118 Beaumnont         yes         yes

 G o w e r St./Ellesmere Rd               PC2156 Ansel1            yes         no
C a ll
sign     Officer                        Duty


         PC2141     Wallace             A61 West Bar to Hillsboro
MD22
WFl 2    PC2114     Pashley             as above

         P C 1024   Howe                 Infirmary Rd. - Langsett Rd.
MD21
                                         Middlewood Rd- “ Parkside Rd.

         P C 1773   Robson               City  (Park Sq - West Bar)
MOU
WD12                                     As above


WC21     PC2200     Wheeler              Escort Liverpool Team
         PC27       Copley               Escort Notts Forest Team
WAU


 * the above two officers till remain on standby at driving school
 available for other duti< i until  such time as required for team
 coach escort.


 After the w a t c h it may  be   necessary to re-deploy  officers to
 other   locations.       Insp.    Cooper  will  be  responsible  for
 re-deployment.
S o w e r Bt/Burngreave Rd                                 ya«          yes
ATS

B u r n g r e a v e Rd/Minna R d   P C 3346 Smith          yes          yes

P i t smoor Rd/Minna Rd            PC2665 Pierpoint        yes          yes

R u t l a n d Rd/Cookswood Rd      PC1697 Mynett           yes          yes
ATS

R u t l a n d Rd/Neepsend Lana     PC39    Shipley         yes          yes

Parkway /Park Square                                       yes          no

E x c h a n g e St/Park Square     ____________ to cover this point
                                   after the match

Park 8quare/Sheaf 6t.                                      yes          no

Park Square/Commercial St          above officer to cover this point
                                   after the natch

Pal lean crossing Blonk            TW dl                   yes          no
S t / E x c h a n g e St.          TW dl

Pal lean crossing Blonk            above 2 T W ’s to cover this point
St/ W i c k e r                    after the match

L a d y ’s Bridge crossroads       PC2212 Mragg            yes          yes
ATS?                               |            ]          yes          no

N u r s e r y St/Wicker                      to cover this point
                                   after the match

S n i g Hill/West Bar island                               yes          yes

C a s t l e Square                 P C 1068 Catchpole      yes          yes
                                   P C 1787 Goodyear       yes          no

Furn ival Rd/Blonk St              PC 6oodyear to cover this point
                                   after the match

W e s t Bar island                                         yes          yes
                                   PC290   Ainsworth       yes          no

Micker/Spital Hill                 PC Ainsworth to cover this point
                                   after the match

H o y l e St/Gibralter St          _____________________         yes    yes

 P s n i s t o n e Rd/Rutland Rd   PC54     I bbetson      yes          yes

 N u r s e r y St/Corporation St   PC286    Benstead       yes          yes
Llvrpool - prl»»rv KflUiai

                                 Officar                Pra-»ateh        Post-Mtch
Loc a t i o n

WhMl     Lana                      PC3229 Prica               yas             yas

Halifax Rd/Kilnar Way              PC2979 Ward                yas             yas
ATS

Halifax Rd/Foxhill Rd              PC272S Plu*«ar             yas             yas
ATS

Halifax Rd/Claywhaela              P C 148   Jaraan           yas
Lana ATS

Halifax Rd/Lappings Lana           P C 1687 Mullins           yas             yes

Paniatona Rd North/                P C 1783 Brougham          yas             yes
Harrias Rd So u t h

Penistone Rd/Bradfield Rd          PC14B6 Walshaw             yas             yes

Hi 1 lfoot Bridge ATS                        ZD               yes             yes



 The following  officers will   remain             on    standby    to    implement
 diversions, provide reliefs ate:

                PC 47      Battye                 PC 679 Hudson
                P C 1364   Farneough
                PC 460     Jenkins                PC2322 Thompson
                PC 511     Fox                    PC2761 Crawley



 All officers sho wn in this           Appendix    will aeal at Driving School
 at 3pm.
Dist r i b u t i o n

A.C.C Operations
Chief Superintendent Nesbitt
Chie-f Superintendent Duckenfield, *F* division
Chief Superintendent Broomhead,    * D r division
S u p e r inten dent Brougham
S uperi n t e n d e n t Marsh
Chief Inspector Edmundson, Operations Room
Chie-f Inspector Shaw
Chief Inspector Wall, Driving School
Chie-f Inspector Lax
Duty Inspector, Operations Room
Inspector Steele
Inspector Cawthornr*
Inspector Scholey
Inspector Cooper
Inspector Brown
Rotherham Traffic Office
She-f'field Traffic Office
Doncaster Tra-Ffic Office
Barnsley        Traffic Office
