                                                           HMIC
                                                           4 South P arad e
                                                           Wakeflcld
                                                           WF1 1LR

                                                           Tel No: 01924 332822
                                                           Fax No: 01924 332707

To:           D J O ’Dowd Esq CBE QPM BA M.Sc CI.Mgt
              HMCIC
              Room 565
              QAO


Date:          14 October 1998


A PPO IN TM EN T O F C H IE F CONSTABLE - M ERSEYSIDE P O L IC E

The Merseyside Police Authority around 1.00,p.m. yesterday, unanimously agreed to
offer the post o f Chief Constable to Mr Norman Bettison, currently Assistant Chief
Constable in West Yorkshire. I was present throughout the selection proceedings and
concur with the Authority’s decision, since I believe that Mr Bettison was just ahead
o f any other candidate.

After the usual arrangements for a medical, re-joining Members o f the Authority for a
buffet lunch and briefing session with Sir James Sharpies, he left Merseyside HQ at
around 7.30.p.m. A t 8.00.p.m. he was contacted by a Superintendent from
Merseyside, who said that Radio Merseyside were posing questions about his role in
the ‘‘Hillsborough Affair”. This was also taken up by the Liverpool Echo (probably
publishing tonight) and the Daily Post.

The attached is a Press Statement which Mr Bettison has prepared as a response to the
accusations made against him.

I am informed that the Merseyside MP, Maria Eagle, has previously made allegations
that a small Working Group o f which Mr Bettison was a member (in the aftermath o f
the Hillsborough Disaster) was responsible for peddling sinister propaganda -
presumably countering allegations made by families of the deceased.

Mr Bettison robustly rejects these allegations and says he was merely part of a small
Working Group which was looking at

• What actually happened in the Ground (from a Police perspective).
• Safety o f the Ground issues.
• A full review o f policing football in South Yorkshire.
Mr Bettison was present at the match in an off-duty capacity and later went to a local
Police Station and set up a Missing Persons Bureau. He had no role in the operational
decision making at the Sheffield Wednesday Ground.

I believe this attack on Mr Bettison’s professionalism and his capacity to act as Chief
Constable of Merseyside is vindictive and cruel.

I have just learnt that the headline in the Liverpool Echo today may say “He Must
Go”.

I see no reason whatsoever why this appointment should not stand and although I am
sympathetic to the plight o f bereaved families, this type o f orchestrated attack does
them no justice and I repeat it is vindictive and vexatious.




HM Inspector of C onstabulary
*   14 - O C T —
               - ? S      1 : : O 1                                                                                    f ■

              1 4 -0 C T -:9 9 E   I 0 : «3   e ROM   C.C.°.A                 *C



                                                                         Pr*M Offlc*
                                   WEST YORKSHIRE                        ftO .B o x *
                                                                         Wikafeld

                                   POLICE
                                      Afecf/a and Public Relations
                                                                         WT1JQP
                                                                         T*l: 01124 292041
                                                                         F « : 01924 2021N
                                                                         wwmiw               j»viA A »ry»i*




                                                                                                                       NEWS RELEASE
                                                                                Wednesday 14 October 1996

                                               STATEMENT FROM NORMAN BETTISON
                                                  THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                 I w « a Chief Inspector in the Headquarters Personnel Department of 8outh Yorkshire
                 Police at the time of the Hillsborough diMSter. I was not Involved In any of the pre­
                 planning or the policing of the match Itself. How/ever, I was there as a spectator,
                 having bought a ticket for a seat In the South Stand, adjacent to the Lepplngs Lane
                 end. Along with thousands of other spectators I saw the tragedy unfold.

                 I left the ground at 3.25pm and drove to the nearest police station in Hammerton Road
                 to put myself on duty and help In any way that I could. Many people, who left the
                 tootbell ground and were looking for friends end relatives, were arriving at the police
                 station and I was given the task, helped by a group of other officers, of taking details
                 of people who had become separated at the ground. We eventually opened a boys’
                 dub nert door to the station for people to wait. I went off duty at Sam the next day.
                 That was the extent of my Involvement on the day of the disaster.

                  I returned to work as normal on the Monday, A few days later I was assigned with
                  other officers to a unit which was sat up under a Chief Superintendent and two
                  Superintendents. The unit wes tasked with looking at what had happened on the day
                  of the disaster, making reoommendations about the policing of the remaining football
                  matches at Hlllaborough before the and of the season and reviewing policing
                  arrangements for football at Hillsborough and other grounds in South Yorkshire the
                  following season. The unit also liaised with and passed information to W ert Midlands
                  Polioe who were undertaking Vie formal and Independent polloe Investigation into the
                  dleaater.

                   After the Immediate work of the unit was complete, I was given a specific role to
                   monitor the public Inquiry and the inquest and brief the Chief Constable on progress.

                   No-one who was at Hillsborough on that day, myself Included, can fall to have been
                   touched by the tragedy. I do not share the suffering of the bereaved famllllea but I do
                   ehare some of the horror of that fateful day. Those who lost loved ones at
                    Hillsborough will have my deepest sympathy for ever.

                                                                ends




                                                                                                              TOTAL   P. 02
        14-0CT-98                  1l : i 7                            01924       292013                                    P . 82
