NOTES OF VISIT TO UTRECHT 4-5 OCTOBER


Utrecht Stadium


1.   I was met at Utrecht Stadium by Mr Ooft, General Manager of
the Stadium, and Mr Agten, the designer.     Mr Ooft is a former
professional footballer, whose duties now include the management
of the Club (FC Utrecht) and all the facilities at the Stadium.
Mr Agten is now independent from Ballast Nedam who built the
stadium:   he explained that there might be some difficulty over
his current relationship with them, but Mr Ooft foresaw no
problem.


2.   The Stadium was opened some seven years ago.     The project
involved redevelopment of an existing derelict stadium on behalf
of the Municipality, who have in fact now handed it over to the
Club, under a privatisation programme, so that responsibility for
all activities on the site will pass to the Club on 1 January.
The Municipality had laid down stringent conditions relating to
safety, financial viability, and limitations on the extent of
commercial activity allowed (basically, no shops, so as not to
compete with a nearby shopping complex).     So the concept combined
first class purpose-built stadium facilities with use of space
for a variety of small businesses (eg a driving school, a
computer repairer, a hairdresser, and various small office
concerns).     All the space was currently let and market rents were
charged.     Mr Ooft thought he might be able to put them up when he
took control of all the facilities.


3.   We met in the boardroom and then went on a tour of the
Stadium, beginning with an impressive suite of conference and
dining facilities (including a restaurant open to the public).
The medical facilities were particularly interesting:     a room for
a Club doctor (who was also available if needed by the public)
which contains a medical couch and other facilities, and a
secondary first aid room with four couches and adequate first
line equipment (including an ECG machine, primarily for
supporters rather than players).
4.   The layout of the Stadium is foursquare.     There are two main
seated areas along the length of each side of the pitch.        The
areas behind the goals each consist of two areas of terraced
standing separated by an area of seating.     Each of the four
terraced areas can accommodate 2,000 fans standing:     the
remaining seating areas in total comprise 12,000, so the total
capacity is 20,000.    One of the standing areas (2,000 places) is
set aside for visiting supporters:     it has a further sub-division
enabling a sterile area to be set up between it and the adjacent
seating which is used by local fans.     One part of the seating
area, next to the visiting supporters' terraced area, is kept
closed as a security measure.


5.   Mr Ooft spoke disparagingly about the hooligan element among
Utrecht fans, whom he refused to call his supporters.     The
paradox was that they looked after their own Stadium very well,
while behaving very badly in other people's stadia:     while happy
to wreck other stadia, they would not allow visiting fans to
damage their own.     He attributed this rather strange sense of
corporate pride to the involvement of the supporters' club in the
development of the concept in the early stages.     But he also said
that at his frequent meetings with the supporters’ club he rarely
disclosed his strategies to them.     Measures to keep rival fans
apart were the pre-dominant feature of police security operations
on match days.


6.   A feature of the Stadium is the dry moat all the way round.
This is an extensive concrete well some six or seven yards wide,
sunk below pitch level so that it cannot be easily overseen from
the terraced areas, and completely invisible from the other side.
There are gates at each of the four corners enabling sections to
be shut off.     In the unlikely event of a part of the Stadium
needing to be evacuated for fire (unlikely because the Stadium
contains no flammable materials, and even the plastic seats do
not give off toxic fumes) supporters could be channelled down
into the dry moat and out through emergency exits, which are
normally kept closed but unlocked, and monitored by the police.
In this way, it is claimed, there is no need for perimeter
fences.   Instead, there are fences some three feet high at the
front of the viewing areas over which it would be possible to
climb in an emergency (and then drop down into the dry moat).
Any fans who misbehave and go down to the moat are immediately
picked up by the police.     There is no access from the moat onto
the field of play.      And indeed it would be rather pointless for
anyone to go down to the moat on this basis. The overall effect
close-to is, nevertheless, rather heavy with its configuration of
concrete, metal gates and fences, but above the first couple of
levels of seats it is almost entirely unobtrusive.


Arrangements for our Visit on 19 November


7.   Mr Ooft said we were most welcome to visit the Stadium on 19
November.     The match with PSV would be a good one (both teams are
currently among the top four in the Dutch League).     There would
be a heavy police presence, and we were advised to be there at
about 11.30am to meet the police, see their arrangements for
handling the fans, and also walk round the Stadium.     Mr Agten
would be present and would explain to us the layout and the
concept.    A light lunch could be provided (but it would not be on
the lines of a traditional English directors' lunch, since the
five directors of FC Utrecht all have specific responsibilities
on match days).     We would then be welcome, according to our
normal pattern, to walk round the ground during the first half
and join the directors in the second half.     It was agreed that I
would fax final details to Mr Ooft when they had been aligned
with other arrangements.


Municipal Authorities


8.   I met Mr van Schaik of the Department of Sport of the
Utrecht Municipality.     I also met Mr van Geelen of the same
Department at the end of the visit.    Mr van Schaik thought that
it would be too ambitious to arrive on 19 November and see
everything.     It seemed better for us to arrive late on the
afternoon of 18 November.     If we were to come to Schiphol he
could arrange transport from there to Utrecht (about 45 minutes
run).   He suggested staying in the Scandic Crown Hotel or the
Holiday Inn.     A dinner could be arranged (19.30 or 20.00 hrs) at
which we could meet Mr Pot (Chief Executive of Utrecht
Municipality) and possibly the Burgermeister, Mrs Vos.
Invitations would also be issued to other municipal
representatives, representatives of Ballast Nedam (who built the
stadium) Mr de Ooft, the police, Mr de Vries (Ministry of Sport)
and Mr de Bakker (Dutch FA).     The municipality would arrange
transport back to Schiphol after the match.


Meetings at KFVB (Roval Dutch Football Association)


9.    Mr de Vries was unavailable for the meetings at KFVB because
of illness.     But Mr de Bakker (security adviser to the Dutch FA)
gave me a helpful insight into the attitude of the Dutch FA to
problems of hooliganism.     Mr de Bakker himself had a police and
military background.


10.   So far as the visit to Utrecht was concerned, Mr de Bakker
would hope to be available on 19 November (he was unlikely to be
free on 18 or 20 October).     The Stadium at Utrecht was not
without problems, because fans managed to climb up from the moat
onto the pitch (contrary to claims that it was impossible).        He
hoped that at some time we could also visit Rotterdam, which was
the largest and safest of the Dutch stadia where the
international matches were played, although the design was now
outdated and would not be followed in any design of a modern
stadium.


11.   After Hillsborough, the Dutch FA set up a commission on
security, safety and control.     After an urgent review it had been
decided not to make any immediate changes to present
arrangements.     The commission was carrying on from an earlier
crowd control advisory board which had met between 1985 and 1987,
and had reported to the Dutch Government.     This commission had
comprised representatives of the Home Office and the Ministry of
Sport, the municipalities and the Dutch FA.     Current issues
within the FA were the need to keep to all ticket matches as a
means of control of entry, whether or not to impose 10% cuts on
seating areas for safety purposes, and the need to separate the
responsibilities of the police and the clubs and in particular
make clear to the clubs where their own responsibilities lay.


12.   The recent membership scheme had failed at its first
weekend.     It had been opposed by commercial considerationsand     by
the clubs who argued that if the police could not identify
hooligans they themselves had little chance of doing so.        Opinion
within Government had been divided about the scheme:       the Sports
Ministry had not wanted a comprehensive scheme (nor had the
police or the local authorities):     the initiative had mainly come
from the Home Office.     In the event there had been support only
for a limited scheme involving certain clubs at away matches.
When the scheme had operated for the first weekend the clubs had
sabotaged it.     At The Hague some tickets had been given to
visiting fans, and although the scheme had workedat Utrecht some
700 opposing fans had been let in.     Police had not been in favour
of continuing the scheme so it had been abandoned after the first
weekend.     The position was now one of some confusion.   This
derived from the fact that clubs were private premises but the
responsibility for public security lay with the Lord Mayor of the
Municipality in which the stadium was located and the local
police. It was significant in this confusion that the hooligans
had themselves tried to have the scheme stopped in the courts.
Although they had lost, the press had not been slow to give them
publicity.     Apart from these questions, any scheme seemed likely
to be bedevilled by the practical problems of controlling the
theft and misuse of cards.


Central Information Unit for Hooliganism


13.   I met Mr van Essen of the Central Information Unit for
Hooliganism.     This was a national bureau, financed by the Home
Office, set up in 1986 and now based in Utrecht.     Immediate
operational policy was set by Mr Fogelzang, the Deputy
Commissioner of the Utrecht police.     Motives for setting up the
bureau had been the realisation that the police had taken over
too much responsibility from the clubs, and the need for the
police to share information.     This was a painstaking process,
depending upon mutual co-operation and trust.     It was also
concerned with identifying and establishing the powers open to
the police.   Attention was being focussed on provision of proper
command centres at stadia (which it was the responsibility of the
owner to provide) and on measures to control the way in which
clubs sold tickets.   Mr van Essen had a seat on a committee
(municipalities, police and the Dutch FA) looking at immediate
control problems, such as sales of alcohol, combined tickets
giving transport to the match and entry to it, specific areas
where restrictions were to be imposed, and measures to be taken
against the five known high risk clubs (Ajax^Feyenoord, PSV, Den
Haag and Utrecht).


Arrangements for Visit


14.   The arrangements for the visit cannot be finalised until
after further discussions with Mr de Vries.    But the present plan
is to arrive at Amsterdam airport in mid-afternoon on 18 November
and leave early evening on 19 November.    For London, this would
mean the 14.00 flight from Heathrow terminal 4 on 18 November
(arrive 16.05) returning on the 19.10 flight from Amsterdam,
(arrive terminal 4 at 19.15).   From Manchester, the connection on
the outward flight would be the 11.30 from Manchester arriving
Heathrow at 12.25, but there is a direct return flight at 20.40
on 19 November, arrive Manchester 20.50.    From Newcastle, the
outward journey would begin with the 11.25, arrive Heathrow
12.30, and returning on the same flight to London, with an onward
connection arriving Newcastle 21.35.   This is subject to further
inquiries about Air UK, and other carriers who fly to Amsterdam
from Newcastle or Teesside (Dan Air fly only Monday to Friday).


15.   That leaves open the question whether on this trip we could
take in a visit to Rotterdam.   Travelling between Amsterdam,
Rotterdam and Utrecht is quick and easy, but the visit would
probably have to be either on 17 November or on 20 November.
Unfortunately, Mr de Bakker is not available on 20 November.      My
present judgement is that we probably have time only on this
visit to go to Utrecht, but we should make sure we see as many
people as possible either at the informal dinner on the Saturday
evening or on the Sunday morning before the pre-match briefings
begin at about 11.30am.


                                         ■RHW
                                        R M WHALLEY

9 October 1989
NOTES ON VISIT TO NIMES 27 SEPTEMBER

Visit to Stadium


1.      I was met by Monsieur Langlais, Deputy Director of the
stadium, and a former Olympic fencing champion.       I then met
Colette Dumas, one of the secretaries, who acted as translator
throughout.     I was then introduced to Monsieur Filliau, who is
the Director of Sport for the City of Nimes, and Monsieur
Gaillant, who is the Director of the Football Club Nimes
Olympique.


2.      After these various introductions I was taken on a tour of
the stadium.     This began with a demonstration of the gates, which
were released manually from one end, allowing some six or seven
gates to swing open in cascade before the process seemed to come
to a stop.     I was then shown how the pivot and angle of the gates
makes each one open under its own weight.     I was shown the box
where the electronic release can be made, and also the manual
release at the end of each line of gates.     The decision to
release the gates is made by the representative of the
Municipality (in this case Monsieur Filliau) whose decision
overrides that of the police or the Club (as it does on the time
a match can start).     I was then shown the terraces and the
seating areas.     The seating areas occupy the entire length of the
pitch on both sides, the terraces being the areas behind the
goal.     The gates go all the way round the field.   They are on the
level of the pitch, about 9 inches above the ground level at the
front of each viewing area.     Each terraced area can accommodate
3,000 people seated or 6,000 standing (the seating in the
terraced areas consists of fixed benches, upon which spectators
can either stand or sit).     There is an area of about 5 yards
between the first row of seating and the fence.       I was told that
fans quite frequently come right up to the fence if the crowd is
large.     Now that Nimes are playing in the second division, crowds
are quite small (average about 11,000 or 12,000, whereas the
stadium as a whole can hold 30,000).     But there are large crowds
for rugby matches.     On the whole, football fans behave worse than
rugby fans.     There is some throwing of objects over the fence
onto the pitch, and I was shown the players' entrance, which has
a tunnel capable of extension right onto the pitch to protect
them from missiles.     I was also shown the changing areas for both
teams.


3.   The public can buy tickets at four booking offices at
corners of the stadium.     Matches are all ticket.   The times when
the booking offices are open are advertised in the local press.
The entry for spectators to the stadium is separate from the
purchase of tickets.     There are 12 entrances which are situated
at intervals along the sides of the stadium.      Fans go through a
series of sloping passageways, with some steps, taking them
through the inside of the stadium onto the terraces or the
seating areas.    At the back of the terraced sections there are
steps in the open down to assist with the evacuation in case of
emergency.    The atmosphere in the public entrances is quite
clinical (large expanses of newly whitewashed concrete).        But the
entrances go past the various sports halls situated at the four
corners of the stadium, so that there is some distraction for the
fans.


4.   These four sports halls are most impressive.      The first is
said to be the largest gymnasium in France, and I was shown the
French National Gymnastics team in practice for championships in
Stuttgart.    A visiting American team was to join them at the
weekend for a match.     The next sports hall is laid out for
exhibitions (one was planned soon for a car company).      Then there
is an indoor sports hall for volleyball, basketball and
badminton, a 14 place fencing area, billiards room (club
membership 200Frs per year, sessions 12Frs per hour), and finally
a huge sports hall laid out for martial arts.      The aim is to
develop these sports halls for all kinds of competitions,
including junior sports for the City of Nimes.


5.   There is car parking for 2000 and a separate pitch adjacent
for use by reserve teams, juniors etc.      A junior match was in
progress (6pm).


6.      The link with the City is strong.   They largely paid for the
stadium (160 of the 170 million Frs which it cost).      Only a tiny
fraction of the remainder came from the Government.
Representatives of the Municipality have the best seats.        The aim
is to develop the stadium also for national championships in
France, attracting interest and attention to the City.      Monsieur
Filliau knew of no other city which was trying to do the same
thing.   The project was obviously conceived on a grand scale.
Since it was opened only in February this year, its development
is still in the early stages.     But I was impressed by the
keenness, confidence and openness of all those whom I met.


Arrangements for the Visit on 20 October


7.   Monsieur Gaillant would arrange for transport at Marseille
(Marignane).    Since the flight (1200 from Heathrow) was due to
arrive at 13.50, a visit to the stadium would be timed to start
at 15.30.   We would be given a tour of the stadium, and a
demonstration of the gates by Monsieur Cloez.      This would last an
hour, followed by discussion if we wished for a further hour, and
then on to the hotel.     We would then be welcome to return to the
match (v Red Star, Paris) as guests at 20.30.      After the match,
we were invited to "lunch" with the Club Olympique (apparently
consisting of drinks and light refreshments).


8.   Transport would also be available the next day, leaving at
11.45, to take us to Marseille in time for the flight at 14.35
(16.30 at Heathrow).     Colette Dumas said she would be available
throughout (and offered to meet us at the airport) to provide
translation facilities.     Monsieur Filliau   would handle the
arrangements from the Municipal side.     I said that we would like
to meet Monsieur Bousquet, and he said that this would be
arranged (he would normally attend the match),      it was agreed
that I would send a fax about 10 days before the visit,
confirming all the details.


9.   I was then invited to a cocktail party with some visiting
journalists and officials of the City.     This was brief but
friendly.      Afterwards Monsieur Filliau arranged for one of his
staff to take me to the hotel.     (This was one of a complex of new
hotels near the stadium, a little way out of the town centre),
subsequently arranged for us to stay at the hotel Le Cheval
Blanc.   This is opposite the Arenes (in the middle of the City).




                                         R M WHALLEY

29 September 1989
