                                                                                       »l
 C O Piecydt              kss (S LdyS vji           /


      I.R.
(£)                u>                                         cc        Mr Hammond
                                                                        Mr Chilcot
  -   1 ^ 'k J U                                                        Mr Faulkner
                                                                        Mr Langdon
                                                                        Mr Moriarty
                                                                        Mr Train
                                                                        Miss Stewart

             To all Assistant Under-Secretaries
                                             es of State


                          (A/                      uF   /
                                                        iw3

             DISASTER ENQUIRIES:    COSTS OF REPRESENTATION



             The Attorney General has recently clarified the Government's
             approach to the use of public funds to meet the costs of
             parties to tribunals and enquiries.         The text of an answer to
             a recent Parliamentary Question on the subject is included in
             guidance which the Treasury have recently forwarded and which
             is now circulated for your information.




                                                              >- r ... i..   -a




                                            G K SANDIFORD
                                            13 March 1990

             Finance Division 1
             Queen Anne1s Gate
. 9a/l he.sr/afc/316
                                                                           21 ffB mjn
                                                         Parliament Street
       HM Treasury                                       London SW1P 3AG
                                                         Telephone 01 270 4509

       Mrs A F Case
       Under Secretary

                                                               ‘ n t^ t      1 d“ " " '
 A J Butler Esq
 Principal Finance Officer
 Home Office
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 LONDON
 SW1                                                           20 February 1990




 DISASTER INQUIRESs COSTS OF REPRESENTATION

 Over recent years, there have been a number of ad hoc public
 inquiries and tribunals set up to investigate the circumstances
 surrounding various disasters and accidents.     They  include the
 Fennell inquiry into the Kings Cross, fire, the Hidden inquiry into
 the Clapham rail disaster, the        Taylor   inquiry    into the
 Hillsborough disaster and the May inquiry into the circumstances
 surrounding the investigation of the Guildfordand Woolwich      pub
 bombings.

 2.   The handling of some of these suggested some confusion about
 the Government's position on the payment out of public funds of
 the costs of those granted legal representation at tribunals or
 inquiries of this nature.

 3.   The position has now been clarified.   The Attorney General
 was recently asked by Mr MacLennan MP if he would give favourable
 consideration to the proposal that the legal costs of determining
 issues of general public importance in tribunals and public
 inquiries should be paid for out of public funds.

  4.       The Attorney General replied (Hansard, 29 January, Col 26):

           "Tribunals and public inquiries can be set up in a variety of
           ways. So far as ad hoc tribunals and inquiries are concerned
           (for example, into major accidents) the Government already
           pays the administrative costs. So far as the costs of legal
           representation of parties to any inquiry are concerned, where
           the Government have a discretion they always take careful
           account of the recommendations on costs of the tribunal or
           inquiry concerned.    In general, the Government accept the
           need to pay out of public funds the reasonable costs of any
           necessary party to the inquiry who would be prejudiced in
           seeking representation were he in any doubt about funds
           becoming available.    The Government do not accept that the
           costs of substantial bodies should be met from public funds
           unless there are special circumstances."


             Switchboard 01 270 3000   Fax 01 270 5653     Telex 9413704
9a/l he.sr/afc/316




5.   Subject to any points that you (or others) may have, I very
much hope that, if and when further ad hoc inquiries or tribunals
have to be set up by your department, you will draw these
guidelines to the attention of the chairman and secretary of the
tribunal concerned.    The guidelines should not preclude asking
other parties to contribute to the costs of those who would
otherwise   be   prejudiced in seeking representation (as did
Occidental in relation to the Piper Alpha inquiry). Any provision
from public funds would, of course, be subject to the normal
public expenditure considerations and Supply procedures.

6.   The guidelines set out above follow very closely those laid
down by Sir John May at the Guildford and Woolwich inquiry
preliminary hearing on 4 December 1989. He said:
     "It is right that I should mention the question of costs,
     "here are no statutory provisions governing this inquiry and
     I therefore have no power to order the payment of costs from
     public funds or by any parties. However, the Home Secretary
     and the Attorney General have   indicated to me   that if ^I
     recommend that a party's costs should be met from public
     funds then this will be considered sympathetically by them.
     When I do recommend payment it will be on    the standard basis.
     In the absence of the formal    machinery of the   court for
     taxing such costs the solicitors' bills will be taxed on an
     informal basis by the Treasury Solicitor's Department.

     It may be helpful if I say now that I intend to make a
     recommendation in respect of the reasonable costs of any
     party whom I consider would be prejudiced in         seeking
     representation now were he in any doubt about funds becoming
     available. For example, I shall certainly recommend that the
     costs of the defendants in both trials should be borne by
     public funds, although I shall in due course listen to
     argument on the mode of representation.    I should also say
     that the costs of public bodies and trade unions and other
     staff associations will not be met from public funds unless
     there are special circumstances.

7.   These remarks, in turn, were consistent with   those made by
Lord Justice Taylor at the beginning of his         inquiry intothe
Hillsborough disaster (28 April, 1989). He said:

     "It may be helpful if I say now that I intend to make a
     recommendation in respect of the reasonable taxed costs of
     any party who I consider would be prejudiced in seeking
     representation now were he in doubt as to funds becoming
     available. For example, I shall certainly recommend that the
     costs of the injured and bereaved being represented here
     should be borne out of public funds".

Lord Justice Taylor went on to say that the costs of the Football
Supporters' Association would also be met out of  public funds. By
way of contrast, the insurers who were handling   the interest of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Football League were
told that they were being given no assurances as to costs and that
their position would be considered at the end of the inquiry. The
9a/l he.sr/afc/316



same was said to apply to Sheffield City Council and what were
described as other "substantial bodies", such as South Yorkshire
police.

8.   I hope this clarifies the position.

9.    I am copying this letter to the Principal Finance Officers on
the attached list.     I hope they too, if they are involved in
setting up an ad hoc tribunal or inquiry, will draw the guidelines
to the chairman and secretary concerned.




                                           HRS A F CASE
hel.Id/jamie/1.20.2.90



CIRCULATION LIST FOR MRS CASE'S LETTER TO MR BUTLER OF 20 FEBRUARY


Miss J C Bacon                    M J Bell
Department of Employment          Ministry of Defence


M Buckley                         A J Butler
Dept of Energy                    Home Office


D Chesterton                      R Cooper
Northern Ireland Office           Dept of Transport


J F Craig                         A R Cruickshank
Welsh Office                      Ministry of Agriculture


S R Davie                         B M Fox
Cabinet Office                    HM Treasury


W M Knighton                      J F Mayne
Dept of Trade & Industry          Dept of Health


H H Mills                         F A Osborne
Scottish Office                   Dept of Environment/Transport


N J Sanders                       Mrs E A Woods
Dept of Education and Science     Dept of Social Security
