Fmsr            m    coNnpgt>ru£.                    no,   3
DRAFT

               CHAPTER   - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   I turn now to the interim recommendations derived from my
inquiries so far.     They represent action which seems to be
necessary, based upon events at Hillsborough on 15 April.
Inevitably they do not represent a comprehensive survey of
arrangements at other football grounds, or at other sports stadia
or grounds: I will turn to these matters in my Final Report.

2.   The recommendations fall into two parts.     The first are
immediate measures which I would expect to see taken before the
start of the next football season.   As this is only a few days
away, I have concentrated on what is feasible in a short time.
But since considerations of crowd safety must be paramount, the
start of the next football season may have to be postponed at
some grounds.    I would imagine that most local authorities,
football clubs and police forces have been urgently examining
their arrangements since the Hillsborough disaster.   But those
that have not done so should now address my immediate
recommendations.

3.   Then there are recommendations which I would expect to see
achieved within the next six months. These will entail reviews
of turnstile areas, control boxes, signposting and ticketing
arrangements,    communications, police procedures, the other
emergency service, training and exercises.

4.   There are no recommendations at this stage bearing on the
removal of radial and perimeter fences. I was very tempted to
recommend that all perimeter fences should be removed at once,
and I note that a number of clubs have already done this. But
they were put up to deal with the different but related issue of
crowd disorder.   Complex questions are involved and I will want
to consider them in depth in my final report.      I do not want
hasty and ill-judged constructional work to be undertaken which
might need to be revised in a few months' time. In the meantime,
I have included recommendations about the circumstances in which
radial and perimeter gates may continue to be used.

5.   Adequate arrangements for crowd safety at sports grounds
depend upon the effective operation and enforcement of a safety
certificate procedure.     In the end this depends upon the
vigilance and commitment of the local authority issuing the
certificate.   I do not know whether the poor performance of the
Sheffield City Council was typical. Arguments have been put to
me suggesting the need for some national oversight or inspection
of local authority certification procedures. This raises complex
issues which I shall want to consider further in part two.

6.   The recommendations in this Interim Report are the minimum
necessary to ensure that football grounds can be safely used,
based upon the evidence which I heard during the public inquiry
at Sheffield and other information I have received.         They
complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set
out, based upon his inquiry into the Bradford City fire.     All
these recommendations entail a recognition by local authorities,
clubs, the police and others of the very grave risks they run if
they neglect the safety of spectators.

A:   Action Before the next Football Season

7.   There should be an immediate review by the local authority
responsible for the safety certificate, the club to whom the
safety certificate is issued, and the police in whose area the
ground lies, in consultation with the fire service and the
ambulance service, of the operative conditions of the safety
certificate.
                        b-vlci. p K i c            ‘cfctcij-
8.   This review should happon            the groundjbefore the start of
the next football season.

9.   It should cover crowd capacities in various parts of the
ground, arrangements for the orderly progression of spectators
outside the ground, through turnstiles, and onto the viewing

                                     /2
areas, stewarding arrangements on viewing areas, and the relative
responsibilities of the club and the police.

10. If theNLocalymithority are not satisfied that the ground is
safe, consideration should be given to postponing first use of
the ground for the next season or limiting the use of the ground
or any part: of itV including reductions in existing capacities,
until urgent remedieuts, measures are taken.

 11. Before any self-contained penning areas on terraces are used
 (i.e. areas bounded on at least three sides by perimeter and
 radial fences) the maximum number which may be accommodated in
r ^ ^ ^ iperwnust be precisely calculated and set down: it is not
 sufficient simply to rely on an unspecified portion of the
 aggregate figure for a group of pens.

12. This maximum number should conform to the recommendations in
Chapter 16 of the Green Guide and, in particular, to paragraph
221. In no case should the recommended maximum of 54 persons per
square metre be exceeded, and in any case of doubt a figure
considerably lower than that should be followed.

13. Where there are no gangways, the figure should be further
reduced as if the area was provided with gangways in accordance
with paragraph 96 of the Green Guide.

14. The responsibility for filling |>en^ and terraced areas and
for monitoring spectators in them must be clearly agreed in
writing between the police and club to the satisfaction of the
local authority.

15. There should be adequate arrangements for, counting
the numbers entering into each / ^ w C ^either mechanica
observation, or by a ticketing arrangement.

16. There should be adequate means for closing off further
access to a pen when its capacity is about to be reached.
17. When' a pen is closed because it is £ull, the flow of
spectators should be capable of direction quickly and smoothly
              *art of the ground. There should be a clear written
statement, agreed by the club and the police to the satisfaction
of the local authority, as to whether pens are to be filled in
sequence or randomly, and any exceptions (for particular kinds of
matches) should be included in writing.

18. Any gates in radial or perimeter fences should be painted in
different colours from the rest of the fence and marked
"Emergency Exit".
 '              v 'le t '
19. &rly) gates/Should be kept.    open during the match and for
    v          A
an appropriate time before an afterwards [one hour beforehand
and half an hour after the match].

20. It should be the responsibility of the most senior police
officer in the immediate vicinity of each gate/? (wh^ch in some
cases may mean an officer of quite junior rank)^to decide whether
or not to allow spectators through the gate for the purpose of
relieving crushing in the pen or on the terrace. The responsible
officer for each gate should be identified for each match.     He
should have direct access to an officer with radio communications
to the police control at the ground.

21.   Adequai   olice reinforcements should be available for rapid
deployment iM the area of an open gate where, for any reason, it
seems likely Vthat spectators may be about to come through it for
reasonsyeither^of crowd safety or of crowd disorder.

22. In no\ci^cumstances should gates be closed so as to prevent
an invasiory/of the pitch:  where there is a conflict between
crowd safety and control of disorder, crowd safety should
prevail.

23.  In aiiy da.se where spectators come through perimeter gates
onto the Bitch, play must be suspended at once to prevent any
            j                    ___________________■— ~

further suites within the pen, and play should not be resumed

                               /4
until th§\oause of spillage of spectators has been identified and
dealt wifcnX

24. ^Cutting
          - equipment 1»should be available to enable immediate
entry to be gained    through radial or perimeter fences.     This
equipment must becapable of being used          without damage to
spectators either crushed up against the fence or when being
rescued from the pen.     It should be provided by the club in
sufficient quantities to enable it to be used quickly and
effectively at all     necessary partsof the ground. Agreement
should be reached as to whether it should be used by police,
firemen or stewards.    Whoever uses it shouldhave training in its
use and be requiredto demonstrate proficiency. A decision as to
its use should rest with a nominated senior police officerat the
ground.

B:    Action to be taken within the next six months

Safety Certificates

25. All existing Safety certificates should be ^reviewedf by the
local authorities issuing them, and any necessary or outstanding
amendments made.       x
             -
26. Thereaft^r, \-the detailed conditions in each safety
certificate^/Sshould be reviewed at least every 12 months, and the
safety certificate itself renewed every 12 months.
         /

27. Any local authority within whose area there exists a
designated sports grovmd for which no safety certificate has yet
                          fUy
been issued should/urgently examine why this is the case and set
itself a timetable for resolving any outstanding difficulties.

28.   Each    local authority should preview its arrangements for
             monitoring, enforcing and amending safety certificates.

29. This review should ^include a provision of an accountable
organisational structure by which the licensing functions of the

                                  /5
council are regularly and effectively supervised        by   senior
officers of the council and elected members.

30. The local authority, to assist it in its functions, shouldjL * iL $ t
set up an advisory group consisting of its own staff,
representatives of the police, fire and ambulance services,
representatives of the club (to include a representative of the
management of the club, a person with competence in the area of
safety, and someone with competence in technical matters) and,
where there exists a recognised supporters' club for that ground,
a representative of the supporters' club. The terms of reference
of this advisory committee should encompass all measures to do
with crowd safety, based upon regular visits to the ground and
attendance at matches. It should produce regular written reports
for consideration by those within the council responsible for
safety certificates.

Responsibilities of the club

31. The management of each club should designate a senior member
of their staff to have responsibility for safety. His terms of
reference should be set out in writing and the management should
ensure that he produces regular written reports on safety at the
ground.

32. The management of the club should take active steps to
satisfy themselves that at every match played at the ground the
conditions in the safety certificate are likely to be fulfilled
without breach.

33. The management of each club should satisfy themselves that
there is a written agreement between the club and the responsible
police   force    setting   out   in detail     the respective
responsibilities of the police and the club for crowd safety and
control.   At least once each year, this agreement should be
reviewed at a meeting between the management of the club and
senior officers of the police force concerned.


                                /6
34. The club should provide an effective force of stewards.
Each club should immediately review its procedures for recruiting
stewards, and their numbers, deployment and training.         The
management of the club should satisfy themselves that their
stewarding arrangements comply with Chapter 13 and Annex B of the
Green Guide.

35. Particular attention should be given to ensuring that
stewards are fully briefed orally and in writing about their
duties, that exercises to test their competence are regularly
carried out, that they are provided with distinctive clothing
which they wear, and that they stay at their posts for the whole
period when they are required to do so.

36. Where the written arrangement between the police and club
requires stewards to have responsibility for monitoring the
safety of spectators, individual stewards should be designated
with the sole responsibility of observing conditions among the
spectators.    These stewards should^have immediate access to
identified police officers having radio communications to the
police control at the ground,                     ^ rUXe J

37. The management of the club should urgently review the
arrangements for the recruitment and supervision of turnstile
operators.   This should include training in the action to be
taken in the event of the development of congestion at
turnstiles, and the means of communication available between the
individual turnstile operator at his turnstile and the police to
ensure rapid action in the event of congestion at any particular
turnstile.    [See also ACPO submission paragraphs 79 and 80
concerning liaison, supervision, and training - perhaps to follow
as part of more comprehensive recommendations in part two].

Structural arrangements at grounds

38. Arrangements for th^\ entrance of spectators to the ground
       P*i9 cKm .U—       \( V
should maintain a close correlation between turnstiles, concourse
or other areas within the ground, and individual parts of the

                               n
 ground.
 ground.    They should have regard to /the needs to separ;
 different groups of spectators (e\g. from opposing teams). They
                                                             Tl
 should form part of a written arrangement between the police and
                                                              <
 club governing the entrance of spectators to the ground.     Any
                                                              I
 proposed variation (e.g. to takje \account of the needs of a
 particular match) must be discussed\between the police and the
                                                              1
 club and agreed by them in writing. \

? 39. Any group of turnstiles should wive access to only one   oi
i specified part of the ground.    The arrangements to comply wi
  this should be reviewed in detail. They should take account of



      i.    the maximum potential capacity, \as set down in the
            safety /certificate,  of the part of the ground
                                                         gi
            concerned;                        \

      ii.   the/maximum rate by which the turnstiles can regularly.
                                                         regularly,
            rediably and safely be expected to functi o n ____

40. So as to establish this rate, each turnstile should be
inspected and its potential rate of flow measured:    thereafter,
each turnstile should be regularly inspected to ensure that it
remains capable of delivering spectators at the rate expected.

41. The correlation between each part of the ground and the
turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all the
spectators for that part of the ground can be passed through the
turnstiles and onto the viewing area (within one hour?) if this
cannot be done, the capacity of the viewing area should be
reduced to ensure that the period of one hour is not exceeded.

42. The turnstilesX should^Jse           of being closed when the
permitted                              sd by them is about to be
reached ai                             made to ensure quick and
effectiveI                             :tile operators for this
purpose.


                                 /8
43. CCTV should be provided, in       addition to the means of
counting spectators, to enable crowd densities outside     the
ground, within concourse areas, and on viewing areas, to be
monitored well before the start of a match and throughout.

44. All CCTV information should be displayed in the central
control point (see below).

45. There will be a requirement (see below) forthose
responsible for monitoring CCTV screens to be trained in the
estimation of crowd movements and densities.

46. The provisionN^f CCT\T equipment should be discussed between
the police and th^-^lub and correspond to the division of
responsibility between th^m for the supervision of spectators.
                           \
47. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the
ground should be comprehensively reviewed.         It should be
unambiguous, visible, eye-catching and clear, and should be
designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their
appropriate viewing area.    Undue complexity should be avoided.
Particular attention should be provided to emergency exit signs.

48. The information printed on tickets should likewise be clear
and unambiguous, and should correlate absolutely with the
information provided both outside and inside the ground.
Retained ticket stubs should contain information necessary to
guide people once inside the ground.

49. The printing of tickets for matches where exceptional
arrangements are made for the accommodation of spectators (e.g.
Cup-ties) should be individually reviewed to ensure that the
total correlation between the information on the ticket and
signposting outside and inside the ground is maintained.

50, Information on tickets requesting spectators .to be <.in        a

position by a particular time should be reviewed by clubs^ancTthe
police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned

                               19
arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.

Control. Communications and Information

51. There should be provided within each ground a unified
central control point, containing representatives of the club,
the police, and the/fire >and ambulance services.   n a i r\
                                             uwFlfb IktmoklE
52. The functions to be carried otft in the central control box,
and the staffing numbers nece^ary, should be specified in the
safety certificate.

53. The central contrprl point should be large enough to enable
its designated staffyco discharge their duties efficiently.

 4.   The central control point should be the focus for the entire
management of each match, both outside and inside the ground,
apart from the playing area itself. It should be so designed as
to enable the ready exchange of information and rapid decision
taking. In particular, it should promote maximum liaison between
the police and the club.

 o.  Within the central control box should be available the
results of all CCTV monitoring outside and inside the ground, the
output of any mechanical or electronic monitoring of numbers at
turnstiles, and the similar output of monitoring of the numbers
being admitted to any particular part of the ground. All staff
within the central control point should be skilled in the
interpretation of this data. In particular, the police and club
officials should continuously review and, where necessary, seek
to verify it, in order to give consideration to alternative
                  ■f
methods of entry ojk spectators to the ground or postponement of
the kick-off if necessary to ensure crowd safety.

56. The central control point should    have communications to the
control rooms of the police, fire and   ambulance services, and to
the police commanders outside and       inside the ground.      If
necessary, the central control point,    or part of it, should be

                               /10
soundproofed.     There should be sufficient communications
operators in the central control point to enable all
transmissions to be received and to be listened to selectively.
The operators in the central control point should have priority
over transmission and be able to override others.   They should
have access, where necessary, to additional channels to prevent
overcrowding of the airwaves.

57. There should be a completely separate system of landlines
with telephone links to parts of the ground, particularly the
turnstiles and the perimeter areas, to complement radio
communications. The landlines should be available both to police
and to senior nominated stewards and turnstile operators. These
telephone links should be run from the central control point.

58. All the comimiiii.cations systems should be thoroughly tested
immediately before a^match. They must be in proper working order
before the day ofythe njatch.

59. The Home Office should bring ixi^conclusion the review of
communications recommended^by Wr Justice Popplewell in his
interim report at paragraph/3.33 and his final report at
paragraph 4.104 so as to d^ri^ a system which will overcome the
difficulties in transmitting arid receiving calls by background
noise.

 60. Within the central control point, there should be a unified
public address system for communicating with individual areas
'outside and inside the ground, or groups of areas, including the
 whole ground.   Any announcements should be preceded by a loud
 signal to catch the attention of the crowd.     This arrangement
 should be prominently displayed at the front of every programme
 sold for every match.

61. The public address system should be so effective that the
introductory signal can be well heard anywhere inside and outside
the ground, even when the ground is filled to capacity.
Particular attention should be given to the clarity of signal of
       any voice transmission.    This involves equipment of sufficient
       quality, and careful training in voice production for any police
       officers or officers of the club who may be called upon to make
       announcements over the public address system.

       Responsibilities of the Police

       62.      The Chief Constable for each police force in whose area lie
<rj    designated sports grounds should nominate a senior officer# in
  <■   addition to divisional representatives, who will undertake, on
       his behalf, to liaise with the management of all football clubs,
       local authorities and other statutory agencies in respect of the
       safety and control of crowds and conditions relating to the issue
       and operation of safety certificates.

       63. Each Chief Constable sl^duld review his force's standing
       operational orders for the policing of football matches in
       designated sports grounds./

       64. The nominated s^iiior officer should draw the attention of
       the Chief Constable, via line management as appropriate, to any
       deficiencies in/the operational orders which become apparent at
       any time.    /
                                     \           ^
       65. The nominated senior officet should^satisfy himself that all
       written agreements between the police,/and the designated sports
       grounds within the police force arek are comprehensive, accurate,
       and capable of being carried out ^ef fectively. He should draw
       attention to any shortcomings wfiich m^y appear, at any time, to
       the Chief Constable,   to the /inanagement of the club and to the
       local authority.          ^                y

       66. The operational orders for each match at a designated sports
       ground should i»c.lwda swfHrcioat- o f M cere to cope with any
       foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and
       in their departure.    It should contain sufficient reserves to
       enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point
       inside or outside the ground.

                                        /1 2
                 67. The nominated senior police officer should, in particular,
                 review the arrangements designed to ensure an orderly approach to
                 turnstiles so as to\achieve an even and unobstructed access to an
                 entry through the turhstiles.

             ^   68. Each Chief Constable should/review th&^rainiii^^eing given
                 to officers of Inspector, rank and above               safety and
     u           control at sports grounds,Vificluding patterns of movement by and
                 within crowds in both normal/and abnormal circumstances.

                 69.          Officers stationed on duty, outside turnstiles and monitorin
                 spectators in viewing areas s h o u ^ be given specific training in
  / 3?^          ^he recognitionyof signs of crowd distress.

                 Co-ordination between Emergency Services

                 70. In addition to their participation in the advisory group
                 mentioned in paragraph 30 above, the police, fire and ambulance
                 services should maintain regular liaison concerning crowd safety
                 at sports grounds. The fire and ambulance services should have a
                 senior nominated officer /'of— eemmensnratB rank to the— senior
                                             H. U--
                 nnm-j     pr>1 -ir-.o -nffi    for this purpose.

                 71. Before every match at a designated sports ground, the police
                 should ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are
                 given full details about the event, including its timing, the
A j& ^   s       numbers of spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and
                 exit, and any^potential difficulties with the control or movement
                 of the crowd.

                 72. These details should be readily and prominently available
                 within the control rooms of the three emergency services.

                              \    '
                 73. Fire servic^ control room computers should be programmed so
                 that they can Respond to the various names by which designated
                 sports grounds/might be identified.
    74. Contingency plans for the arrival at designated sports
    grounds of emergency vehicles from all three services should be
    examined.   These should include routes of access, rendezvous
    points, and accessibility within sports grounds themselves.
    75. Regular exercises should be held involving the management of
    the club, its stewards, the police, the fire and the ambulance
    service in relation to the operation of emergency procedures at
    designated sports grounds. These should include, in particular,
    exercises to test the rapid summoning
                                  _——     -
                                            of assistance to a sports
    ground, the effectiveness of communications within the ground and
    between the central control point and the control rooms of the
    three operational services, and the operation of any cutting.
    equipment to rescue spectators from behind radial or perimeter
    fences.

    Medical Facilities

    76. There should be an urgent review of the medical facilities
    available for spectators at sports grounds.    It should be the
    responsibility of the club to establish, to the satisfaction of
    the local authority, that such arrangements exist, and the local
    authority should take professional medical advice as to what
    facilities should be provided at the ground for crowds of given
    numbers.

    77. Within each sports ground there should be one or more rooms
    designated for the first-aid of spectators. The number of such
    rooms, and the equipment to be maintained within them, should be
(
    specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice.
                                                    k C~
    78. If, under €5 above, it is decided that the club should
    provide a qualified general ^ ^ ^ ^ I l ^ a c t i t i ^ e r for the benefit
    of the crowd at every match, he should be readily contactable at
    any time when spectators are within the ground, and should have
    the means of immediate communication with the central control
    point.
«   I
        79. The central control point should have ready the texts of
        announcements asking for doctors or other qualified medical
        personnel among the crowd to attend at any part of the ground, on
        receipt of a request to this effect from the doctor provided by
        the club for the benefit of the crowd.

        80.   [Attendance of Ambulance1

        81.   [First-aid system].   - See F.A. submission pages 25 and 26.




                                          /1 5
