             A RESPONSE TO

     THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL




            Frederick Luff
      Head of Security, Safety,
  Community 8 Supporters Liaison at

      QUEERS PARK RANGERS F.C.

-Chief Superintendent Metropolitan Police)
                                CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION          1.(1) - 1.3(a) and   (b)

THE CONSEQUENCES      2. (1) (i ) - (v)

VITAL ATTITUDES       Government - 3.(1)
                       Football Authorities - 3.(2)

IDENTIFICATION OF      4(l)(i) - (vi)
THE CURRENT PROBL0M

STRATEGY AND           General - 5.(1)
RESPONSE               Initial approach to reduce the dilemna - 5.(2)

PROPOSED CODE OF CONDUCT

                      Specific Ground Rules - 6.(l)(i)
                      Teams to enter pitch together - 6.(l)(ii)
                      Effective liaison - 6.(l)(iii)
                      Training 8 briefing of stewards - 6.(1)(iv)
                      Dedicated family and membership areas - 6.1(v)
                      Other initiatives - 6.(2)
                      Priority - 6.(3)
                      Government response - 6.(4)

BASIC PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES - THE COST

                       Government policy - privatisation - 7.(1)
                       Consultants, Arthur Young - Bankruptcies - 7.(2)
                       No monetary charge for police - 7.(3)
                       League clubs contribution - 7.(4)

KEY PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES

                       Defined areas of liability and costs - 8.(1)
                       Police costs - 8.(2) - 8.(3)
                       Determined Manning levels and costs - 8.(4) - 8.(7)

MEASURES TO REDRESS BALANCE

                       Arbitration - 8.(8)(i)
                       Proportionate payment - 8.(8)(ii)

PROPOSED NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME/FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

                       General - 9.(1)
                       Minister's "League Table" of Arrests - 9.(2)(i)
                       Analysis and surrmary of Q.P.R. Arrests - 9.(2)(ii)

WEIXOME PROPOSALS

                       Restrictions on hooligans travelling abroad - 10.
                       Exemptions from scheme - 11.(i) - (ii)

CONFINE LEGISLATION TO SUSPECT GROUPS      -   12.
                                   - 2 -


MEMBERSHIP CARDS

                        Working Party reconinendations - 13.(1)
                        Signature required - 13.(2)
                        Potential benefits'of photographs 8 signatures - 13.(3)
                        Free issue of membership cards - 13.(4)

IWJPOSED NI3V CRIMINAL OFFENCES    -   14. (1) - 14. (2)

CO-ORDINATED POLICY FUR REVIVAL

                        General - 15.(1)
                        Key responses for survival and revival - 15.(2) (i) - (xii)

REQUIRED RESIXUSE I3Y HIE MINISTER FOR SPORT 6 POLICE

                        The Minister - 16.(1)
                        Police - 16.(2) - (3)(a) and (b)

SIMMRY OF STRATEGIC      OPTIONS

         OPTION 1   -  National I.D. Card     - 17.(1.)(i) - (v)
         OPTION 2   -  Mandatory National Membership Scheme - 17. (2)(i)
         OPTION 3   -  Mandatory National Membership Scheme restricted
                      to suspect groups AND Voluntary Membership
                      Scheme for the remainder - 17.(3)(i)
         OPTION 4   - Voluntary Membership Scheme F.A. Code of Conduct
                      co-ordinated policy — 17.(4)(i) — 17,(5)(iii)

CONCLUSION              in.
INTRODUCTION

1.(1)     The primary objectives of this paper are an attempt to secure the
          future of our national game and acceptable standards of decency in
          our society. The sad reality is that too many authorities involved
          have adopted an inflexible approach, shaping the facts to their
          theories.
          The problem has not yet been precisely identified, exaggerated by
          the Minister for Sport to support the perceived solution of
          a national identity, scheme and simultaneously played down by many
          involved in football, who totally reject the proposal.

1.(2)     The current specific problem must first be accurately identified
          before balanced effective measures can be determined to provide
          a long term solution. Objective co-operation from all agencies
          involved is essential. Continued confrontation and intransigent
          attitudes must somehow be replaced by a common determination to
          achieve effective legislation, which will ultimately eradicate
          violent and offensive behaviour by the minority.

1.(3)     The Government and the football authorities presently sit on the
          horns of a dilenma as they join together on a working party, which
          seeks to find a solution for the problems in soccer.
          (a)   Government are committed to imposing a national membership
                scheme which, hopefully, they now begin to realise would be
                anti-soccer, rather than anti-hooligan, evidenced in part by
                a letter to all chairmen from the Minister for Sport, in which
                a number of exemptions are now proposed in the draft Football
                Spectators Bill (see Appendix 'A' and 'B').
          (b)   The Football Association, Football League representatives and
                other football executives probably now recognise they should
                have agreed to implement a voluntary membership scheme. They
                should have refrained from uttering declarations which
                understated the real problem of violence and bad manners by
                certain spectators in soccer. Their mutual dilemma is how to
                find a balanced strategy which will effectively deal with the
                issue without loss of further credibility from the public at
                large.

THE CONSEQUENCES

2.(1)     (i)   Football gates have declined by 45% over the past decade.
                The current 5 million fans are now a minority group in society,
                with the majority turning to fishing, rugby, hockey and bowls
                as an alternative.
         (ii)   This Government, supported by the public at large, are prepared
                to sacrifice our national game because they unjustly perceive
                it to be an industry, which has abandoned the principles of
                sportsmanship and decency, purely for commercial gain.
        (iii)   The true law-abiding supporters despair at the intransigent
                attitudes of Government and football authorities, with little
                confidence that the decision making groups will determine
                a sensible solution to save the game they love. They will
                welcome tough measures to root out and penalise the minority
                of ill-mannered, violent individuals who have exploited their
                sport as a base for selfish and unacceptable behaviour. However,
                they are sick and tired of being arbitrately branded as hooligans
                because of the offensive antics of a few selfish and irresponsible
                individuals.
                                    - 2 -


         (iv) The vast majority of League clubs who have achieved acceptable
               standards of behaviour, despite the general regression in
               society, resent being grouped together and legislated against
               because of the deficiencies of those few clubs with atrocious
               records of disorder who have not responded effectively to their
               long-standing problem of appalling behaviour. How can the
               larger group begin to educate such visitors on their annual
               visi t?

          (v)   The Home Office, Police and football authorities, supported
                by successive Governments, have implemented defensive strategies
                such as "segregation", "perimeter fences" and "barbed-wire
                cages", which have proved so counter-productive. These long­
                standing policies must be progressively discontinued, albeit
                they cannot sensibly be reversed overnight.

VITAL ATTITUDES

3.(1)     Government must concede that football is the victim, not the cause,
          of widespread public disorder and abominable behaviour. They should
          view tho problems which confront our national game and taint our
          worldwide image as an opportunity to introduce measures which will
          effectively deal with the antics of "lager lout" criminals in every
          area of our society. Such undesirables have already begun to turn
          their attention to cricket, horse racing, boxing and holiday resorts
          at home and abroad. The demise of soccer will not solve the problem,
          even in the short term.

3.(2)     Football authorities and a few identifiable League club managements
          must similarly accept that they have failed over the years to fully
          apply themselves to maintaining decent standards of behaviour. Too
          often they have described the problem as minimal, whilst violence
          and obscenities erupt all around them.   Repeated declarations that
          English soccer is now ready to re-enter Europe have resulted in
          general ridicule and alienation to the game. The general public
          vividly remember Heysells Stadium, West Germany v England, a serious
          incident at a London football stadium and Wembley this year.

IDENTIFICATION OF THE CURRENT FRDBL0M

4.(1)     (i)   Most League clubs have achieved acceptable standards and have
                 significantly reduced disorder and misbehaviour over the past
                 few years by the introduction of CCTV, family areas, voluntary
                membership schemes and many other innovations.
         (ii)   A few readily identifiable clubs have failed to do so.
        (iii)   The Home Office and police statistics establish the trouble­
                makers as minority groups, virtually confined to males, aged
                between 14-25 years, the only exception being three or four
                well-known locations where there is a core of organised
                undesirable mature males, aged between 30-35 years.
         (iv)   Over 50% of arrests and charges for football related offences
                occur outside stadiums before, during and after matches.
          (v)   The installation of CCTV and the implementation of family and
                voluntary membership areas over the past two years have
                assisted to reduce disorder AND halted a further decline in
                at tendances.
                                     - 3 -


         (vi)   At tendances have fallen by 45% over the past ten years.
                Obviously many factors have contributed to this phenomenon but
                the "hooligan syndrome" is-clearly the prime reason.    (1987
                Digest of Football Statistics - Football Trust - Appendix 'C ')■

                Comment

                The "suspect groups" and venues for potential trouble are
                relatively simple to identify. Question: why is there no
                co-ordinated plan targeting such individuals and locations
                for’ a special operational response?

STR/Y113GY AND m^SITJNSH

5.(1)    General
         The prohibitive cost, administrative difficulties and predictably
         disastrous consequences to soccer of introducting an absolute national
         membership scheme are now widely accepted.  (Arthur Young Report -
         commissioned by The Football League).

5.(2)    Initial Approach to Reduce the Dilemma
         The Football Association, supported by The Football League, must
         introduce internal measures, which will impress the Government and
         society of their determination to rid soccer of the ill-mannered and
         unsporting minority. We suggest the F.A. issue a CODE OF CONDUCT to
         be observed by Al.l, League clubs, with punitive measures imposed upon
         those who fail to conform.

PROPOSED COLJIJ OF CONDUCT

6.(1)     (i)   Specific and additional "Ground Rules" to be posted around all
                stadia and published in all inatchday programmes:-
                " ...................... Football Club welcome all true Supporters.
                  Enjoy the football. Our CCTV system will identify trouble­
                  makers and assist to enforce the main Ground Rules
                   (a)   No violence or swearing
                   (b)   No indecent gestures
                   (c)   No dangerous pushing
                   The aim with your co-operation and traditional support will    ,
                   be to promote sportsmanship and our family atmosphere".

                These "Ground Rules" should be enforced by Police and Stewards
                and re-inforced by appropriate articles in progranmes.

         (ii)   On matchdays both teams, led by the match officials, to enter
                the field of play together and greet the crowd from the centre
                circle.   The result would be spontaneous applause from both home
                and away supporters, leaving the ill-mannered minority isolated
                and confused at being unable to barrack the opposition.

        (iii)   Regular constructive liaison between Police and key club officials,
                constantly reviewing the situation and flexibly adopting appropriate
                measures.
                                   - 4 -


        (iv)   Matchday briefings of Stewards by a responsible club official, plus
                appropriate training in safety and evacuation procedures.

         (v)   The provision of dedicated family and membership areas.

6.(2)   Most Clubs will obviously introduce further initiatives to enhance
        acceptable behaviour and sportsmanship. However, the above five
        mandatory standard rules, applied by all Clubs, will dramatically
        reduce misbehaviour and be generally welcomed.

6.(3)   The priority being to harness the energy and support of the vast
        majority of decent law-abiding supporters to isolate the trouble­
        makers and educate them that they are unwelcome until they observe
        basic standards of decency. A similar strategy to that adopted by
        police in the Neighbourhood Watch Scheme.

6.(4)   Government Response

        Surely Government and the Minister will have to respond favourably
        to such measures and introduce further necessary concessions and
        exemptions, even perhaps a closely monitored voluntary membership
        scheme.

BASIC PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES - THE COST

7.(1)   This Government is conmitted to a policy of efficient housekeeping
        and management, demanding cost effectiveness, i.e. G.L.C., I.L.E.A.,
        education, The National Health Service and privatisation of nationalised
        industries.

7.(2)   The comnissioned consultants, Arthur Young, have exposed the unacceptable
        cost effectiveness of the LUton Town approach. Their additional
        projection of the monetary consequences of an absolute national
        membership scheme shows that such an introduction would result in many
        bankruptcies and redundancies in football, with a regression in
        unemployment statistics.

7.(3)   With credit and public acclaim this Government has successfuly dealt
        with serious public disorder in inner cities, industrial disputes,
        public demonstrations and carnivals. All costs were met from the public
        purse and rates. No monetary charges for police were levied upon the
        victim companies or the culpable organisers where riots, robberies and
        thefts occurred.

7.(4)   Surely the same standards and principles are as appropriate to soccer,
        particularly as League Clubs meet substantial costs for police services.

KEY PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES

8.(1)   Defined Areas of Liability and Costs

        Areas of liability must be defined.  League Clubs should be accountable
        for policing/stewarding costs for the manning levels required INSIDE
        their respective Stadium and the inmediate curtilage. They cannot
        justly be required to pay for officers deployed upon patrols and traffic
        duties far away from the football ground.
                                   - 5 -


 8.(2)   Police Costs
   j .    It is comnon practice for Clubs te meet Special Service Agreement
         •payments for numerous officers engaged for^S/1?- hours upon such patrols
           and duties a mile or more from the ground. Most of those officers come
           into the stadium 20 minutes after kick-off and leave 20 minutes before
           full-time to man those distant locations.

 8.(3)    In many instances the in-house stewards successfully police dispersal
          from the stadium, assisted by a few police officers. This has presented
  •      few problems but those Clubs have unfairly met the overall high cost
“
T U jw   ofV ' hours service, when in reality they have only received 50 Minutes
         service and, in some cases, for no internal duties when such officers
          take a meal break during the match.
 8.(4)   Determined Manning Levels and Costs
         At the beginning of each season the Chief Pol ice Officers and_ C lub — .
         Secretaries negotiate manning 1evRls£^ S 3 o s i s for^he coming fixtures.
         Matches are graded an A, B or C priority, with fifedTT5§ources“^specTTied.
         The Special Services Agreement Contract is then signed by the Club
         officials. Very few Clubs will query the projected manning levels and
         accept the tendered quotation. They dare not argue for fear of
         objections to their safety certificate.
 8.(5)   Generally there is a high level of liaison and co-operation but, in
         practice, the Senior Officers will understandably err on the side of
         caution in assessing potential problems. Those projections will seek
          to protect career prospects, their Division and Force from possible
         criticism at any enquiry. The "client" is then conmitted to meet those
         additional costs, based on such wary speculations, for the rest of that
         season, with no reduced charges if the risk is subsequently reduced or
         provably over-assessed. Certainly there will be no hesitation by police
          to prefer increased bills if further manpower is unexpectedly required.
 8.(6)   This inexact calculation to decide appropriate resources becomes even
         more unfair when Clubs who regularly achieve decent standards are
         required to meet higher costs because of the notorious behaviour of
         a visiting side.
 8.(7)   The situation will become even more imprecise and unjust with the
         introduction of a national membership scheme, inevitably leading to
         higher estimates for officers to monitor entry and potential disorder
         from frustrated spectators seeking admission, etc.

 MEASURES TO REDRESS THE BALANCE

 8.(8)   (i)   Arbitration
               An independent panel of arbitrators needs to be formed to consider
               appeals by League Clubs that the assessed manning levels and
               resultant costs are too high in relation to the risk, their
               reputation and efforts to maintain desirable standards. No
               accountable police force should be expected to determine the
               prnhnble risk, consequent necessary resources and then require
               payment from the public as a monopoly, without review where
               necessary by independent assessors.
                                     - 6 -

        (ii)   Proportionate Payment
               Those few Clubs who regularly necessitate increased police levels
               because of the probability ef disorder, should be liable for those
               additional charges when playing AWAY as well as at HGME.
               It is wrong in principle for the home Club to meet that cost,
               for the dubious privilege of receiving a side habitually followed
               by troublemakers. Such a provision would be a greater incentive
               for such Clubs to enforce the common GROUND RULES at home, to
               reduce their problem.

PROPOSHD NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEIE/FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

9.(1)   General
        It is widely accepted that the imposition of an absolute scheme will
        not assist to prevent disorder and crime outside the stadia. Such
        external offences exceed those conmitted inside football grounds.
        The counter-productive effects to football of compulsory membership
        legislation, as previously outlined, cannot sensibly be denied.
9.(2)   Minister's'League Table" of Arrests (Appendix 'D')
         (i)   The statistics and conclusions released by the Minister for Sport
               in December are an example of mistakenly shaping facts to theories.
               They purported to illustrate the size of the problem and allegedly
               those clubs who had the most serious problem and offenders. The
               figures were inaccurately interpreted and so misleadingly presented,
               as to amount to a distortion of the actual situation.
        (ii)   Queens Park Rangers F.C. has a long standing tradition of high
               standards of behaviour and a friendly family atmosphere.
               The Minister's crude 1987/88 figures list 91 arrests at Loftus Road
               for 20 First Division home matches. Categories of offences are not
               specified, or whether they were conmitted INSIDE or OUTSIDE THE
               STADIUM. Similarly no results are included. They are simply added
               together in a vain attempt to support his allegation that an overall
               serious problem prevails.
               Reference to the actual details and analysis of all TWENTY home
               fixtures reveals the magnitude of the distortion.
               Sumnarised Facts:-    (Appendix 'E ')
               (a)   There were 87 arrests at Q.P.R. at 20 home matches during
                     the 1987/88 season.
               (b)   59% were OUTSIDE the stadium - i.e. 51
               (c)   41% were INSIDE the stadium       - i.e. 36
               (d)   Categories:-   Drunkeness                       45
                                    Assault/Obstrueting Police          4
                                    Threatening/Disorderly Behaviour 16
                                    Possessing Drugs                    4
                                    Criminal Damage                     2
                                    Offensive Weapon                    5
                                    Highway/Footway Obstruction      ....
                                      (Touts/Street Traders)

                                    Total                             87
                                   - 7 -

             (e)   Home Supporters            26
                   Away Supporters            54
                   Not Supporters         _    7
                     (Street Traders, etc.I
             (f)    Results
                    29 were cautioned by police
                     3 were acquitted, and only
                     2 were sentenced to imprisonment.
                       The remainder were fined or conditionally discharged.
             (g)    In relation to attendances this represents an arrest rate
                    of 0.035% for the season. The truth is, the-proportionate
                    arrest rate in soccer is 0.03% whilst the national average
                    outside among adults is over 3%.
             The Minister's analysis and conclusions were greatly exaggerated
             and resented, which does not assist his cause.

WELCOME PROPOSALS

10.   Restrictions on Hooligans Travelling Abroad

      The proposed restrictions and exclusion orders for thoseconvicted
      abroad will be universally supported and havebeen  suggested and
      requested by many in soccer for a long time. However, the proposal
      should contain harsher measures, with restrictions applied to all
      matches at home and abroad, for a lengthy period and not confined to
      "keymatches" abroad.  (Minister's letter B - paras. 31-32. Appendix 'B')

11.   Exemptions from Scheme

       (i)   The provision of exemptions for certain groups - accompanied
             children in family areas, disabled people - are a step in the
             right direction.  (Appendix 'B ' - para. 17).

      (ii)   However, "sensible and special arrangements" for groups outside
             of the identified group of troublemakers (para. 4.(i)(iii) of
             this report) are essential for justice to be seen to be done, i.e.

                    Club guests
                    Hospitality boxes
                    Supervised school groups
                    Foreign visitors
                    PLUS
                    Genuine visitors to London outside the identified
                      suspect age groups
                    All citizens outside the identified age groups, i.e.
                      males under 14 and over 25 years.

      Why should senior citizens, ladies and other citizens, who behave
      impeccably, be legislated against?
                                  - 8 -

CONFINE LEGISLATION TO SUSPECT GROUPS
12.   Only identified suspect groups should properly be affected by
      a mandatory scheme. League Clubs-should be required to introduce
      a progressive voluntary membership for all other groups, all such
      voluntary members and non-members to be liable for the overall
      restrictions and penalties if they comnit offences. The Home Secretary
      to be empowered to proscribe certain designated League Clubs to
      implement a higher age limit for mandatory membership, i.e. 14-35 years,
      where there is a problem relating to such age groups.

MEM3ERSHIP CARDS
13.(1) Such cards should be issued for two or three years and include:-
                   member1s name
                   a photograph
                   membership number
                   date of expiry
                   name of club nominated
                   national football allegiance
                   readable electronically
       (Working Party Report - para. 2(b) - Appendix 'A')
13.(2) It is suggested that voluntary and mandatory membership cards are alike
       and issued for three years to reduce administration and costs. The
       member's signature should also be required on the card to assist
       identification.
       Voluntary members should be offered incentives to join which, in due
       time, may extend to bankers card facilities.
13.(3) The introduction of a memberhip card, without a photograph and signature,
       would considerably reduce the credibility of any scheme, voluntary or
       mandatory. A card without such positive proof of identity could be
       used by anyone and seen generally as a cosmetic measure. Genuine fans
       and those considering returning to football will support such a scheme,
       particularly when benefits result in:-
                   Reduced admission prices
                   Discounts at national outlets on numerous goods,
                     travel, holidays, etc.
                   Club discounts for goods and away travel.
13.(4) Membership cards to be issued free to:-
                   Patrons
                   Executive box users
                   Season ticket holders
                   Supporters Club members
                   Over 60's

PROPOSED NEW CRIMINAL OFFENCES    (Appendix 'A' page 15, paras. 29-32)
14.(1) Should the proposed mandatory national membership scheme become law,
       it will be necessary for powers of arrest to be extended to club
       officials and stewards inside the ground, to enable clubs to begin
       to progressively police their stadium. Similarly, failure to produce
       or surrender a membership card to such officials upon request should
       be included as an offence.
                                  - 9 -

14.(2) For the same reasons the firm view of the football authorities that
       a refusal to surrender a card upon demand should be included as an
       offence deserves support.

CO-ORDINATED POLICY FOR REVIVAL
15.(1) General
       A national identity card scheme will have a limited effect upon the
       "hooligan" problem and, simultaneously, adversely affect thousands
       of decent citizens who are outside the identified suspect age groups.
15.(2) Similarly, the traditional response from the F.A., Football League
       and Football Management will not reduce the problem on. encourage the
       thousands of well-mannered spectators to return to the game.
15.(3) A fundamental change in attitudes and a lateral thinking approach
       are vital for survival and revival.
       In addition to the proposed code of conduct (6.(1) - 6.(4) policies
       and priorities require urgent review and implementation to achieve
       better conditions for spectators and to improve the image of football.

KEY RESPONSES FOR SURVIVAL AND REVIVAL
16.(1) Football Management
       (i)   A co-ordinated policy to promote the brighter side of soccer,
             whilst objectively acknowledging problems as they exist and
             a positive approach to resolve them.
      (ii)   Consider a joint agreement to ban/barr those newspapers/tabloids
             who frequently publish untruths and inflanmatory articles,
             deliberately provoking confrontation situations for the sole
             purpose of further copy.
     (iii)   Provide sufficient well-lit and clean toilets for everybody -
             particularly for the ladies and at the rear of terraces.
             Restaurants and pubs recognise this as a priority - wny not
             footbal1?
      (iv)   Provide adequate coloring outlets at reasonable prices - again
             particularly for the terraces.
       (v)   Limit terrace attendances below the safety capacity where
             necessary to enable spectators to use those facilities.   Imagine
             the embarrassment and discomfort of being trapped on the terrace
             unable to visit a toilet for over two hours which, in the case
             of parents with children, is intolerable.
      (vi)   Provide incentives for membership - voluntary and/or mandatory
             scheme.
     (vii)   Reinforce general observance of "ground Rules" (6.(l)(i) -
             6.(3) by further innovations and imaginative use of the public
             address system.   (Consider recordedtapes from respected
             personalities in soccer, requesting good manners to eliminate
             obscene chanting such as "You're ..... eh!" etc.) The overall
             strategy of this would be to harness the energy and support of the
             majority to isolate and educate the ill-mannered minority.
                                     - 10 -


   (viii)        Review and seriously consider reducing admission prices, which
                 may well require cut-backs in transfer fees and contracts.
     (ix)        Develop a long-term strategy - 5/10 years - to reverse the proven
                 counter-productive policy of SEGREGATION.
         (x)     Underline and achieve attitudes of sportsmanship - on and off the
                 pitch. Emphasise "no cheating" and eradicate the "win at all
                 costs" and "us and them" syndromes. This will require a different
                 attitude from managers, players and marketing outlets.
     (xi)        Further develop the Football Trust's lead in comxiunity involvement.
    (xii)        Develop and implement a policy to reduce the "macho" image of
                 football - board rooms to cease being sacrosanct areas for male
                 executives - more women directors - more women stewards, etc.
                 Given the chance, the ladies can make a major contribution in
                 achieving a softer image for soccer and to realise the overall
                 objectives.

16.(2)    The Minister
          Implementation of most of the measures tendered will further render
          the Minister's current proposals inappropriate and redundant before
          the statute can be invoked. Once soccer has set an example of
          desired standards, Government will find great difficulty to refuse
          requests for reduced policing costs under Special Service Agreements.
          The opportunity will be available for Government to change course
          and retaincredibility by complimenting the transformed attitudes and
          strategies in soccer.

16.(3)     The Police
          For the same reasons police forces willwelcome the opportunity to
          reduce manning levels. However, in the interim, the Home Office and
          police must be persuaded to adopt a lower profile policy in and around
          most football stadia. Police should maintain a similar strategy to
          that implemented at Notting Hill Carnival, industrial disputes and
          demonstrations, i.e. more officers on reserve, ready to be deployed
          in the event of trouble.

16.(4)    They are well aware of the dangers of a too high profile operation
          and will accept the resultant resentment caused to law-abiding
          citizens:-
           (a)     The use of mounted officers, wearing anti-riot helmets and
                   visors, to funnel queues into railway stations, on to coaches,
                   into and out of stadia is frightening, intimidating and
                   frustrating.
                  (At one ground recently visited, out of London, perfectly
                  well-behaved supporters were required to walk between a stationary
                  row of tightly packed mounted officers. At the head of the queue
                  they were ordered to pass, in single file, through an 18 inch gap
                  formed by a horses head and the wall. Fears and resentment from
                  families and elder citizens were apparent but considerably reduced
                  by one wag's remark - "Your horse obviously counts officer").
                   The anecdote underlines the unnecessarily high profile response
                   too often adopted by many forces.
                                 - 11 -


         (b)   Handlers with dogs are openly deployed outside stadia and
               inside railway stations as crowds gather and disperse. The
               threat of such force is resented by law-abiding citizens and
               seen as unnecessary intimidation. Their use if disorder occurs
               is accepted.
         (c)   The comnon policy of searching everyone before entry is not
               widely supported. Parents with children producing membership
               cards and senior citizens are dismayed and embarrassed at such
               inflexible procedures, as they seek entry to family areas.
               In reality police officers do not have such wide powers of search.
               They are acting as agents of the club, where under the "Ground
               Rules" admission can be refused to anyone who refuses to be
               searched. Most clubs will support selective searching of the
               suspect groups (14-25 years) outside of family areas, but
               experience great embarrassment and difficulty in endeavouring
               to answer complaints from family members who are furious at such
               beaurocratic measures.  (Anyone who disputes this assertion only
               has to ask and we will forward the letters of protest received
               every week).
         (d)   The police have general support from the vast majority whose
               decent fans appreciate their difficult task. However, disgraceful
               attitudes and actions of a few officers seriously diminishes
               normal regard and provokes confrontation incidents.
               The British police are unable to succeed in their important role
               without the assistance of the public at large, combined with
               a multi-agency approach to identify problems and long-term
               solutions.

         (e)   The Comnissionor of the Metropolis, all Chief Constables and
               their executive managers will realise that they and their
               respective police forces are currently in serious danger of
               being seen as a political force supportive of Government,
               a police state, with no regard for the wishes of the public at
               large.

16.(5)   Lew Profile Policing


                                                            Queens Park Rangers
                                                            1984
                                    - 12 -


SUWARY OF STRATEGIC OPTIONS

17.(1)    OPTION 1 - National Identity Card

         (i)   The Minister describes this option as a different issue requiring
               wider debate (Para. 49 - Appendix 'B'). However, disorder in
               society generally is provably the greater problem and demands such
               wider debate urgently, before costly dubious measures are illogically
               introduced for lesser problems in soccer. What next, a progression
               of mandatory national membership schemes for other sports and
               outlets as the pattern of disorder inevitably changes?
     (ii)      A National identity card with photograph, signature and magnetic
               strip, would bring this country into line with E.E.C. countries
               and greatly assist to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and
               crimes of violence at home and abroad. Production of the card should
               be required at designated locations to obtain admission or travel
               facilities.
    (iii)      The British public will support any just measure calculated to have
               beneficial effects. They are also furious at the disgraceful
               antics of a minority and ashamed at our resultant tarnished image
               throughout the world.
     (iv)      Predictably, the N.C.C.L. and other groups will vociferously
               protest that such a measure is an infringement upon civil rights.
               What rights? The right to break the law with anonymity? The
               right to be faceless and unaccountable? Or the right to exploit
               this country's welfare schemes without proper identification?
         (v)   I believe a National referendum would result inamassive "YES"
               to the proposition, provided the problems are properly identified,
               the advantages set out and the questions objectively framed.

17.(2)     OPTION 2 - Mandatory National Membership Scheme
           Politically desired but not a viable option

17.(3)     OPTION 3 - Mandatory National Membership Scheme restricted to Suspect
           Groups and Voluntary Membership Scheme for the Remainder
           Preferable to Option 2

17.(4)     OPTION 4 - Voluntary Membership Scheme with Incentives. Complimented
           by F.A. Code of Conduct for League Clubs and a Co-ordinated Policy
           for Revival
         (i)   There are recent significant signs that this Government, the
               Home Secretary especially, would now prefer a Voluntary Membership
               Scheme.
     (ii)      The Football Association, The Football League and club management
               must seize the opportunity to demonstrate a new comnitment and
               revise attitudes, resulting in effective internal strategies and
               tactics which will automatically further reduce unacceptable
               behaviour.

    (iii)      The implement at ion of a "Code of Conduct" for ALL League Clubs
               (6. (l)(i) - 6.(4) and comnitted "key responses" (15.(1) -
               15.(2) (i) - (xii) must impress Government, who are desperate to
                                - 13 -


        resolve the problem of violence in society in accordance with
        their declared election promises to maintain "law and order".

CONCLUSION

18.    OPTION 4 - Voluntary Membership is the prudent solution. This
       would allow Government time to debate and consider the wider issues
       of a National identity card, without loss of face to Ministers or
       football management.




                        q Ij j       *(
                            F.R.C. LUFF
                             APPENDICES




Working Party Report - N o v e m b e r 1988


Letter to all Chairmen from the Minister for
Sport - December 1988


1987 Digest of Statistics - Football Trust


Minister's "League Table" of Arrests


Analysis a n d S u m m a r y of Arrests at Q.P.R.
B A C K G R O U N D NOTE

FOOTBALL:        N A T I O N A L M E M B E R S H I P SC HEME

         "Legislation             will       be    brought      f o r ward to          provide   for  a
         n a t i o n a l m e m b e r s h i p s c h e m e to c o n t r o l a d m i s s i o n to football
         matches."

A w o r k i n g p a r t y un d e r the c h a i r m a n s h i p of Mr C o l i n Moynihan,
M i n i s t e r for Sport,             and c o n s i s t i n g of r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of the
f o o t b a l l authorities, the G o v e r n m e n t and the p o l i c e w a s set up on
6 J u l y 1988 to r e v i e w the m a i n p r i n c i p l e s of the s c h e m e and to
i d e n t i f y a p p r o p r i a t e t e c h n o l o g y to imp l e m e n t it.         T h e w o r ki ng
p a r t y ' s report, "Football: Na ti o n a l M e m b e r s h i p S c h e m e - R e p o r t of
t he      Minister         for       Spo rt's       Working    Party",       w as     published         on
9 N o v e m b e r 1988 (Press N o t i c e s 618 and 619).

The p r o p o s e d l e g i s l a t i o n    w o u l d give e f f e c t to a n u m b e r       of       the
recommendations contained                    in the w o r k i n g party report.

T h e y are:

       a d m i s s i o n to football m a t c h e s d e s i g n a t e d by the S e c r e t a r y of
       St a t e w o u l d be r e s t r i c t e d to m e m b e r s of the scheme;

       the g r o u n d s on wh i c h the m a t c h e s         are played w o u l d      ne e d       to be
       c o v e r e d by a licence;

       the s c h e m e wo u l d be a n a t i o n a l one a d m i n i s t e r e d          by      a    body
       c a l l e d the Footb all M e m b e r s h i p Authority;

       the F o o t b a l l M e m b e r s h i p A u t h o r i t y w o u l d dra w up the s cheme in
       a c c o r d a n c e w i t h c r i t e r i a imposed by legislation; the scheme
       w o u l d be subj ect to a p p r o v a l by t h e ^ S e c r e t a r y of State;

       a n y o n e c o n v i c t e d of a footb all r e l ated o f f e n c e (under the
       P u b l i c O r d e r Act 1986) w o u l d be b a n n e d from m e m b e r s h i p for a
       p e r i o d of b e t w e e n two and five years;

       new c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e s w o u l d be created, for fals e a p p l i c a t i o n
       for m e m b e r s h i p and for g a i n i n g or a t t e m p t i n g to g a i n e n t r y to
       a g r o u n d w i t h o u t a va l i d m e m b e r s h i p card.

It is p r o p o s e d to intro duce the s chem e by the S p r i n g of                     1990.




PRE SS O F F I C E
D E P A R T M E N T O F THE E N V I R O N M E N T
2 M A R S H A M S TRE ET
L O N D O N S W 1 P 3EB

01 276 0 920

22 N O V E M B E R   1988
                 DETAI LS             OF


  WORKING               PARTY            REPORT


 PREVIOUSLY                    C I RCULATED -




( F U R T H E R COPIES WILL BE SUPPLIED UPON R E Q U E S T . )
       4   JAN   ’ 89   15:28         THOMPSON      INVESTMENTS                      PAGE.0 2




                                                       D E PA R TM EN T OF TH E E N V IR O N M E N T
                                                       2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SWlP 3EB
                                                                       01-276 3 0 0 0
                                                       My ref:
                                                       YOur ref:




                 Ku el          -A.'-V ► xvt-.+n.




As you know, the Government intends to bring forward a Bill to
establish a legislative framework for the national membership
scheme for football spectators.  The Bill will be published soon
after Parliament returns from the Christmas recess.

Hv p u r p o s e    in w r i t i n g to you now is to invite you to a meeti ng
in the House of C o m mo ns on T u e s d a y 17 J a n u a r y , The G o v e r n m e n t s
p r o p o s a l s have b e e n the subje ct o£ a gr eat d ea l of c o m m e n t and T.
tho ugh t that a Cull bri e f i n g would be h e l p £ u l for you.           ih®
m e e t i n g will be in the J u b il ee C o n f e r e n c e R(?om, Ho us e of C o m mo ns
at 5,00pm.                                                          '

You may also be interested to see the enclosed copy of a letter
about our proposals which I have sent to colleagues, in
Parliament.
I am writing in similar terms to all chairmen of Football League
clubs,




                                                                               J /




                                                      COLINM
                                                           OYN
                                                             IHA
                                                               N
       4    JAN   ’ 89   15:29           THOMPSON       INVESTMENTS                       PAGE.03




                      PROPOSALS FOR A NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME
                            AND RESTRICTIONS ON CONVICTED
                              HOOLIGANS TRAVELLING ABROAD



 SOME KEY QUESTIONS ANSWERED


                          *«_ cqipmlttad to the, intrnHnn»<^

 ih« w«i ^                    U            y t 8, ”iniBt«r toT Sport, has looked at
                  p      ht       s :   £ s r .“    p    &    r   s   t - r   s   t t :   SS   4 2   i : i
                                            the                               m o t i o n ,    f o r « »


 fSr FShib"iih2*C!tSt0^ B1i1 UllJ- ?roFose a legislative framework
              sch€u"e backed by criminal sanctions.             Subject to
 « i           ^ approval, the scheme will be drawn up by a Football
 S S f S S S i f *1? 1" 1 ? 7 * ? 0 bS dppolnted * th® Secretary of State.
 The Football Association and the Football League have said they
 S a c L S ^ 8 * ^ + * * 1 * ^° ±nt bo6y whleh th*y would recommend to the
 Secretary of State for designation as the FMA.             The Government
 welcomes this and hopes the football authorities and the clubs
 implementation,con rue^ v® approach to the acheme and Ita



 General

 1#        scheme?       the purpos® of p r o d u c i n g a national membership

           -    To form part of a package of measures which the
           Government and the football authorities are taking to help
           stamp out the unacceptably high level of hooliganism
           associated with football.

        - To break the link between football and hooliganism by
        banning th© troublemaker from all Lsagud grounds«

2.      Why ia the Government proposing to legislate in this area?
       ” The scale of the problem demands tough action. We hoped
         at the football authorities would bring in a scheme on a
       voluntary basis.   Unfortunately they have said that the
       clubs would not agree to this.

The Working Party
3.     Who was on the working party?
            4 J PI I ’89      15:30                    T H 0 M P S 0 N INVESTME N TS                            PAGE.04




          - The working party was chaired by the Minister for Sport
          and included representatives of the Football Association,
          the Football League, Government Departments and the
          Association of Chief Police Officers.

 4.       What is the status of the working party’s report?
              The report, which was agreed by all members of the
          working party, makes recommendations to the Government and
          the football authorities*

 Attitude of the Football Authorities

 5.      What is the attitude of the football authorities to the
          proposal to introduce a scheme?

               Thg-^gotball authorities have made clear all along
               r opposition to the princiivrS‘
                                             '
                                             ,T!¥f^her*^^
                           ..................   I.... — r~iHr r~~~T)fm— .. .........


              They co-operated on the working party and" have, since
          the publication of its report, confirmed their willingness
         'to continue to co-operate with the Government in producing
          a workable scheme.

             They wanted to see tougher action in some areas, e.g.
          they would have liked to see convictions for any form of
          violence leading to membership bans.


Police Attitude
6    .    What is the attitude of the police to the proposal to
          introduce, a scheme?             ”

             The Police were represented on the working party by the
          Association of Chief Police Officers.     a c p o unread t-ho
         ^®E2££-and        wfiXcomed-JttuaL-attQfiljaiftJBiJU^

         since voiced theljL.£BflflI3 a&&gna.

             A meeting with the Federation has taken place and
         further meetings will be held to ensure that their
         concerns are taken into account in working out the details
         of the scheme.

Details of the Scheme
7.       How will the details of the scheme be decided?
            It would be for the FMA to draw up the detailed scheme
         and submit it to the Secretary of State for approval.

8.       who will be                  appointed                          to            run   the   Football   Membership
         Authority?
        4   JAM   ’ 89   15:30   THOMPSON   INVESTMENTS   PAGE.05




        ’ 4 J ft. Pootball Association and the Football League have
        said they wish to establish a joint body which they would
        recommend to the Secretary of State for designation as the
        FMA-

        - it will be open to other organisations and individuals
        to seek appoihtment as the FMA.

Inside Grounds

            no* the problem now outside rather than inside grounds?
       -  Not true that hooliganism is no longera problem inside
                 ,Th?r® Mere ®'147           and6,542 ajeotlona
       from grounds last season.

       ” k !2/ ! 5f ,pe<2Ele A^ erviewed in a National Opinion Poll
             ^              Mail on Sunday on 27 November said they
       had been caught up in violence inside the grounds, and 28%
       outside.


       Has there been any trouble inside the grounds this season?
           Yes, incidents have continued this season.  And it is.
       not Just incidents, the police view remains that many
       matches provide the focus for aggressive and provocative
       behaviour with the threat of violence never far below the
       surface.


       What other measures have been taken inside grounds?

             It® , P°lice presence,    segregation  arrangements,
       strengthening of the law on public order, including
       exclusion orders and tight controls on alcohol*
           Enforcement much assisted by CCTV.     Better quality
       equipment has meant that ringleaders can be identified and
       rooted out.

Outside Grounds

      How will the scheme help solve the problem of hooliganism
      outside the grounds?

           The scheme would end football as a focus for
      hooliganism outside as well as inside the ground.       It
      would remove the match as a central focus for the
      activities of hooligans.   If they cannot get into a match
      they will not travel to one.

      How about the problem outside grounds?
      ~ A great deal has and is being done, tough measures are
      being taken.
      4    J AM   '89   15:31   THOMPSON   INVESTMENTS            PAGE.0 6




              The Sporting Events (Control o£ Alcohol) A.ct 1985
          established f i r m controls on the sale and possession of
          alcohol at grounds and on football special coaches and
          trains.
              The Public Order Act 1986 provided new offences of
          disorderly conduct and possession of fireworks or smoke
          bombs at matches.
          - It provided the courts with the power to make exclusion
          orders prohibiting attendance at certain matches by
          convicted football hooligans. This has proved useful but
          exclusion- orders are of only limited effectiveness.
                                                                 * V
              Police effectiveness has been strengthened, e.g. the
          improved exchange of Information between forces; better
          liaison between the police and the football authorities.
          - Advice has been issued on the enforcement of the law on
          the misuse of alcohol and on the need to ensure swift
          justice following incidents of hooliganism.

Casual supporters
14.       How will the casual supporter be affected?
              Joining a scheme will be a simple process.   It would
          mean completing a single form with a few personal details
          and providing two photographs. Supporters will appreciate
          this is a very minor Inconvenience in the context of
          ridding the game of hooliganism.
             The Government would like to see a means of allowing a
          casual supporter to obtain a membership card on the
          morning of the match, provided that this would not
          threaten the integrity of the scheme - this is something
          for consideration when the scheme is worked up in detail
          by the FMA for approval.

15,       What effect will the scheme have on attendances?
              There might be a short term effect on attendances but
          as the scheme becomes more effective in keeping out the
          troublemakers, more people will be attracted to attending
          games.     Many previously deterred by the threat of
          hooliganism will come back into the game, particularly
          women and families.

16.       Will the supporter with no             club    affiliation   have   to
          nominate a club allegiance?
               Most people would wish to be associated with a
          particular club to benefit from the advantages which club
          membership will offer.     However those with no club
          allegiance may be able to join the scheme without
          nominating a club.
            4   JAN   ’ 89   15:32   THOMPSON   INVESTMENTS
                                                               PAGE.0 7




     Exemptions

     17.     Will there be exemptions from membership?
                                                   -«

            Z     *he W°r^in9 Party recommended that certain groups
            should be exempt - accompanied children in famiiv
            aIIni?Ki/re8' (*isabled people in designated areas.   This is
            sensible    and    special   arrangements  should   also   be
                              ,Club
            groups and foreign visitors.
                                              hospitality boxes, school

            Ik **h.er® guests visit a match at the club’s >invitation
            3 £ their                         ^   “ —   U - t £ &


 Segregation

 18'        2??? "V.1 „ th® e“ eet of the scheme be on segregation?
            Will friends be able to sit together?

                    e?at±?n af now would remain a matter for the club
            effJt n n o    police. The membership scheme need have no
            effect on segregation arrangements.

 Getting into the Ground

 19.        what additional time will be required at the turnstiles?

           ZVo+-«™^entlai^ 8UPPlier® of the technology say that some
           ehanir +-ha °U ^ meJ?n.
                                 4.Kno  ®xtra time would be necessary to
           more t h a n 5 ? m          turneti1«-  « could be done in no
           or to pay for Sem.         presently tak«» to part with tickets


20.         What about checking photographs on membership cards?

                  'ltr,lln9 party recommended, on strong police advice,
           d*ltn?±£'ot°gr?£h wa?
           detection if thereis
                                    asential to deter fraud and assist
                                    trouble.     But the working party
                           at         woUl* b«impractical to expect
           turnstile operators    to checkphotographs on entry.

21.        What about last minute crowds?

           - There are problems now at some big matches about last
           minute crowds.   The scheme need not affect the problem if
           theroroinrfe            ** choson- If people were to enter
           be no bad thing.     earlier for the big g a m , thla would


22   .
           Ground fAct? Wil1 th® schen,e hav* on the Safety of Sports
       4    J AM    ’ RR   15:33   THOMPSON   I HUESTHE NTS
                                                                   PAGE.0 8




            - Important to avoid any overlap between the requirements
            of a certificate issued under the Safety of Sports Ground
            Act and a licence under the national membership scheme.

 The Luton Schine

 23.        How successful has Luton's membership scheme been?
                Very successful.    Luton operate             a 100% membership
            scheme confined to home supporters*

               Since the scheme was introduced three years ago, there
            has been only one arrest at a League match' 'in Luton (and
            that for a drugs offence). There were 102 arrests in the
            season before the scheme came in.

 24.       Why not apply the Luton scheme nationwide?
            -      Different grounds pose different problems.
            - What has worked well in Luton could not be successfully
            transferred to the whole country.    Look at London for
            example with its mix of catchment areas for different
            clubs.

               A scheme at an individual club cannot provide the
           security which a national scheme backed by legislation
           could offer.

Which Clubs7

25.        Which matches will be covered by the scheme?
           - The Secretary of State will designate the matches to be
           covered by the scheme.        The working party report
           recommended that all matches involving clubs in the
           Football League should be designated.

           Will a scheme apply to matches in which non-League teams
           are playing?

               The working party recommended that supporters of non-
           League clubs should not be required to produce membership
           cards for these matches.     We will be considering this
           further when our legislative proposals are published.

One card * any match

27.         Will my card entitle me to go to any Football                 League
           match?

              Yes, a member would need and be allowed only one card
           but with it would be able to go to any ground. Any scheme
           would be a national one.
       4   JAN   ’ 89   15:33   THOMPSON   INVESTMENTS   PAGE.0 9




International matches In England and Wales
28.        Will I need the card to go to international matches or cup
           finals?                    .*
           - The working party recommended that In the Interests of
           the Integrity of any scheme, Internationals and Cup Finals
           should be included.    We will be discussing this issue
           further.

Timing
29.        When is It proposed to introduce a scheme?
              Our target date for introduction is Spring 1990.    The
           key issue in settling the timetable is the need to Install
           the right sort of technology.

Cost
30.        who pays?

           - Always been made clear that football should finance any
           scheme.   There are considerable commercial opportunities
           in a membership list of millions. One company has already
           offered to set up and run a scheme at no cost to clubs.
              Even without commercial development, a leading company
           has said it could put a scheme in jplace at a cost to the
           member of about £3 per year. This Is less than some clubs
           already charge their members; for example, Tottenham
           Hotspur charges £5.
                if the football authorities and the clubs take a
           positive approach to marketing, financing a scheme would
           not be a problem.   In addition, the Football Trust might
           be prepared to consider any requests for assistance from
           the smaller clubs.

Abroad
31.        How about hooligans travelling abroad?
               The Home Office has proposed that convicted hooligans
           should be made to report to an appropriate place in the UR
           when key matches are being played abroad.

32.        Will this apply to hooligans who are convicted of footbSli
           related offences abroad as well as to those convicted
           he re ?
       4    JAN       ’ 89   15:34   TH0MP90N   INUE9TMENT9
                                                                  P A G E . 10




                It is proposed that someone resident here who is
           convicted of such an offence abroad should be brought
           before a court in this country so that e restriction order
           may be    imposed.     It is proposed      that bilateral
           arrangements would be made with other countries for this
           purpose.

 Foreign visitors

 33*       How will foreign visitors be able to attend matches?
                  There are several possibilities:
                  -     they could join the scheme;
                  -     they might be guests of the club;
                        or, they could be asked to produce proof of
                        identity like a passport, to secure temporary
                        membership.

Applying for membership

34.    Where will I be able to get a membership card?

           -   This is for the FMA to consider but the Government
           hopes application forms would be freely available - from
           the FMA, the clubs and perhaps, as the working party
           recommended, other agencies.
                                                              i

35.    What information will a supporter have to give to obtain a
        card?

           - Joining would be a simple process, it is proposed that
           the supporter would need to provide a few personal details
           - name, address and two photographs, the club he or she
           wishes   to  be   associated with    and  their   national
           allegiance.

36.    Will Scottish and Northern Irish supporters be asked to
        give their national allegiance?

       - Yes, the working party proposed that anyone joining a
       scheme, from wherever they come, would be asked to fill in
       a standard application form.

37.    How long will the card last?

          This is something the FMA would look at. The working
       party recommended that cards should be valid for twd or,
       more likely, three seasons.
      4   J AI I    ’ 89   15:35   THOMPSON   INVESTMENTS       PAGE.11




38.       What happens if a supporter loses his card?
             He should report the loss to the FMA*    it is proposed
          that the card would then be invalidated at every ground.
          The working party recommended that clubs should be able to
          issue temporary membership cards, valid for one match only
          to members whose cards were lost, stolen or damaged.

39.       How can you stop forgeries?

          - No system can ba impervious to forgery and fraud. The
          Government believes that an electronically readable card
          supported by a photograph will add a further layer of
          deterrence against hooligans, on top of the measures
          already taken.

40.       What happens if a supporter tries to use a card more than
          once at a match - by handing it to a friend?
          - Technology is available to ensure a card is only valid
          once per match and cannot therefore be passed back to
          someone else to use* we would wish to see that this is a
          feature of any scheme. The working party recommended that
          attempting to enter the ground without a valid membership
          card should be a criminal offence.

Convictions and Bans
41.       Who will notify the FMA of those convicted?
                                                            f

          - The working party proposed that the court should inform
          the FMA and the police of a relevant conviction.

42.       How long will a supporter lose his membership for if he is
          convicted of a football related offence?
              The working party proposed that mandatory bans of five
          or two years depending on the offence should be imposed
          and   that   the  FMA   should  have   powers   to  impose
          discretionary bans in line with guidelines agreed with the
          Secretary of State.

43.       Will supporters be able to appeal against bans imposed at
          the discretion of the FMA?
                   We intend that an appeals tribunal should be set up.

44.       How will the courts know what a football related offence
          is?
              There is already a definition in the Public Order Act
          1986. Most cases will be straightforward. There would be
          a degree of interpretation involved for the courts within
          the framework set in any legislation.
      4    JAN   ’ 89   15:35   THOMPSON   INVESTMENTS
                                                                    PAGE.1 2




           Will those convicted of other criminal offences be banned?

           j J S - h S L S f only** anyle9i,latl0n «PPly t0 football


Sanctions against club and FMA

46*        What happens if a club does             not   install   a   scheme or
           operate It properly?

          -   The working party proposed that there should be a
          licensing authority. A licence could be withdrawn from a
          club and this would mean spectators would not be
          allowed into a match.


47.       What If the FMA fails to run a scheme properly?

                         party proposed that the Secretary of State
          should have the power to terminate Its contract and
          appoint another body to take on the task.

Civil liberties

          How will civil liberties be safeguarded?

          -   A scheme would not interfere in civil liberties, no-one
          has the right to enter a football ground.     Clubs refuse
          entry to unwanted spectators now;        Hooliganism does
          infringe the civil liberties of others ** shopkeepers,
          shoppers, the general public and property owners in town
          centres and near grounds and not least the genuine
          football supporter.

          Why not make everyone carry a national ID card?
              That is a subject for a different, wider debate.   A
          typical national ID card would not keep hooligans out of
          football.


          Surely the commercial development              of   a    scheme      will
          Infringe civil liberties?

      - In developing the commercial potential of a scheme, the
      FMA and the clubs would have to act in line with the
      principles of the Data Protection Act - members would have
      the right to see and challenge the accuracy of any
      computerised information held about them and appropriate
      security precautions would be taken to safeguard that
      Information.
Attendances                             Average attendance per home match, by club. Football League                                                               Table 1.4
                                        1958/59, 1963/64, 1968/69, 1973/74,1978/79, and 1981/82-1 986/87


                                                                                                                                                       thousands
                                                                                                                                            (Division in brackets)
                            1958/59    1963/64      1968/69      1973/74      1978/79    1981/82     1982/83      1983/84      1984/85         1985/86     1986/87
       Accrington Stanley (3) 6.5
       Aldershot          (4) 4.2      (4) 5.3      (4) 5.9      (3) 5.2      (4) 4.2    (4) 2.2     (4) 1.9      (4) 2.5      (4) 2.0         (4) 1.5     (4) 2.4
       Arsenal            (1)45.2      (1)34.5      (1)38.4      (1)30.2      (1)36.4    (1) 25.5    (1)24.2      (1)28.1      (1)31.2         (1) 23.8    (1)29.0
       Aston Villa        (1)33.9      (1)22.3      (2) 24.7     (2) 23.4     (1)32.8    (1) 26.9    (1)23.7      (1)21.4      (1) 18.3        (1) 15.2    (1) 18.2
       Barrow             (4) 4.3      (4) 3.1      (3) 4.7

       Barnsiey             (2)11.2    (3) 6.5      (3) 9.5      (4)    4.3   (4) 11.0   (2) 15.1    (2)   12.3   (2)    9.7   (2)    7.2     (2)    6.1   (2)    5.9
       Birmingham City      (1)26.7    (1)22.1      (2)26.1      (1)   33.0   (1)20.2    (1) 17.1    (1)   15.6   (1)   14.1   (2)   12.7     (1)   10.9   (2)    7.4
       Blackburn Rovers     (1)30.5    (1)21.5      (2)11.1      (3)    7.4   (2) 8.6    (2) 8.4     (2)    7.1   (2)    7.6   (2)    9.6     (2)    5.8   (2)    6.8
       Blackpool            (1)20.9    (1) 16.5     (2) 15.1     (2)   10.1   (3) 5.6    (4) 4.2     (4)    3.0   (4)    3.9   (4)    4.9     (3)    4.5   (3)    3.9
       Bolton Wanderers     (1)27.7    (1) 17.0     (2) 10.5     (2)   15.9   (1)24.8    (2) 7.6     (2)    7.6   (3)    5.9   (3)    5.0     (3)    4.8   (3)    4.9
       Bournemouth          (3) 10.7   (3) 9.8      (3)   10.7   (3) 9.0      (4) 3.8    (4)   5.9   (3) 5.7      (3) 4.0      (3) 3.9        (3) 3.4      (3) 6.6
       Bradford (PA)        (4) 7.0    (4) 6.2      (4)    3.3                                                                      —              -t-          -
       Bradford City        (3) 11.1   (4) 5.7      (4)    7.2   (4) 3.8      (4) 3.9    (4) 5.4     (3) 4.9      (3) 4.2      (3) 6.6        (2) 5.7      (2) 8.2
       Brentford            (3) 13.9   (3)11.9      (4)    6.4   (4) 5.1      (3) 7.5    (3) 5.7     (3) 6.2      (3) 4.7      (3) 4.1        (3) 4.0      (3) 3.9
       Brighton & Hove A.   (2) 22.5   (4) 9.3      (3)   10.8   (3) 10.9     (2) 22.1   (1) 18.2    (1) 14.7     (2) 12.3     (2)11.8        (2) 9.7      (2) 8.3
       Bristol City         (2) 22.5   (3)   10.4   (2)   15.5   (2) 14.1     (1)22.3    (3)   6.5   (4)    4.8   (4)   7.3    (3)   8.5      (3)   6.6    (3)    9.4
       Bristol Rovers       (2) 17.9   (3)   10.7   (3)    7.1   (3) 13.0     (2) 7.6    (3)   5.6   (3)    6.2   (3)   5.5    (3)   5.3      (3)   4.2    (3)    3.2
       Burnley              (1)23.7    (1)   19.8   (1)   16.4   (1)20.6      (2) 10.7   (3)   6.9   (2)    9.1   (3)   6.6    (3)   4.2      (4)   3.2    (4)    3.3
       Bury                 (3) 9.4    (2)    8.2   (2)    7.8   (4) 4.9      (3) 3.8    (4)   3.6   (4)    3.1   (4)   2.1    (4)   3.6      (3)   2.9    (3)    2.5
       Cambridge United           —            —            —    (3) 4.4      (2) 6.8    (2)   5.1   (2)    4.5   (2)   4.1    (3)   2.1      (4)   2.1    (4)    2.8
                                                                                                                         /

       Cardiff City         (2) 17.8   (2) 13.8     (2) 16.9     (2) 10.7     (2) 9.2    (2) 5.6     (3)    7.0   (2) 7.1      (2) 4.4        (3) 3.1      (4)    2.8
       Carlisle United      (4) 7.2    (4) 8.3      (2) 9.2      (2) 8.3      (3) 5.2    (3) 4.4     (2)    5.9   (2) 5.6      (2) 4.0        (2) 4.0      (3)    2.6
       Charlton Athletic    (2) 16.8   (2) 18.3     (2) 18.0     (3) 5.3      (2) 9.6    (2) 6.6     (2)    7.2   (2) 6.7      (2) 5.1        (2) 6.0      (1)    9.0
       Chelsea              (1)40.9    (1)31.3      (1)37.6      (1)25.9      (1)24.8    (2) 13.1    (2)   12.7   (2)21.1      (1)23.1        (1)22.0      (1)   17.7
       Chester City         (4) 7.0    (4) 6.2      (4) 5.9      (4) 2.7      (3) 4.1    (3) 2.2     (4)    2.1   (4) 1.8      (4) 1.9        (4) 3.0      (3)    2.7
Attendances                       Average attendance per home match, by dub. Football League                                                Table 1.4 (cont.)
                                  1958/59, 1963/64, 1968/69, 1973/74,1978/79, and 198 1/8 2-1 986/87
                                                                                                                                                  thousands
                                                                                                                                       (Division in brackets)
                    1958/59      1963/64      1968/69    1973/74    1978/79      1981/82          1982/83      1983/84      1984/85       1985/86      1986/87
Chesterfield        (3)    9.0   (4)    5.4   (4) 5.1    (3) 5.8    (3)    4.8   (3)        4.8   (3)    3.2   (4)    3.4   (4)    4.1    (3)    3.2   (3)    2.6
Colchester United   (3)    7.8   (3)    5.3   (4) .6.3   (4) 5.4    (3)    3.4   (4)        2.9   (4)    2.6   (4)    2.2   (4)    2.1    (4)    2.3   (4)    2.7
Coventry City       (4)   16.3   (3)   26.0   (1)33.2    (1)23.3    (1)   22.6   (1)       13.1   (1)   10.6   (1)   12.6   (1)   12.8    (1)   11.6   (1)   16.1
Crewe Alexandra     (4)    7.4   (3)    5.5   (4) 4.8    (4) 1.9    (4)    2.0   (4)        2.2   (4)    2.2   (4)    2.5   (4)    2.3    (4)    1.8   (4)    1.9
Crystal Palace      (4)   14.9   (3)   17.2   (2) 20.8   (2)21.8    (2)   23.3   (2)       10.4   (2)    9.9   (2)    8.2   (2)    6.4    (2)    6.8   (2)    7.6

Darlington          (4) 5.0      (4) 3.4      (4) 6.1    (4) 2.3    (4) 1.8      (4) 2.5          (4) 1.4      (4)    1.5   (4) 3.7       (3) 3.0      (3) 2.0
Derby County        (2) 19.0     (2) 12.0     (2) 27.7   (1)27.8    (1)21.6      (2)11.8          (2) 13.6     (2)   12.9   (3) 10.8      (3) 12.4     (2) 15.5
Doncaster Rovers    (3) 6.7      (4) 6.4      (4) 10.2   (4) 2.4    (4) 3.0      (3) 5.2          (3) 3.5      (4)    3.8   (3) 4.1       (3) 2.8      (3) 2.4
Everton             (1)39.2      (1)49.4      (1)46.0    (1)35.4    (1) 35.5     (1)24.7          (1)20.3      (1)   19.3   (1)32.0       (1)32.2      (1)32.9
Exeter City         (4) 9.4      (4) 7.3      (4) 5.4    (4) 4.2    (3) 4.4      (3) 3.9          (3) 3.2      (3)    3.4   (4) 2.4       (4) 2.0      (4) 2.6
Fulham              (2)26.3      (1)21.2      (2) 14.2   (2) 10.1   (2) 10.1     (3) 6.9          (2) 10.8     (2) 8.1      (2) 6.2       (2) 4.6      (3) 4.1
                                                                                       \
Gateshead           (4) 4.1             —          —           -          -                              —            —            —             —            —


Gillingham          (4) 6.9      (4) 5.6      (3) 5.4    (4) 7.5    (3) 7.1      (3) 5.2          (3) 4.1      (3) 3.9      (3) 4.7       (3) 3.7      (3) 5.0
Grimsby Town        (2) 13.1     (2) 9.5      (4) 4.0    (3) 7.4    (4) 6.5      (2) 8.4          (2) 7.7      (2) 7.6      (2) 6.5       (2) 5.2      (2) 5.1
Halifax Town        (3) 6.7      (4) 3.8      (4) 5.7    (3) 2.8    (4) 1.8      (4) 2.4          (4) 2.0      (4) 1.4      (4) 1.4       (4) 1.4      (4) 1.3

Hartlepool United   (4) 5.5      (4) 4.2      (3) 4.2    (4) 2.7    (4)    3.0   (4) 2.1          (4)    1.4   (4)    1.5   (4) 2.3       (4)    2.6   (4)    1.7
Hereford United            —            —          —     (3) 8.0    (4)    3.4   (4) 2.6          (4)    2.2   (4)    3.0   (4) 3.9       (4)    2.8   (4)    2.6
Huddersfield Town   (2) 14.8     (2) 12.5     (2) 10.2   (3) 5.7    (4)    3.6   (3) 6.7          (3)    9.3   (2)   11.0   (2) 7.2       (2)    6.8   (2)    6.6
Hull City           (3) 14.4     (3) 8.5      (2) 14.2   (2) 8.2    (3)    5.2   (4) 4.0          (4)    6.6   (3)    8.1   (3) 7.6       (2)    7.7   (2)    6.7
Ipswich Town        (2) 14.3     (1) 16.0     (1)23.6    (1)22.4    (1)   21.7   (1)21.9          (1)   19.5   (1)   17.5   (1)17.2       (1)   14.5   (2)   12.1
Leeds United        (1)24.9      (2) 29.9     (1) 37.0   (1)38.7    (1)27.6      (1)22.1          (2) 16.0     (2) 15.5     (2) 15.2       (2) 13.3    (2) 17.6
Leicester City      (1)27.9      (1)24.1      (1)28.4    (1)24.8    (2) 14.2     (2) 14.2         (1) 12.4     ( 1 )H '7    (1) 14.5       (1)11.8     (1) 11.7
Lincoln City        (2) 11.3     (4) 5.7      (4) 7.9    (4) 3.8    (3) 3.2      (3) 4.2          (3) 4.8      (3) 3.1      (3) 2.5        (3) 2.6     (4) 2.0
Liverpool           (2) 36.7     (1)45.0      (1)47.3    (1)42.3    (1)46.4      (1)35.1          (1)34.8      (1)32.0      (1)34.4        (1)35.3     (1)36.3
Luton Town          (1) 19.9     (3) 7.2      (3) 15.8   (2) 12.2   (2) 8.8      (2) 11.9         (1) 13.5     (1)11.9      (1) 10.8       (1)11.1     (1) 10.3
Manchester City     (1)32.6      (2) 18.2     (1)35.2    (1)30.8    (1)36.2      (1)34.1          (1)26.8      (2) 25.6     (2) 24.2       (1)24.2     (1)21.9
Manchester United   (1)53.3      (1)44.1      (1)51.2    (1)42.7    (1)46.4      (1)44.6          (1)41.6      (1)42.5      (1)42.9        (1)46.3     (1)40.6
Mansfield Town      (3) 8.7      (3) 9.5      (3) 7.1    (4) 3.2    (3) 5.2      (4) 2.7          (4) 2.3      (4) 2.4      (4) 2.3        (4) 3.8     (3) 3.2
Middlesbrough       (2) 24.9     (2) 18.8     (2)21.1    (2) 22.3   (1) 18.5     (1) 13.4         (2) 10.0     (2) 8.5      (2) 5.1        (2) 6.3     (3) 10.2
Milwall             (4)11.9      (3) 10.5     (2) 15.4   (2) 9.5    (2) 7.0      (3) 4.6          (3) 4.0      (3) 4.4      (3) 6.5        (2) 5.5     (2) 4.3
Attendances
                                    Average attendance per home match, by dub. Football League                                            Table 1.4 (cont)
                                    1958/59, 1963/64, 1968/69, 1973/74,1978/79, and 1981/82-1986/87


                                                                                                                                          thousands
                                                                                                                               (Division in brackets)
                    1958/59       1963/64      1968/69      1973/74    1978/79      1981/82      1982/83   1983/84     1984/85      1985/86      1986/87
Newcastle United    (1)39.5       (2) 29.4     (1)34.0      (1)32.9    (2) 20.8     (2)   17.3   (2) 24.2 (2) 29.8     (1)26.2      (1)23.4      (1)24.8
Newport County      (3) 6.6       (4) 3.7      (4) 2.5      (4) 3.0    (4) 3.7      (3)    4.5   (3)   4.7 (3) 3.1     (3) 2.4      (3) 2.5      (3) 2.1
Northampton T.      (4) 8.5       (2) 12.7     (3) 6.8      (4) 5.4    (4) 2.9      (4)    2.3   (4)   2.6 (4) 2.3     (4) 1.8      (4) 2.4      (4) 6.3
Norwich City        (2)21.1       (2) 16.3     (2) 13.8     (1)23.0    (1) 17.9     (2)   14.2   (1)16.9 (1)15.7       (1) 15.1     (2) 13.7     (1) 17.6
Nottingham Forest   (1)28.7       (1)22.5      (1)26.4      (2) 14.4   (1)29.6      (1)   19.9   (1)17.9 (1)17.7       (1) 16.8     (1) 16.8     (1) 19.1
Notts County        (3) 9.5       (3)    6.4   (4)    4.8   (2)11.9    (2)    9.3   (1)   11.6   (1)10.3 (1)     9.5   (2)    6.2   (3) 4.4      (3)    4.7
Oldham Athletic     (4) 5.3       (3)   12.4   (3)    4.1   (3) 10.1   (2)    7.0   (2)    7.0   (2)   7.0 (2)   6.0   (2)    4.7   (2) 4.7      (2)    6.9
Orient              (2) 13.3      (2)   10.4   (3)    5.9   (2)11.8    (2)    7.3   (2)    4.4   (3)   2.7 (3)   3.2   (3)    2.6   (4) 2.6      (4)    2.9
Oxford United             —       (4)    6.9   (2)   11.6   (2) 8.3    (3)    4.6   (3)    5.9   (3)   5.7 (3)   7.9   (2)   10.6   (1)11.0      (1)   10.4
Peterborough U.           —       (3)   10.8   (4)    5.8   (4) 8.8    (3)    4.6   (4)    4.7   (4)   2.8 (4)   3.4   (4)    3.2   (4) 2.6      (4)    3.7
Plymouth Argyle     (3) 22.9      (2)   13.0   (3) 10.6     (3) 7.7    (3)    7.5   (3)    4.8   (3)   4.5 (3) 5.3     (3)    5.1   (3)    8.3 , (2) 12.4
Portsmouth          (1)24.0       (2)   14.7   (2) 19.2     (2) 13.7   (4)   10.1   (3)    8.5   (3) 14.1 (2) 13.2     (2)   15.2   (2)   13.6 ’ (2) 13.4
Port Vale           (4) 12.8      (3)   10.1   (4) 4.4      (3) 4.0    (4)    3.3   (4)    3.6   (4)   4.8 (3) 4.0     (4)    3.3   (4)    3.6 (3) 3.3
Preston North End   (1)22.4       (2)   18.8   (2) 13.2     (2) 12.2   (2)   12.1   (3)    5.5   (3)   4.9 (3) 4.6     (3)    3.8   (4)    3.5 (4) 8.1
Queens Park Rang'   (3) 9.2       (3)    7.7   (1)21.6      (1)22.9    (1)   16.3   (2)   12.6   (2)12.8 (1)15.4       (1)   14.0   (1)   12.7 (1) 11.8
Reading             (3)   12.7    (3) 8.4      (3) 6.6      (4)“ 6.5   (4)    7.6   (3)    4.0   (3)   3.5 (4) 4.5     (3)    3.7   (3)    6.9   (2)    6.9
Rochdale            (3)    .4.8   (4) 3.0      (4) 5.4      (3) 1.9    (4)    1.8   (4)    1.8   (4)   1.7 (4) 1.5     (4)    1.4   (4)    1.8   (4)    2.2
Rotherham United    (2)   10.5    (2) 10.0     (3) 9.1      (4) 3.4    (3)    4.5   (2)    9.9   (2)   8.3 (3) 4.6     (3)    4.5   (3)    3.5   (3)    3.0
Scunthorpe United   (2)   12.4    (2) 7.4      (4) 3.6      (4) 3.0    (4)    2.7   (4)    2.2   (4)   3.6 (3) 3.3     (4)    2.1   (4)    1.8   (4)    2.1
Sheffield United    (2)   19.6    (1)21.7      (2)15.5      (1)22.9    (2)   16.3   (4)   14.9   (3)11.8 (3)12.a       (2)   12.1   (2)   10.8   (2)   10.0
                                                                                                                   /

Sheffield Wed.      (2) 27.0      (1)23.4      (1)26.9      (2) 14.6   (3) 10.9     (2) 19.2     (2)16.8 (2)22.8       (1)27.8      (1)23.1      (1)23.1
Shrewsbury Town     (4) 8.1       (3) 6.6      (3) 5.5      (3) 2.5    (3) 6.1      (2) 4.6      (2)   5.3 (2) 4.7     (2) 4.7      (2) 3.9      (2) 4.1
Southampton         (3)21.5       (2) 17.2     (1)22.5      (1)21.1    (1)21.3      (U 21.8      (1)18.8 (1)18.1       (1) 18.0     (1) 14.9     (1) 15.0
Southend United     (3) 11.2      (3) 8.5      (4) 10.6     (3) 6.5    (3) 6.6      (3) 5.1      (3)   3.5 (3) 3.1     (4) 2.1      (4) 2.8      (4) 3.7
Southport           (4) 3.4       (4) 3.0      (3) 4.2      (3) 2.5
Attendances                    Average attendance per home match, by club. Football League                                           Table 1.4 (cont)
                               1958/59, 1963/64,1968/69,1973/74,1978/79, and 1 9 8 1/8 2-1 986/87

                                                                                                                                  thousands
                                                                                                                       (Division in brackets)
                    1958/59    1963/64    1968/69    1973/74    1978/79    1981/82      1982/83      1983/84      1984/85 1985/86 1986/87
Stockport County    (3) 9.3    (4) 4.3    (3) 7.2    (4) 2.4    (4) 4.1    (4)    2.5   (4)    2.3   (4)    2.1   (4)    1.9   (4)    2.7   (4)    2.1
Stoke City          (2) 17.3   (1)30.3    (1) 19.0   (1)21.6    (2) 19.1   (1)   14.6   (1)   16.6   (1)   13.9   (1)   10.7   (2)    8.3   (2)   10.0
Sunderland          (2) 27.8   (2)41.3    (1)25.4    (2) 24.4   (2)25.5    (1)   19.6   (1)   17.4   (1)   16.2   (1)   18.5   (2)   16.1   (2)   13.6
Swansea City        (2) 14.6   (2) 10.9   (4) 5.7    (4) 2.8    (3) 13.7   (1)   18.2   (1)   11.7   (2)    7.0   (3)    4.4   (3)    4.3   (4)    5.2
Swindon Town        (3)11.4    (2) 19.3   (3) 18.1   (2) 7.3    (3) 8.0    (3)    5.8   (4)    4.2   (4)    3.3   (4)    3.2   (4)    6.5   (3)    7.7

Torquay United      (4) 5.4    (4) 5.2    (3) 8.3    (4) 3.4    (4) 2.7    (4) 2.2      (4) 2.3      (4) 1.9      (4) 1.4      (4) 1.2      (4)    1.8
Tottenham Hotspur   (1)40.4    (1)43.8    (1)37.5    (1)26.1    (1)34.9    (1)35.1      (1)30.6      (1)28.7      (1)28.9      (1)20.9      (1)   25.9
Tranmere Rovers     (3) 11.8   (4) 7.1    (3) 6.0    (3) 4.2    (3) 2.2    (4) 1.7      (4) 1.9      (4) 2.1      (4) 1.6      (4) 1.6      (4)    2.1
Walsall             (4) 9.1    (3) 7.3    (3) 5.9    (3) 4.8    (3) 4.0    (3) 3.7      (3) 3.2      (3) 5.0      (3) 4.8      (3) 4.9      (3)    5.3
Watford             (4) 8.6    (3) 11.4   (3) 13.6   (3) 6.7    (3) 14.4   (2) 14.6     (1) 19.5     (1) 16.5     (1) 18.2     (1) 15.4     (1)   15.8
                                                                                                                                      1
West Bromwich A. (1)32.4       (1)20.6    (1)25.1    (2) 16.0   (1)26.5    (1) 16.8     (1) 15.2     (1) 14.6     (1)   13.8   (1) 12.2     (2)    9.1
West Ham United  (1)28.4       (1)24.6    (1)31.1    (1)28.4    (2) 25.8   (1)26.6      (1)22.8      (1)21.4      (1)   18.4   (1)21.1      (1)   20.6
Wigan Athletic        —             —          —          —     (4) 6.7    (4) 5.8      (3) 4.4      (3) 3.9      (3)    3.3   (3) 4.1      (3)    3.4
Wimbledon             —             —          —                (4) 3.7    (3) 2.6      (4) 2.3      (3) 3.5      (2)    4.4   (2) 4.6      (1)    7.8
Wolverhampton W. (1)38.5       (1)22.6    (1)30.7    (1)25.6    (1)20.8    (1) 15.2     (2) 15.7     (1) 12.5     (2)    8.4   (3) 4.0      (4)    5.8

Workington          (4) 5.0    (4) 4.8    (4) 2.4    (4) 1.2                                                                           —            —

Wrexham             (3) 10.3   (3) 7.0    (4) 5.6    (3) 6.0    (2)11.5    (2) 4.3      (3) 2.7      (4) 2.1      (4) 1.6      (4) 1.8      (4) 2.5
York City           (4) 8.1    (4) 3.9    (4) 3.9    (3) 6.9    (4) 2.9    (4) 2.4      (4) 3.2      (4) 5.0      (3) 5.5      (3) 4.1      (3) 3.4
                                                                                                             /




Divisional averages

  Division 1           31.9       27.0       31.6       28.3       27.5          22.6         20.1         18.8         21.1         19.6         19.8
  Division 2           18.7       16.4       16.0       13.7       13.3          10.3         10.8         11.6          8.7          7.7          9.0
  Division 3           11.1        9.8        7.9        6.2        6.1           5.1          5.3          4.9          4.8          4.5          4.3
  Division 4            7.7        5.5        5.6        3.9        4.2           3.6          2.8          2.8          2.5          2.5          3.1
  All Divisions        16.7       14.1       14.5       12.3       12.1           9.9          9.3          9.0          8.8          8.1          8.6
            55                           Written Answers
                                                                              19 D E C EMDER 1988                                                    Written Answers                         56




                                                                                                                                           Football Statistics
                                                                                                        -     Mr. I lurry llnrncs: To ask the Secretary ofStnte Tor (lie
                                                                                                           Environment ir he will list English League football clubs
                                                                                                           togcllicr with (lie following Information Tor cncli o r them
                                                                                                          dumig the 1987-88 senson; the number of mntchcs played
                                                                                                          nt tlicir grounds, the totnl season's nttcudauce, the lotnl
                                                                                                          arrests in association with such matches, the average
                                                                                                          nttcn,lance per match, the average number o r arrests per
                                                                                                          match and the arrests as a proportion o r the attendance:
                                                                                                          nml if he will make a statement about the numbers ol
                                                                                                          charges and convictions which have arisen Trom such
                                                                                                          nrrcsts.                         ** '

                                                                                                        •- M r*j ' I” *n,,inn: 1,1C information that fallows relates to
                                                                                                        I ootball League matches played in the 1987-88 season.
                                                                                                         Ihe figures on the matches played, total attendances, and
                                                                                                                                               hy Association or
                                                                                                        U u c r olice Olliccrs. Comparable Figures are not available
                                                                                                        lor charges nor for convictions arising from the arrests.
                                                                                                            In addition to those arrested at l-ootball League
                                                                                                       grounds in the 1987-88 season, 6.542 were ejected from the
                                                                                                       gi omuls. C learly, neither the ejections nor arrests relied
                                                                                                         lie substantially gieater miuiber o r incidents of violence
                                                                                                       boohgaiiism and vandalism at Football League grounds!
                                                                                                       rtirtlicMiiore, the police view remains that many matchcs
                                                                                                       provide the focus Tor aggressive and provocative
                                                                                                       behaviour with violence never far below the surface.
                                                                                   l i r s t   c/i f i t i o n                                   j
      ( tub
                                                       Matches                 l o t at                 Total artests                    A rerage             A vcrafte      A rtesti as a
                                                                         attendance
                                                                                                                                      attendance               arrests      proportion o f
                                                                                                                                      per match             per match         attend,mce
     A isem il
                                                                                                                                                                              (per cent.)
     < li.illlciil
                                                                            598.059                                     153                29.903
                                                                            173,629                                                                                 765            003
    < lichen                                                                                                              14                 8.682
                                                                           40R.538                                                                                 0 70           OKI
    < ovciiliy                                                                                                          271                20,427
                                                                           350.165                                                                                13 55           0 07
    l>ciliy County                                                                                                      191                17.508                  9 70
                                                                           313.107                                       86                                                       (106
    liv c ilo n        1                                                                                                                   17.155                  4 30           0 0.1
    I ivci |iiio |                                                         555.692                                      21                27.785
                                                                           791.977                                                                                 1 20           0 001
    Iiilon                                                                                                              33                39,599                   1 65           0 001
                                                                           I6I.RR4                                        I
   M : iik lics lcf D u l l e d                                                                                                             8.094                 005             0 0006
                                                                           783.099                                   18
   I Irw cK lle U nilcd                                                                                                                   39.155                   1 90          0 005
   I l l l l Wj<;||                                                       419.7-12                                  149                  20.987
                                                                          313.904                                                                                 7 45           0 04
   Miilliii)>.li,ini I ' o t e s t                                                                                   32                   15.695                  1 60
                                                                          3R4.648                                   1.10
                                                                                                                                                                                 0 01
   O x lim l U nited                                                                                                                     19.212                   6 50           00.1
                                                                          218.6.12                                  105
   I ’n l t s n m n t l i                                                                                                                10.9.11                  5 25           00 5
   O n e c i u r.-nk R a n g c i s                                        324.780                                   2R2                  lfi.2.19
                                                                          265.813                                                                               14 10            0 09
  S lie llield W e d n e s d a y                                                                                     91                  13.290                  4 55
                                                                         395.519                                     90                                                         0 03
  S onllniinplou                                                                                                                         19.776                  4 50           0 02
                                                                         290.617                                   208
   I ottcnlm n llo l^n ir                                                                                                                14.5.11                1040            0 07
                                                                         517.970                                     74
  W nll.nd                                                                                                                              25.899                   3 70           0 01
  AViiiiMcdoii
                                                                         291.461                                     41                 14.573
                                                                         159.691                                                                                 2 15           0 01
  Wcsl Ihnu                                                                                                         49                   7.985                  245
                                                                         396,473                                   149                                                          0 03
                                                                                                                                        19.824                  745             004

                                                                               2nd Dlvblan
                                                   Matches                 Total               Tata! arrests                          Average        A ierage arrests      Arrests as a
                                                                     attendance                                                attendance per              per nuttch     propoHhm o f
                                                                                                                                       match                                attendance
                                     ----- ---------             ------ ---                                                                                                 (per cent.)
  Aslon Villa                                               22
  Kiimslcy                                                             403.836                                   308                  18.356
                                                            22          168.339                                                                                14 00              008
  lliiininf.linni                                                                                                  55                   I S 3?                  250
!lll:ickli(ii n
                                                           22           188,722                                   101                  8.578
                                                                                                                                                                                  00J
                                                           22          211.120                                                                                  4 59              005
 |toil|H(1IIUUlll                                                                                                  79                  9.596
                                                           22          168.757                                                                                  3 60              004
 Dcidrmd City                                                                                                    119                   7.671                    6 77
                                                           22          285.509                                   197                                                             0 09
< rysl:il I'iilnce                                         22                                                                         12.978                   8 96
                                                                       215.496                                     78                                                            007
1Imldi-islicld                                             22                                                                          9.795                   355               004
                                                                       150.334                                   126                   6.833                   5 7J              (108
    J* rw*vil J..h 6.4
                                                    Il ' ti tt c n An in e r t                    19 I)I:CI:MI!I:R 1988                                               tt'th lc n /turners                         as

      ( luh                                                                      Matihcs               h ’tlll           lo ia l arrests                   Arcrage         Average at tests       AtrestS as a *
                                                                                              iilli iiihvu c                                        attendant e pi t            per match        proportion n f
                                                                                                                                                            m alch                                 attendant e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (per m u . )
     Hull ( 'ily                                                                        22         15 MO 7                                    ,1R             7.159                     1 7.1                0 02
     l|nivitli                                                                          22        25R.0.17                                    99             11.729
     l.rcdi 1Inilcd
                                                                                                                                                                                       4 50                  0 III
                                                                                        22        4 1 i.irM                         -        IRI             20. Ml                    8 36                  0 01
    1 ritTsIri (.'ily                                                                   22        22.1.019                                    Rl             10.139                    3 68                  0 01
    M:imiieslrr ( ily                                                                   22        42R.655                                      15            I9.4R1                     159                  0 01
    Middliill 11jirpli                                                                  22        32I.2I7                                    III)            11,601                    5 00                  0 01
    Millwill                                                                            22        IR5.I65                                      II             8,417                    2 00                  0 02
    1>ldli:im Alltlelic                                                                 22        117,995                                     19              6.727                                          0 01
                                                                                                                                                                                       0X6
    riyimntlli                                                                          22        220.152                                     29             10,2X0                    1 32                  0 01
    Minding                                                                             22        I5H.I52                                     20              fi.RU                    0 91                  0 01
    Sliellirld 1lulled                                                                  22        72.1,91.0                                   r.o            10. IR0
    M i l t vv,Iiiii y
                                                                                                                                                                                       2 73                  0 01
                                                                                        22        108,202                                     OR              4.918                    3 10                  0 06
    Slnlc ( ily                                                                         22        211.211                                     57              9,602                    2 59                  001
    fiiviiidnii                                                                         22        209.R00                                     67              9.536                  ’ J .05                 0 01
    Wc-.l Dioinwitli                                                                    22        222.261                                    112             10.101               ' ' frOO                   oor>
                                                                                                               J n l Division
                                                                                    i lies         Total                Total arrests                     Average         Average arrests         Arrests ax a
                                                                                             attendance                                                attendance              per match         propnrtloti i>f
                                                                                                                                                       per match                                   atteiiilonre
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (per rent.)
   AMrr sfir>|                                                                        23           70.612                                     39             3.071                     17               006
   111:>( I |innl                                                                     23          96.9.15                                     .16           4.214                      16                0 01
   tin n lli.nl                                                                       23         105,110                                      72            4.5X3                      3 1              0 07
   l « i i i m l                       llove     A lliion                             23         205.263                                      34            8.924                      15                0 02
   ll ii .li .l ( 'ily                                                                23         725.R6I                                      21            9.R20                     09                001
   llm llll           Itn vcis                                                        21          R1.753                                      IR            3.6R4                     OX                0 02
   U ni y                                                                             23           5R.99 7                                      5            2.565                    02                0 01
   ( lirslrr           ( ily                                                         23           5X.96 7                                     22            2.563                     096               001
   (lii-slrtIm I.I                                                                   23           61,219                                      21            2.662                     091               0 01
   I ) 'i n r 3ilc i          M o v e d                                              21           43.223                                      2H             1,8 79                    12               006
   ll’111:11>I                                                                       2)          116.451                                     99             5.063                     4 3               0 09
   < M llill|;li:illl                                                                23          106.261)                                     32            4.620                      14               0 0.1
   < !i i m s l . y         I o w n                                                  23            76.541                                    66             3,.12 7                   29                009
   M .'itr.licltl             I o w n                                                23           90,891                                     21             3.951                     09                002
   I l r 111l l :i 111 | ■ ( r > f l   | n w n                                       23         126.578                                       II            5,50.1                    0 5               0 01
   I lu lls < n u n ly                                                               23         I41.R21                                      56             6.296                     24                0 01
  I 'm I V :ile                                                                      21           RR, 126                                    22           , 3.R1I                     0 96              0 02
  I'lisltlll lliiilli                  I'tu l                                        21         119.99H                                      20          V S.0X6                      09                001
  I t t ’j l n l l i m n        U n iled                                             21           HI.107                                     47             3,656                     20                0 05
  .‘ i o i i l l n . i n p l a i i U n i t e d                                       23           79,320                                       .1           3.4IR                     0 1               01101
  .'rnn di iM n il                                                                   23         400.760                                      R0            17.421                     35                0 02
  \V j.h:ill                                                                         23         12R.151                                      47             5.571                     20                00 1
  \ V i ( ' n ii A l l i l c l i c                                                   23           R6.776                                       4            3,772               • •   0 17              001
  V in k         ( 'ily                                                              23           62,902                                     62             2,734                     27                0 10

                                                                                                           4th Dlrhlon
  ( M>                                                                       Matches               Total               Total arrests                     A ret age                A rerage       Arrests as a
                                                                                             attendance                                               attendance               arrests per      proportion o f
                                                                                                                                                      per match                     match         attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (per t etil.)
  M illion          W .tm lererJ                                                    23          I I I . 77R                              21                 4,990                      0 9                  0 02
 M m nicy                                                                           21          1 11,7 70                                90                 6,294                      3 9                  0 06
 1 'iin d iiid |;e            U n ited                                              2)            57.R 96                                29                 2,299                      13                   01)5
 ( 'at«lil| ( ily                                                                   23          101.752                                  43                 4,424                      19                   0 04
 < !,it I k l e       1I n i lc d                                                   23            5 I . 2R 2                             27                 2,229                      12                   005
 t id rli« le i              U n ited                                               23           40,607                                  —                  1.766                      __                    __
 ( tc « e         A lc x n n d m                                                    23            5 I.82R                                21                 2,253                      0 9               004
 1):itli>iR ltin                                                                    23            50.374                                      5             2.190                     0 2                001
 l u e k t        ( ily                                                             21            56.261                                 83                 2.446                      3 6               0 15
 1l.dil;IK            1o w n                                                        23           .1 9 , 3 5 8                            38                 I.7H                       17                0 10
 1I n t l l i p m . l        1lu lle d                                              23           4 R.972                                 12                 2,129                     0 5                002
 1l r i r l i . n l        t lu lled                                                23           50,712                                  28                 2.205                      12                0 06
 | ll'W (.ll||                                                                      23           40,261                                  .15                1,750                      15                0 09
 1r y l n i i ( l i i c n t                                                         23           90.322                                      8              3,927                     0 3                0 01
 I'rlciliiiK iu g li U n i te d                                                     23            7I.R R I                               15                 3,125                     0 7                002
 II h i Inl.-ilc                                                                    23           41,901                         .        32                 1.952                      14                0 07
.Si : n I ' m n t i | : l i                                                         23           70,501                                 146                 3,065                      63                021
.*;< n n i l n . i ( k ;                                                            23            71.405                                46                  3,235                      2 0               0 06
Jiloi                                                                               23           52,151                                  17                 2,268                     0 7                0 03
.Sn-iniM M             .                                                            21         100.957                                   10                4 . 3R 9                   0 4                001
 1n ti|ii:iy           1I n i lc d                                                  21           67,414                                  21                2,912                      0 9                0 03


1c i i n n e t e           M overs                                                 23           7 6 . R 17                              53                 3.311                      2 3               0 07
W it|» c tli.-iiii|> (tmi W a n d e i e n                                          21         2 2 6 , 91 . 1                        132                    9 .R6 R                    57                0 06
Wit ilium                                                                          71           51.5 V I                                17                 7.711                      0 7               0   01
                                                                          S C H E D U L E                 O F        A R R E S T S
                                                                                                         A T

                                                                          Q U E E N S              R A R K           R A N G E R S

                                                              1 S T       D I V I S I O N                L E A G U E       M A T C H E S

                                                                                    1 9 / 8 / 8 7          -    2 3 / 4 / 8 8


                                             /

NO.   DATE          LEAGUE        GATE           POLICE    S U PPO R TE R STADIUM                    DRUNK       ASSA ULT        THREATENING   P O S S . CRIMINAL   OFFENSIVE FO O T ­
                    MATCH                        LEVELS                                                          O B S T R U C T DISORDERLY    DRUG DAMAGE          WEAPON    WAY
                                                 & C O STS   H        A    I   0                                 POLICE          BEHAVIOR                                     O BSTR l
                                                                                                                                                                              CTION



1     1 9 .8 .8 7   DERBY         11,561         71                   1         -     -        1     1           -                             -                    -          -
                                                 £3,483


2     2 2 .8 .8 7   ARSENAL       1 8,981        106                  -         1 1                  -           1                             -                    -          -
            i                                    £ 5,200


3     2 .9 .8 7     EVERTON       1 5,380        106                       NO A R R E S T S          -           -                             -                    -          -
                                                 £ 5,200


4     1 2 .9 .8 7   CHELSEA       2 2,583        106                  4       16      9       11     7                                                              -
                                                                                                                 2              8              2      1                        -
                                                 £5,200


5     2 6 .9 .8 7   LUTON         11,175         71                   3         3     2        4     1                          1              2                    1          1
                                                 £ 3,483


6     2 4 .1 0 .8 7 P O R T S ­   1 3,171        106                  1         3     1        3     4           -                             -                    -          -
                    MOUTH                        £ 5,753


7     7 .1 1 .8 7   WAT­          12,101         71                        NO A R R E S T S          -           -                             -                    -          -
                    FORD                         £ 3,853


8     2 1 .1 1 .8 7 NEW­          11,794         71                   2         7     5        4     8                          1              -                    -          -
                    C ASTLE                      £ 3,8 5 3


9     5 .1 2 .8 7   MAN           2 0,632        106                  3         3     4        2     5           -                                                  1          -
                    UNITED                       £ 5,753


10    1 8 .1 2 .8 7 COVEN­        7 ,229         64                        NO A R R E S T S          -           -                             -                    -          -
                    TRY                          £ 3,479


11    2 1 .1 2 .8 7 OXFORD        9 ,1 2 5       71                   2         1 1            2     1           -                             -                    1          1
                                                 £ 5 ,7 8 0
                                                                                             -2-


NO.   DATE          LEAGUE       GATE        POLICE    SUPPO R TER STADIUM              DRUNK      ASSAULT    THREATENING   P O S S . CRIMINAL   OFFENSIVE F O O T -
                    MATCH                    LEVELS     H       A   I   O                          OBSTRUCT   DISORDERLY    DRUG DAMAGE          WEAPON    WAY
                                             & C O STS                                             POLICE     BEHAVIOR                                     OBSTR­
                                                                                                                                                           UCTION


12    1 .1 .8 8     SO U T H ­ 8,613         59             NO A R R E STS              -          -          -             -      -             -           -
                    HAMPTON                  £ 3,209
                                            ..
                                             -j


13    6 .2 .8 8     CHARL­       11,512      53         1         2     1      2        1          1          1             -      -             -          -
                    TON                      £ 2,876


14    2 7 .2 .8 8   WIMBLE­      9 ,0 8 0    64~'                 1     1
                                                       -                                1          -          -             -      -             -          -
                    DON                      £ 3,479


15    5 .3 .8 8     L IV E R ­   23,171      106       8        12    8        12 14               -          3             -      -             2          8
                    POOL                     £ 5,753   NEITHER        NEITHER
                                                       7 (S treet T ra d e rs ) 7
              t
16    1 6 .3 .8 8   N O TTS      8 ,316      59             NO A R R E S T S            -          -          -             -      -             -          -
                    FORREST                  £ 3,209


17    1 9 .3 .8 8   NORWICH      9,033       64        1          1     -          2    2          -          -             -      -             -          -
                                             £ 3,479


18    4 .4 .8 8     SPURS        14,866      106                  4     3          1
                                                       -                                -          -          2             -      1             -          1
                                             £ 8,629


19    2 3 .4 .8 8   S HEF­       12,531      71             NO A R R E S T S            -          -          -             -      -             -          -
                    FIELD                    £ 3,853



                                 250,854 £ 8 5,524     26     54        36         51   45         4          16
                                                       NEITHER 7

                                                                                                                                                                  B
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH       The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                    50 Queen Anne s Gate
                                    London SW1H 9AT
                                    01-273 2S77/3602/2370




Alan T Smith Esq
Christian Science Committee
 on Publication for South Yorkshire
5 Twentywell Rise
SHEFFIELD                           23 June 1989
S17 4PZ                        Date




Dear Mr Smith

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you
for your letter of 17 June and for the copy of
the Sentinel which was enclosed.

Your kind words are m u c h appreciated.

                                Yours sincerely



                                t   A l(iw(Ws>
                              R M WHALLEY
                         Secretary to the Inquiry
