                                                                                 CC Xr



                Norfolk County Council                                                 ^ h>/ Uo lx—w m
                                                                          County Hall     (ti0<vve GJfcm.
                                                                          Martineau Lane
B.J. Capon M A ( Oxon)                                                    Norwich NR1 2DH        V ~ K U p U,
Chief Executive and Clerk                                                 Telephone (0603) 22 2 9 4 9
T.D. W. Molander MA                                                       Fax No. (0603) 222959
County Solicitor and Deputy Clerk                                         DX 5216 NORWICH

                                            Please ask f o r : -


                                                                                                              b
 My Ref.      KB/MJL-LR/:   5C/2                                       Mr. Beattie                       I*
 Your Ref.    FEP/89/35/-:/88
                                                                       13th September, 1989.



                                                                   C




  Dear Sir,

             Interim Report of the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster


      The County Council's Safety of Sports Grounds Sub-Committee have considered
  the Interim Report by The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough
  Stadium Disaster with a view to considering the findings in relation to Norwich
  City Football Ground.  They were concerned to note that there was no mention in
  the interim report of crush barriers and they have asked me to write to request
  that the design of crush barriers be fully investigated during the course of the
  inquiry so that recommendations can be made to Authorities responsible for
  safety at sports grounds.   Can you please draw the Sub-Committees comments to
  the attention of The Rt. Hon Lord Justice Taylor.

                                          Yours faithfully,




                                    for Chief Executive and Clerk




  Secretary of State for the Home Department,
  Home Office,
  Queen Anne's Gate,
  London,
  SW1H 9 A T .

                                                                                Norfolk County Council
                                                                                     CENTENARY
                                                                                           w 'rx>
                                           cc.   Ms Craig
                                                 Ms Rex
                                                 Ms Nicholson
           cc |w. I                              Mr Yates
                                                 Mr Chilcot
                                                 Mr Moriarty
                                                 Mr Turney
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 HMCIC
                                                 HMCIFS
                                                 Mr Mower
                                                 Mr Clayton
                                                 Mr Goddard
                                                 Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                 M r Mhalley
                                                 Mr Lidington
                                                 Mr Yeo




Mr Mould


           HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


    The Home Secretary saw your submissions of 15 September
and 14 September on the proposed letter to John Carlisle and
the reply to Mr Edey.       He agreed to the issue of the letter
to Mr Edey, subject to the deletion of the fifth and eigth
paragraphs of the draft.       He decided that to mention that
consideration was being given to any necessary enforcement of
the r e p or t 's recommendations by means of a statutory
instrument would beg the question of why, if we knew that the
recommendations were not being implemented in some places, we
were not using this power.       I have circulated my letter to
Mr Edey separately.

2.  In regard to the letter to Mr Carlisle, the Home Secretary
needs to know before it is sent which, if any, local
authorities -'     '              have not implemented the
asterisked recommendations, and why.        If there are a number of
local authorities           who have not implemented the
recommendations he would like advice on why it is not possible
to use the statutory power.     The draft letter to Mr Carlisle
will need to be amended in the light of advice on this.        I
should be grateful if advice and a fresh draft could be with
us by 29 September jca-o  c(a o c ^ o S^4 .

3. The Home Secretary discussed publication of the letter to
Mr Carlisle with Mr Mower and Mr Lidington on 18 September.
Mr Mower advised that it would not be sensible to publish the


                                                 /letter as this
                            2.




letter as this might simply stir up journalists to write
stories on local authorities and clubs not implementing the
recommendations.  He advised that the reply should simply be
used when necessary to explain what we were doing.  It was
noted that Mr Carlisle would need to be told that the letter
would no longer be published, but that he would be able to
use it as he saw fit.




Private Office                         MISS C J BANNISTER
1
19Q September
    Qonf omKor 1
               1989                    Private Secretary
