          ooutn      torKsrure       jt    oec                          -4dss        gtr




     South Yorkshire Joint Secret* rtat
     P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,                            £
     Barnstay, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
     Fax: B trrw te y (01228) 7 7 2 W
     W .J. W M fnm n, BA(Beon), CPFA. Cterk and T m tJu rer


                                                                                ^          (SO U TH Y O R K S H IR E
     Our ref:    W JW /VS                                                                                  P O L IC E
                                                                                                     A U T H O R IT Y
     Your ref:


     Date: 21 October 1999

     Thte matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkin 1 0 ft         Direct line: 01226 772803

     Chris Michael
     Office of Charles Clarke MP
     Room 772                                                                       S'
     Home Office
     Queen Anne's Gate
     LONDON SW1H9AT
                                                                                                        IT
     BY FAX AND POST

     Dear Ms Michael

     HILLSBOROUGH: FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS
     BRIEFING PAPER FOR HOME SECR WARY

     The Chairman of the Authority wisht« to thank the Minister for agreeing to meet representatives
     of the Authority on 2 November.

     In connection with the meeting, f enclose a briefing paper on the two issues which the Authority
     wishes to discuss. I have prepared quite an extensive note on the matter of the Authority meeting
     the defence costs of the former officers, as this will provide the                                1
     background if at some future state, he is asked further questions
     situation. The papers should be re td in conjunction with the earlier letjters from myself and the
     Chief Constable.

     The South Yorkshire delegation on :! November will comprise a maximu Ti of 5 people - Clarence
     Swindell (Chairman); Mike Hedges (Chief Constable); Ian Daines (Assistant Chief Constable);
     and myself. There may be a seconc member of the Authority who will join the delegation.

      Please contact me if you require anything further.

      Yours sincerely



      Bill Wilkinson
      Cterk and Treasurer
b1
      Enc

      Copies to:            Councillor C Swindell (Chairman)    Mr D Rigg (District Auditor)
                            Mr M Hedges (Chief ( Constable)     Ms M Oades (Assistant Clerk)
6uutn   iO f K s r iiic J t oec                     X UL   V       • w'4-'




  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

  Hillsborough - financial Implication*

  Briefing paper for Home Office




  (atn uiM £tiQ n

  The Authority's submission is in two parts.


  Part 1 relates to costs incured as a result of the Authority 's decision to fund
  the legal defence costs o l the two former officers facm,\g private criminal
  prosecutions arising out of their actions on the day of the disaster. The
  Authority is following up an issue raised earlier this year b / the Rt Hon David
  Bfunkett, who referred, in a letter to the Minister, to the financial impact on
  South Yorkshire Council Tl x payers, and whether Home 0 ffice funding could
  be made available. The papers provide a brief history of Hillsborough; a
  summary of the factors which led the Authority to make support available;
  the financial implications w date; and the basis for the Authority seeking
  financial support from other parties.


  Part 2 relates to liabiliths for damages to persons vyho were injured,
  Although the background notes are less extensive, this is the Authority's
  principal concern, because of the existing scale of unins bred liabilities, and
  the recent prospect o f even more cases coming to light.
boutri Tor'Ksnire   ji   oec




  Part 1 : Defence costs of f ?rimer officers

  1.1     Background

          Original decision Febuary 1998

          This followed publication of the findings of Lord Justice Stewart Smith's
          scrutiny for the Hom< Secretary, which concluded that there was no new
          evidence; in the light of that, DPP had taken no further action. The
          immediate response of HFSG was to announce that tbey intended to take
          out private prosecutk ns, and on reporting this to members it was felt that
          there should be a cl 3ar statement that the Authority would stand by its
          former officers. Members took into account their previous stance at the
          Inquest and consistontly since 1989, and also the DPP’s successive
          decisions that there were no criminal charges to answer. It was resolved
          subsequently to offir ‘reasonable’ legal support towards any private
          prosecutions which might follow. The £0.5m which the Authority had
          originally earmarked in August 1997 for costs in connection with the
          Scrutiny was identified to provide funding.

          June/July 1998

          Private prosecutions were commenced by Ann Adlir gton. Each of the
          former officers was charged with two counts of mainslaughter and one
          count of wilfully negEscting to perform a public duty, One of the former
          officers faced a charge of attempting to pervert this course of justice,
          although this charge was eventually withdrawn in A|pril 1999. The DPP
          was invited to take over the conduct of the private prosecutions and to
          discontinue them. On 19 December 1998, the D PP announced his
          decision not to take ever and discontinue the charges.

          Late 1998/early 19S9

          The issue of Police Authority powers to fund defenp:e costs in criminal
          proceedings was railed. Mo specific powers exist, and the Authority is
          reliant on its general duty under Section6 of the Police Act, and the
          supplementary powe: available to it under S111 of th'3 Local Government
          Act. Counsel’s advice was sought, and subsequeintly the Authority
          appointed indepencent legal advisers.           The Claiirk and Treasurer
          suspended further payments until the issue was clarifh*id. A full report was
          presented to the Authority on 5 February; the Authority s advisers felt that,
          on balance, there w js sufficient doubt about the exi stence of powers to
          raise the possibility of a successful challenge Howev'er, recognising that
          there were strong co jnter views - principally from the legal advisers to the
          Chief Constable - it v-as resolved to seek a ruling from the Court.

           March 1999

           The Divisional Court ruled that Police Authorities do have the necessary
           powers, but each case must be considered on its merits. The Divisional
           Court ruled on two rr atters. First, it decided that police authorities may, in
ouutn lOi KSiiire   jt   oec.




          principle, decide to fund officers and former officers/ qgal representations
          in proceedings on he grounds that to do so is conducive to the
          maintenance of an efficient and effective police force in its area, but the
          Court made it clear th jt each case must be considered on its merits.

          In a separate action heard by the Court at the same ti me, Mr Duckenfield
          and Mr Murray soujht judicial review of the DPP s decision not to
          intervene in the prosocution. The Divisional Court dec ded that the DPP’s
          decision not to take o/er the prosecution of the charge s against the former
          officers was lawful, Si ive in respect of the charge of a ttempting to pervert
          the course of justice, which the DPP was directed to reconsider. On 12
          April 1999, the DPP decided that he would take over &nd discontinue this
          charge.

          21 May 1999

          The Authority met to consider the whole issue of suppo rt afresh, in the light
          of a comprehensive report prepared by Garretts its independent legal
          advisers. The outcome of the meeting was:

          (i)       confirmation o previous offers of support, subiijoct to a review by a
                    costs draftsman of the reasonableness of the cokts to be claimed;
          (ii)      agreement to und to the conclusion of the cosnmittal proceedings,
                    subject to a fo mal agreement indicating the le\>el of representation
                    the Authority ^ ould fund and the maximum costs; to be reimbursed.

           Issues considered by the Authority in reaching these decisions included:

          •      the belief that while mistakes were made, the officers acted in good
                 faith

          •      the officers were cm operational duty at the time of the incident

                 as a general proposition, police officers need to kn ow that if they act in
                 good faith and even if errors are made, their Au hority will stand by
                 them

           •     the alternative of legal aid would have required substantial personal
                 contributions fronr. the officers’ capital and income

           •     the morale of current serving officers in South Yorkshire and elsewhere
                 would be affected by a decision not to support

           •     the Divisional Courts comments on the powers issue, and the
                 implications of Heme Office advice

           •     the financial imps ct on the Authority

           •     the need to con:rol legal costs expenditure from public funds in a
                 corresponding mi inner to the Legal Aid Board
O U U tH   i Ui K b i l i !   C   J 1   OCL




    1.2          Outcome of Commit al Hearing in July 1319

                 The Stipendiary Mag strate concluded that there was a case to answer,
                 and was not persuade d by the officers' arguments on ‘abuse of process’ (ie
                 in relation to the elapsed time since 1989, and that the level of public
                 comment on the cast precluded a fair trial). This issijje is being pursued
                 by the officers, and t hearing with the Circuit Judge has been granted in
                 December 1999.

     1.3         Applications lo r            suf   po rt

                 The Authority’s commitment to support ended at the conclusion of the
                 committal proceedings Further applications are avyf.aited in connection
                 with the trial (scheduled for June 2000).

     1.4          Costs

     1.4.1 The present position is as follows:
                                                                  £000         £000
                  Costs to 5 February , 999                       279
                  Costs to 20 July 199!*                          326
                  Costs in connection with Judicial Review         64          669

                   Chief Constable’s le^al costs                                100
                   Police Authority lega. costs                                 186

                                                                                955

                   This figure will reduce by approximately £100,000 if the Authority is
                   allowed to recover VVT, and at this stage it takes no Account of reductions
                   arising out of the cotts draftsman’s review. In the pe    to 5 February, he
                   has put forward recommendations that the Authority     seeks  a reduction of
                   £37,000 (13%) in the former officers’ legal costs.

                   The Authority has in total set aside £1m to cover costs already paid out
                   and under review.

      1.4.2 Apart from clarifying the VAT issue the Author ty is also seeking
            confirmation from tha Tax Inspector that payment of legal costs does not
            constitute a taxable benefit for the former officers, This issue has only
            been raised recently by tax specialists consulted by the Authority Case
            law on the subject is unclear The Authority’s lega I advisers have put
            forward a strong ca; -e to the Tax Inspector that there is no taxable benefit
            accruing. If the rulir.g is contrary to this, then subject to appeal there could
            be substantial additional costs for the Authority and/or the officers.

       1.4.3 The costs have so tar been funded from reserves             Options for the future
             include:

                    •         further calls on reserves
                    •         budget reductior.s
ooutn iu r K s r i i r c ^   oec                            Zi   UL I   32           r .^i




                  raise additional cash via the precept
                  seek contributions or funding from other sources

    1.4.4 If the former officers 9re tried but acquitted, or the ch arges against them
          are dismissed or otherwise do not proceed to trial in the Crown Court, an
          order for costs in their favour to be paid out of central funds will be made
          unless there are post ive reasons for doing so eg whene their conduct has
          brought suspicion or themselves, or where there is ample evidence to
          support a conviction but they are acquitted on a techni d^lity.

    1.4.5 Legal aid was not available to the officers for the judicial review
          proceedings in which they became involved; nor will it be available
          retrospectively in the criminal proceedings. Furthernmre, legal aid would
          only be made available to the officers upon their making substantial
          contributions from thuir income and assets, namely, £1 for every £3 or part
          thereof by which the average weekly disposable income exceeds £50; and
          the amount by which their disposable capital exceeds £3,000

     1.5      Basis of the Author ty’« application for support

              The facts of this cast relate to South Yorkshire, but ths principles behind it
              could apply anywhera. This was the basis of the Divuiiional Court hearing.
              Police officers need issurances that if they act in goop faith in operational
              circumstances, then their Police Authority will supplort them if they are
              challenged.

               In this context, it is a widely held precedent in both public and private
               sectors that when a i employee is engaged on his normal duties, but his
               actions result in losu, damage, or injury, then the e mployer will stand by
               him as long as the e is no suggestion of deliberat s or wilful action or
               neglect If there is a question of whether proper procedures were followed,
               this is an entirely jeparate matter to be dealt wiith under disciplinary
               procedures. This \/as the process which common oed on Hillsborough,
               until ill health rules Intervened. Police officers are not 'employees’ - they
               are servants of the Crown. The equivalent of their employer is therefore
               either the Crown or, locally, the Police Authority.

               It was on that basis that the Authority believed that t should stand by its
               former officers

               A decision not to support could be rationalised on on e of several grounds,
               which were debated by members:

                (i)      The availability of Legal Aid, albeit that the ormer officers would
                         have to make very substantial contributions from limited private
                         resources if Legal Aid was forthcoming;

                (ii)     The ability of the Courts to make costs award:* from central funds if
                         the officers were acquitted; and
ooutn T o rk s n ir e   jt   oec




            (iii)       The potential implications for Police Authority lunds of supporting
                        these cases to a full trial.

            The members felt, however, that asking retired officers to expend their
            savings and most of ineir pension in meeting legal costs incurred from the
            bona fide performance of their duties would be viewed by serving officers
            as abdicating responsibility at the very time when a former officer most
            needed support. Set ing this precedent would, it was felt, impact badly on
            the morale of the current force and the willingnesf of officers to put
            themselves in a position where safety critical decisions have to be taken
            instantly. The case arising out of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster is all
            the more acute because nine years have passed between the day of the
            Disaster and the ccmmencement of the prosecution and because the
            former officers had b Jen told there would be no prosecution brought by the
             DPP.

             Nevertheless, memb3rs are concerned about the financial implications of
             this support for the existing Police budget and therefore imposed strict
             conditions on the level of representation it would fund and initially agreed
             funding only up until Committal, which remains the position. A trial has
             now been listed to b jgin June 2000 with. . . an
                                                           --------------------
                                                               estimate         q_7 Weeks. A pre-
             trial hearing has also been listed for December 1999 where the fcbuse of
             process” arguments will be re-argued before the trial judge.

              Estimates of the likely costs of proceeding to a full tri al have been sought
              from the former officers’ legal representatives but ares clearly difficult to
              give before they ha\e mapped out their trial strategy in detail. Indications
              are, however, that tne total costs could be well into seven figures. The
              potential impact of {his sort of additional expenditure on police budgets
               means that member j may be reluctant to approve a c<0ntinuation
                                                                       *          of support
              for the trial costs, without additional funds to mini     mise  the impact on
               policing resources.

              The potential budgetary impact is substantial, if the case proceeds to
              trial and conceivat ly to other stages beyond that. In view of that, and
              the national impl cations for employers and Police officers, the
              Authority has retolved to ask the Home Secretary to consider
              whether additiona support might be made available to mitigate the
              costs for South Ytrkshlre residents.

               Separate discussions have been sought with the Police Federation and the
               Superintendents' As isociation
ouuT. fi   iui K i i u i c   j   i   oei                       Zi   UC X       3 • JO        r . Uii




    PART 2 : Costs of settling personal injury slairqs

    2.1        This is a separate isiue. The Authority's public liabi ity insurance cover
               had an indemnity limit of £8.5m at the time of the disaster. This limit
               together with the £4.n contributions made by other parties accepting a
               share of the liability towards the settlement of clainrs was exceeded in
               June of 1997. Since that time the Authority has had tc fund
                                                                       1    the settlement
               of outstanding claims including the Claimants legal cc sts. The position to
               date is as follows:-
                                                                                        £m

                Payments made by the Authority in the                              2,227,000
                  settlement of claims

                 Reserves placed on outstanding claims                             5.078.000

                                                                                   7.305.000

      22         The reserves represent 15 outstanding personal injury claims of which two
                 claims have reserve s totalling £3.5m. This figure represents a substantial
                 increase in the initia! reserves placed on the two claims by the insurers
                 when they were referred to the Authority following recant advice from the
                 solicitors handling the claims concerning medical reassessment of the
                 Claimants' life expectancies. In addition three “new" claims have been
                 received from one fi/m of solicitors during the last thrcie months, the value
                 of which they asses} at a total of £750,000. All three Claimants
                 concerned, two of whom were previously unknown to the South Yorkshire
                 Police, are alleging physical and psychiatric injuries and have obtained
                  legal aid to bring actions against the Police. Limitaticjn will be a major
                  issue in each case but insufficient is known about the cases at the present
                 time to enable an ausessment of the value of the claims to be made.
                  These developments have resulted in the Authority having to set aside an
                  additional £2.4m in the 1998/99 accounts and the possibility of further
                  claims being made cannot be excluded although it is now 10 years after
                  the event.

      2.3         The Authority sepai ately wishes to explore the poss ibility of support
                  towards the cost to the Authority of meeting the pers onal injury claims,
                  When the insurancj indemnity limit of £8.5m was arr ved at in 1989 it was
                  inconceivable that;iny one incident involving police Officers could give rise
                  to claims under a pjblic liability policy exceeding tha amount. Nothing on
                  the scale of Hillsbo.ough had ever occurred and the disaster generated
                  approximately 16,030 claims. Hillsborough has re-w itten the rules and will
                  have caused all po ice authorities to review the limits of their public liability
                  policies. South Yo;kshire Police Authority now have an indemnity limit
                  under their policy cf £21 m and this is currently under review
v U w ^i i iui f\ot ia i
                                                                 ex.   UCI   33   3 0 3    r. iu




   24          The Authority w isles to explore with the Home Secretary the
               possibility of:

               (I)         direct flnancii I assistance towards the cost of settling personal
                           injury claim*; and/or                                         . - - h i.
               (ii)        a c a p it a lis a t io n direction, with credit approval, to enable the
                           costs of settling the claims to be spread.




      Bill Wilkinson
      Clerk and Treasurer
      21.10.99
