INQUIRY     INTO        THE         HILLSBOROUGH

       S X A D I U M            D I S A S X E R




                       Before


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                The Town H a l l ,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

            Friday,    19th May,     1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Lt d . ,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                           (Morning Session)



     N. FITZMAURICE

             Examined by Mr. Goldsack
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward
             By Lord Justice Taylor

     F.J. ECCLESTON Called

     A. HOCKENHALL Called

             Examined by Mr. Goldsack
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow

     L- OXLEY Called

             Examined by Mr. Philips
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward

    C. SWEET Called

             Examined by Mr. Goldsack
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow

DISCUSSION
                        FIFTH DAY'S P R O C E E D I N G S
                         FRIDAY,    19th MAY,       1989

                            (MORNING     SESSION)

          MR. GOLDSAC K:   Sir, we have two more Liverpool
     supporters befor e we move on to local residents.

          LORD JUSTIC E TAYLOR:        Yes,   thank you.

                        NEIL FITZMAURICE,          called

                       Examined    by MR.     GOLDSACK:

Q.   You are Neil Fit zmaurice,     are you?         A,        Yes .

Q.   A resident   of the Anfield district          of Liverpool?
     A.   Yes .

Q    Mr. Fitzmaurice ,| what time did you arrive in Sheffield
     on 15th April?    A.    It was after half past two,
     about twenty to three, something like that.

Q.   Is that in Sheff ield or at the gate?                A,     No,   that was
     actually gettinc the mini-bus parked,

Q.   Had you arrived in Sheffield a little earlier and been
     to a pub for a c rink?   A.   Yes.

Q    How much had you had to drink?           A,      About two pints         of
     lager.

Q. When you arrived at Leppings Lane, what was the situation
   that confronted you?    A.   A massive crowd that we just
   sort of tagged along to - just joined at the back and then
   people came behl nd us so we just found ourselves in the
   middle of the c rowd.   It was at that point -- it was
   really bad.

Q.   Looking at the model over there, at what point did you
     join the back o   the mass?   A.  Well, I actually got
     through the gates     The gates were open when I got to
     them.

Q.   The main perime :er gates were open?   A.   Yes, they were
     open when I got to them and they closed behind me, so we
     were actually t Ten in between the gate and the turnstiles
     in that small p addock area waiting to get into the
     turnstiles.

Q.   And you were he ading, were you,         to Turnstile B?            A.    B, yes .
     The congestion there was bad.
                                2


                                         N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q.How long did it actually take you to achieve entry to
   the ground?    A.   It was about -- between five and
   ten minutes just squashed, you know.

Q.   And how did  you get in?   A.    Through     the concertina
     door at the side being opened.

Q.   How close to that were you when it opened?      A.   I was
     just by these -----     Ithink these lines are indicating
     a barrier.   I was just at the side of this barrier and
     actually ducked under the barrier to get round for that
     so I was only about -j5 yards or 15 ft. away.

Q.   Did the decision to open those gates surprise            you at all?
     A.   No, they had to be opened.

Q. Why was that?   A.   Because there were people on the
   other side of the gates that were in a worse situation
   than I was.   They were crushed up against iron gates
   and it was just -- that was ridiculous itself, so the
   decision to open it does not surprise me at all

Q.   When you went through the concertina gates, to which
     part of the ground did you go?   A.   I went through
     the tunnel but first of all I waited for my friends who
     had gone to the toilet, so I waited for them and then
     I went through to the tunnel into the B Section.

Q.   How busy was the section between the gate and the
     entrance to the tunnel?   A.    Not really busy, it didn't
     reflect what was outside, put it that way.    I think a
     lot of the people hadn't realised the c oncertina gate
     had been opened and so there were a lot of people there
     but not really what was outside.

Q.   So you were one of the   first through the gate,          were you?
     A.   Yes.

Q. When you went down the tunnel, what met you at the other
   end?   A.   We just went towards the light where we
   could hear the noise and there was a load of us in the
   tunnel singing, just singing a song •   About three-quarters
   of the way down I was just hit at the back and just
   thrown forward.   I grabbed a little boy in front of me
   who was on the mini-bus that we went home with because
   there was no way he could keep up the pace, he was losing
   his footing and his dad was by the side of me but his
   dad had been broken away from him - it was so    easy to
   lose people - so I grabbed him and took him with me.
   I was running then at that stage.    It was from a walk,
   a slow walk, to a run, just sort of being carried, you
   know.
                                                 N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q.   Can I just be clear?   At what stage were you running?
     A.   Getting towards the actual B entrance, mid-way
     through the tunnel when the force hit me from behind.

Q.   So the mass of people from behind at that stage meant
     that you started running?   A.   Well,yes, carried
     forward just by the actual pace of ---

Q.    You and the boy that you took hold of, where were you
     propelled to? A.   We were propelled    to the left side
     of Section B.    Yes.

Q.   Pen 4.    A.       Yes, I then actually lost that boy.          I
     don't know what happened to him.              I never saw him again.
     I saw him a f t e r w a r d s , so he was okay.   At that point, I
     could see a bit of play going on, the game had started
     at that point because there was a ball in the air and
     the crowd was singing and when I got to the people that were
     sort of in front of me, I suddenly realised it was getting
     a bit tight behind me, so I shouted to the lad who was
     with me, Stephen.              I shouted, "I'm going.   I don't want
     to watch the game if it is like this, I am going.               There
     is no way I am going to get out ---              There is no way I
     am going to go through this for 45 minutes," so I went
     to turn and I realised all I could turn was myneck.
     That was all I could move, my neck and rry head.           No other
     part ofny body would move at all.

Q.    Can I just be clear about one       thing? You say you saw
     a ball on the field of play?        A.   In the air.  Just
     in the air.

Q. Do you actually know that the game had started, rather
   than the pre-match kick-off?   A.   No, it had started.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do not worry about that
     unless you need to look at it.   Just look this way,                   if
     you do not mind.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:   W hereabouts were you in Pen 4 when
     you realised the only part of your body you could move
     was from the neck up?    A.    I  was about 6 or 8 ft.
     after the tunnel had ended inside the pen, directly behind
     the g o a l .

Q.   So well   back in the pen?    A.     Well    back.

Q.    For how long did you remain in     that position?
     A.    Between 5 and lO.minutes.       As I say, the time lapse
     I just can't grasp at all.

Q.   Where did you then move to?   A.   I was carried to the
     right of the pen, although at the time I didn't feel like
                                       4


                                                   N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

     it and even in my statement I said I didn't move at all
     but it was only after I went back to the ground a week
     later that I realised how I got out, that I must have
     actually been carried, swept far -- sorry, far to my
     le f t .

Q.        LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:   To your left?                   A.        Yes,
     sorry, to my left.     I am sorry.

Q-        MR. GOLDSACK:   Where did you eventually end up?
     A.   I ended up alongside the railing going down separating
     B Section from A Section, I think it is - that railing.

Q.   To   the left of Pen 4?      A.        Yes.

Q.   As   you were standing    in it?          A. Yes.

Q.   There is a fence and then very quickly another                      fence?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   Is that where you were?           A.     That's where          I ended up.

Q.   To the left-hand side      of Pen 4 looking           towards       the pitch?
     A.   Yes.

Q.    Do you know how far back from the perimeter fence
     you were?    A.   I ended up  about 4 or 5 ft. away from the
     actual fence itself at the front, so I had to climb on
     to a barrier to jump over that fence, so I actually moved
     a lot to my left and a lot forward as well but, I mean,
     I didn't even realise I had moved at all because it was
     that tight.

Q.   Once you got into that initial position where you could not
     move from the neck up, were you conscious of any particular
     surge from behind or simpty constant pressure?  A.    Just
     people kept ---   It just kept getting tighter.    I mean,
     at the end of that I just thought that was it, there wasn't
     any more people getting in at all and then very little
     went on until some people screaming, I was screaming
     myself.   Just panic reallysetting in and the time I
     thought it was getting its worst was when I saw a person
     just lifted himself up and scampered over the top of my
     head -- over everybody's head, and just jumped over on
     to the pitch.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Walking on heads?    A.   Walking
     on heads.   On hands and knees just crawling right across
     but not once did he fall, did he slip, because it was so
     tight, you know.   He actually just scampered right across
     the top of everybody.
                                5


                                        N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:     Could you see the state of people
     immediately around   you?   A.   Yes.

Q. What was their state?     A.    After the panic, when people
   stopped panicking, I described on the statements that
   the people who had actually collapsed or died had just
   popped up like a cork from a bottle.      That's how I
   described it.    The people who no longer had any sort of
   bodijy movement to sbop themselves moving, they were just
   getting pushed up and were bobbing all around.       They
   were just hanging up    or they were just turned round the
   wrong way and    facing you, so you knew straight      away --
   you knew by the colour of their face and their lips as
   well.    One person next to me was standing ip and when I
   actually got to the fence that I climbed over, I grabbed
   him by the arms and the mate I was with grabbed him by
   the feet and we lifted him over, still thinking that he
   was going to be okay.      We lifted him on to the top
   of the fence and I shouted to him, "Just jump down now and
   run on to the    pitch" and when I let go of him,      he just -
   head first on    to the concrete like that, so he      must have
   been dead anyway.    But you just didn't know people had
   died because they were standing up and the natural thing
   is when people die they fall over and hit the floor but
   there was no room for them to fall at all.      And a man
   on the floor with his appendix scar opened again.        He
   had gone as well.     He was on the floor as well.

Q.   How did you eventually get out of Pen 4?    A.    When
     the old man fell to the ground it was as if the crowd ---
     I mean, I was shouting, "People are dying" and I turned
     round to a man behind me in a striped T-shirt, that's
     all I can remember, a striped T-shirt - and shouted,
     "There is a man dead down there, an old man dead" and
     he seemed to look at me, look past me, horrified and then
     there was suddenly room, just room.    I don't know where
     it came from but obviously somebody had forced back into
     the tunnel but there was room.    When that man hit the
     floor, there was room and there was room around him for
     somebody to go down and try and give him mouth to mouth
     but he was gone.   The pressure was too much for him,
     and that is how I got over.    I climbed on to a barrier.
     I first of all shouted to people by the side of me,
     "Let the people who can't walk get passed along and lift
     them over" and then eventually, after that man dropped on
     to the floor and died and was dead, I just couldn't handle
     that no more.    I couldn't stay in there so I got on to a
     barrier and jumped over the railings into that no-man's
     land straight between the two fences and climbed on to the
     pitch .


                                         (So you went              into   ...)
                              6
                                      N. FITZMAURICE


Q. So you went into the no-man's land as you call it first?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And then over ... A. Well I jumped from the pen I was in,
   I climbed over the railing and ended up in between those
   two railings which was just steps.  That was like a no-man's
   land in between the pens.  I climbed on to that and just
   walked and from there there was a gate open, a panic gate
   open on to the pitch.

Q. I see, that   panic gate was open? - A. Yes, it was open.

Q. When you then looked back at Pens 3 and 4 were there a number
   of people climbing over the perimeter fences? - A. The
   perimeter fences on the front?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes, there were people climbing over.

Q. Did you see any Police Officer at that stage? - A. As soon
   as I got, a few friends of mine, one of the lads I was with
   ran and tried to pull them perimeter fences down. When I
   went to help him I was stopped by a Policeman who put his
   hand on my chest.   He did not actually say anything to me.
   He just looked at me and I was trying to shout to him:   "If
   you help me that is two of us to rip the fence down, to
   pull the fencing down" but he just carried on looking at me.
   I looked over his shoulder and as he turned to leave me
   alone to pull the lads off he was actually going to tryand
   stop the lads from ripping the fence down. As he turned
   round the fence come away in the lads' hands and I shouted,
   you know I was just so happy I just screamed and he spun
   round again and two other Policemen come at me, so there
   was then one with his hand on my chest, that was then
   tightened and a Policeman on either shoulder of me, so there
   was like three people stopping me from moving any further.

Q. I think you then gave what assistance you could to those
   who were injured? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I just ask you about this: were t h e m people asking
   for any form of first aid equipment? - A. The only shouts
   I heard, there were people asking for that, but the shouts
   I heard were for respiration masks, that is what people
   were shouting for, and oxygen.  The overall thing was:
   "Where is the ambulances?"

Q. Did you see oxygen arriving? - A. Yes, the second time we
   had a bill board, the second trip I had made on the way
   back with an empty board we stopped by a big fella on the
   floor, he was quite hefty who was getting mouth-to-mouth
   but he was not coming through the mouth-to-mouth.   We were
   waiting for him to make it to the board so we could take
   him out round the back where they were getting taken and
   an oxygen tank was given to a Police Officer in front of
   me.  There was a tap on the side.  The Police Officer was
   fumbling on the top for a button and a Steward by the
   side of him shouted:  "There is a tap on the side" but the
                                    N. FITZMAURICE


Police Officer just grabbed it and dropped it to the floor,
the oxygen tank was dropped to the floor.  I don't actually
know whether there was anything in it but the oxygen tank
was just dropped to the ground.  That man did not actually
make it to the board, he died.

Were you still on the area near to the goal when the Fire
Brigade and the Ambulance Service arrived? - A. Yes.

How did they appear to react once they did arrive? - A. Well
once they reacted it all got underway.   The Fire Brigade
were excellent they started.   They knew immediately that
them fences had to come down to relieve the congestion
inside. They knew straightaway so why everybody could not
have I don't understand that.   They just went straight to
that fencing and started getting at that.   The ambulance
came in front of me.   The first    one that was on the pitch
was actually going to attend to this overweight chap who was
on the floor but I don't think he actually made it into
the ambulance anyway.   There was a lot of dead people getting
taken into the ambulances which was really wasting a lot of
time because there was no need.

      MR. GOLDSACK:   Yes, thank you.


             Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD;

Mr. Fitzmaurice, do you have in front of you the     composite
bundle of photographs, number 2. Have a look at      photograph
PR1 7A.  Is that a photograph of the area of the     stand
that you were in? - A. I am not at all sure.  Is     that the
tunnel? Yes, that is the area that I would have      been in.

Is that a picture of you there? - A. No, I had a beard at
the time actually.  I have just shaved it off.

      MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, if it is very difficult to do
this in this manner.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

      MR. WOODWARD:  Don't trouble Mr. Fitzmaurice any more
please.  It could take a long long time and it might not
be very fruitful.

You went to the football match on the 19th.  Had you been
there the year before? - A. No, it is the first away match
I have ever attended.

When you went to the stadium did you consider there was much
of a crowd about on the roads as you made your way in? -
A. As we got to the actual road leading down to Leppings
Lane there were a lot of coaches and a lot of people there.
I did not really give much thought to it at the time.
                                8

                                        N. FITZMAURICE


Q. Which way did you approach the gates to the ground.  Did you
   come over the bridge or down Leppings Lane? - A. Right down
   Leppings Lane.

Q.   And on your way you had had a drink had you? - A. Yes.

Q.    How much had you drunk? - A. About two pints.   I don't know
     where that was but we had a bit of a drive before we even
     got into the ground area after that.    It was a good like
     ten or fifteen minutes away so it might have been on the
     outskirts of the city.

Q. How close were you to the gates before you appreciated that
   there was quite a crowd of people at this match? - A. Not
   actually till I was inside did I realise.  I am used to
   crowds through the Kop so there was a crowd there, there was
   a lot of people there, but because everyone was singing
   in that kind of mood, you know ready for a game, it did not
   really occur to me till inside how bad it was.

Q.    So nothing really occurred to you about what was happening
     at this match until you got what, on to the terrace? - A.
     No actually past the first gate, the main gate and in between
     the section of the turnstile and the gate, that was when it
     got bad.

Q. What time would that be? - A. That must have been about
   5-to-3.

Q. So was there quite a rush on at this time to get in or not?
   - a . Well yes, the turnstile area I was in was ridiculous,
   you know, there was a lot of people there.

Q. Was there any reason for you leaving it so late? - A. No,
   we just could not get in I presume.  I was in the back of
   a mini bus.  There was no windows or anything, only back
   windows, so I had no idea.

Q. But it was 5-to-3 when you got inside the gates, was it?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Before you got to the turnstiles? - A. Yes.   Before we got
   to the turnstile area.   I never actually sawtheturnstile.

Q.   You had a ticket did you? - A. Yes.

Q.   Were there many people about without tickets?   - A.   No.

Q.   You did not see any? - A. No.

Q. Nobody approached you for a ticket? - A. No.

Q. And you saw no signs of people interested in getting tickets?
   - A. No.
                               9
                                       N. FITZMAURICE


Q. Did you see any signs of people drinking? - A. No, further
   up the road, further up Leppings Lane there were people
   standing outside pubs with a can may be or a glass or a pint
   of lager but not down by the actual gates at all. No one
   at all there that I saw anyway.

Q.    So you did not see a sign of anybody drinking in the area
     of the gates? - A. Not at all.

Q.    You were in the area of the gates for how long? - A. As I
     say the time itself I cannot actually get a grasp on it.
     About five minutes may be.   That was bad enough.  I had
     new trainers on and they were totally wrecked, the toes
     were poked through and everything.

Q. Totally wet? - A. They were totally wrecked.  They are not
   new any more.  They were all scratched and buffed and stuff,
   you know.

Q. That was because of getting through the crowd, was it? - A.
   There was people standing on my feet and standing on the
   backs of my calves and stuff like that.

Q. You had to get forward in order to get through to the gate
   that took you in? - A. Yes.

Q. How did you get into that position to be able to go through
   the gate? - A. To actually get through the gates was no
   hassle at all. Going through the gate was fine, it was
   actually once them gates had been closed behind us and we
   were in that pen it was as if too many people had been let
   in at once.

Q. How then did you get into the enclosure behind the turnstiles?
   - A. Through the concertina door at the side.  Obviously
   the Police realised there was too much hassle for people
   trying to get through that little turnstile gap that they
   opened the concertina door.

Q. What was the attitude of the crowd at the time? - A. A lot
   of panic.  There was panic because people could not move.
   I mean that was a bad enough crush.  There were people
   choking then, but when them gates got opened there was
   relief.

Q. For all this panic you approached the crowd and came upon
   it.  It was already there? - A. Well when I got to the gates
   there was no sign of it at all.  You are talking about
   people like 18" in front of you as you are walking.

Q. Yes, but as you approached the gates, the gates to go into
   the front of the turnstiles you are moving along at your
   own pace and as you wished to? - A. Yes.

Q. There comes a time when you are in a crowd? - A. Yes.
V?
                                      10

                                              N. FITZMAURICE


     Q. And you appreciate there is an air of panic? - A. Yes.

     Q. Well did you seek to come out of the crowd? - A. Yes.

     Q. Backwards? - A. Yes, but you could not.

     Q. Well what about the people behind you, they must have
        appreciated there was panic as well.  Were they coming back?
        - A. Yes, of course.

     Q.   Were they seeking to get back? - A.Everybody     was saying:
          "Stop pushing and calm down and get back".

     Q.   Did you hear the Police Tannoy? - A. No.

     Q.   Did you hear     a hailer from .a Police vehicle telling people
          to come back, to stand back? - A. Not personally, no.

     Q. And to stop pushing? - A. No, from the actual place I was
        in I was surrounded by people shouting so I could not hear
        anything.




                                      /Q. But you had
                                 B, FITZMAURICE



You had made your way along Leppings Lane to get into
that position?   You were utterly oblivious of any noise
from any Police vehicle? - A. Yes.

Utterly oblivious of any announcements asking people,
pleading with people, to get back? - A. I never heard
any.

Did you see a single person seeking to withdraw from
this throng? - A. There were people actually trying to
fight their way to get out.   The crowd was opening
every now and again for people who really did look bad.

Did you see any Police Officers about? - A. Not in the
crowd itself.   The Police Officers I saw, there was one
on the gate.

That is the concertina gate or the gate in the railings?
- A . No, the actual opening gates.  There was one
there.

Was that a Policeman on foot? - A. Yes.    There was a
Policeman on a white horse.    When the concertina gate
was opened - I do not know if I put this in the
statement actually - when the concertina gate was first
opened that horse was backed up so that its hind
quarters were facing the crowd that were rushing to the
concertina gate and the horse was kicking.    I do not
know whether it was nerves from the horse or what, but
that back leg was kicking out.

For you to get in through the concertina gates, were the
gates at that time fully open? - A. They were pulled...
They must have been, yes.   I just remember being the
wrong side of the barrier when somebody said, **They have
opened the gates at the side” .

Once you got in through those gates what happened? - A.
I came through with about...    There were quite a few
people there.    The lads I was with I had lost at this
time.    I had lost them in that crush to get in, but
they were actually in the toilets I found out, so I
waited and people were going through the tunnel as I
waiting.    I just did not go through the tunnel that
early.    I waited for my mates because I did not want to
lose my lift home.

You waited so the crowd you had gone through the gates
with had gone on ahead of you, more or less? - A. Well,
the people who had cottoned on to the concertina gates
being opened had gone ahead.   A lot of people were
waiting around to go to the toilet though.
                                  B, FITZMAURICE


The situation is this, the gate is opened and the people
go in through it.   More people appreciate that the gate
is opened.   You go in amongst those people but they go
on ahead of you? -A. Yes.    I did notwant to lose
anybody.   It was my first trip away.     I was completely
overwhelmed by it.

So you weren't carried on in a great swell of people or
a great throng of people? - A. Not at all.

That wasn't your experience? - A. Not at that point.
Not until I had got into the tunnel.

When you got into the tunnel was it free at the entrance
to it? - A. The entrance to it was.   I was a tiny bit
congested maybe.   A lot of people were wanting to go
in, but when I went in it was a normal kind of attitude.
I keep referring to the Kop, that is the only way I can
explain it.   You have got to realise I was at that
point used to crowds of people pushing to get somewhere.

Was the floor of the tunnel wet? - A. Not that I am
aware of.    You could not even look down.   It was dark.
I could not see a thing.    There was no lighting in the
tunnel whatsoever so there was no way of me really
finding out.

When you went down to the end of the tunnel did you go
to the right or to the left? - A. To my left.   I was
not actually aware there was a fence down the middle of
it.

If you look at photograph 21 in the West Midlands bundle
you can see the fence and the yellow paint on the floor.
- A. I can see it now, yes.

Up to this time had people been managing to keep their
feet? - A. As Isay, the little boy in front of me was
finding it very hard to do.

Up to this time from coming through off Leppings Lane to
get into the tunnel had people been managing to keep
their feet? - A. Inside that, yes.

And before that? - A. Well, before the tunnel there was
no need for them not to keep their feet because the
crush was inside.   The main swarm was inside the
tunnel.   At that point no-one was falling.   There was
a bit of panic people saying, "Hold on.   We will all
get in there.   Just calm down” .

The people falling over was on the terraces was it? -A.
Yes.   I did put in my statement that I saw people
falling over, but I actually saw people falling over
                            13



                                    B. FITZMAORICE


   when those first perimeter gates were opened again.
   After the Policeman was giving the order to open those
   gates again.

Q. You saw people fall over? - A. The first people through
   stumbled over.

Q. They fell down, did they, on to the ground? -A. Yes.

Q. What did the fans who were coming in do when those
   people fell on the ground? - A. Obviously went over the
   top of them.   I would have just thought the other side
   of that gate open to the Leppings Lane end, there would
   have been some sort of queue system, but there wasn't.

Q. Are you saying as you came in through the gate there
   were people who had fallen down and the fans trampled on
   them? - A. Yes.   That is what it seemed to me.    I did
   not stick around.    I just saw people falling forward.
   When those gates were opened people were crushed up
   against those gates.    Back into Leppings Lane there was
   no organisation at all.

Q. You paused then when you got inside the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. You had seen people had fallen.   Did you go to the
   assistance of anybody that had fallen? - A. No.

Q. Why not? - A. Because I just ran into where I was going.
   I just went to where I was going.

Q. You paused inside the gates? - A. I paused inside the
   concertina gates.

Q. You had seen people who had fallen there and trampled
   on? - A. I had seen people had fallen as the rush was
   coming in.    It just never occurred to me at that time
   to go back.    There probably would not have been any way
   of going back because by then there were thousands of
   people there.

Q. You weren't carried on in a throng to the tunnel, you
   were able to go at your own pace? - A. Yes,that   iswhat
   I have said from the start.   It was actually inside  the
   tunnel I was carried.

Q. Which gates was it at that you saw people falling? -A.
   The actual main gates from Leppings Lane into the
   ground.

Q. The actual gates outside? - A. Yes.

Q. As the usher is pointing to them? - A. Yes.
                              14



                                       B. FITZMAURICE


Q. The perimeter gate there? - A. Yes.      The gates, that's
   them.

Q. You had seen people fall there? - A. I had seen when the
   gates were opened a rush of people come in.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is that where you have been
     talking about up until now, or were you talking about
     the concertina... - A. This is coming back now.

Q. So people fell when the outside gates opened? - A. Yes,
   people stumbled.

Q. People fell when the concertina gate was opened? - A.
   No, not at all.   The concertina gate was a relief gate
   really.   People just  walked through there, and ran
   through there.

Q.   There was no falling there? - A. No, not at   all.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:    You were intending to describe
     people who fell as they went in through the outside gate
     from Leppings Lane, were you? - A. Yes.   Inside that
     gate when it had been closed there was a crush and
     outside there was a crush.

Q. At that point when you went through those gates and had
   seen people fallen, the way ahead of you was all barred,
   wasn't it, there were lots of people in front of you? -
   A. After the concertina gate was opened?

Q. Would you look where the usher is pointing please? - A.
   Yes.

Q.   Do you see there? - A. Yes.

Q.   Is that the place where you were   intending to describe
     people as having fallen? - A. Yes.

Q. So you approached those outside gates, did you?        When
   they were opened people fell down? - A. Yes.

Q. And were trampled by fans coming? - A. I presume so.    I
   did not stick around to see what happened.   I ran.
   You either stayed there and got caught up in another
   crush which I did not want to do because I had just got
   over the first one.

Q.   From those gates being opened it was clear for you to
     run forward? - A. Yes, to run round to the concertina
     door to try and get in before another crush.

Q. It was clear for you when the gates were opened to run
   forward to the concertina gates? - A. Are you trying to
                                 B. FITZMAURICE


say I was in the gates when they were opened, because I
was already there?   I was on the other side of the
gates.

I am not trying to say anything. - A. It sounds like it.

I am asking you. - A. I was already in that pen.    The
gates were closed behind me.    I was watching the gates
with people crushed up against the gate and a Policeman
struggling to keep the gate closed.   When that gate was
opened I was already in.

Do you remember when you were answering questions a few
minutes ago, you said that the perimeter gates, the
outside gates, were open when you went to go into them?
- A. Yes, and then I said they were closed behind me.
I was inside that patch between the turnstiles and the
gate*   They were closed behind me.    I said that just
before.   I was in a bunch that was already inside.
The gates were closed again because the crowd with me
was too much.




                         /Q. As you went through
I
                                    16

                                                      N. FITZMAURICE



    Q. So as you went through the perimeter gates you ran forward,
       did you? - A. I am sorry.  When I came down to those first
       gates they were already open.  I walked through.  When I came
       through, it was packed anyway, and I was just walking with
       people 18 inches in front of me or whatever, and I never
       stopped.

    Q. M r .Fitzmaurice, where were these people that fallen from which
       you ran and which you paid no heed to? - A. The people were
       behind me.    The people who had fallen were the people who had
       been closed o u t .

    Q. The ones that had been closed out were the ones that had
       fallen? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can we understand exactly what it is you are saying. - A. I
       hope so.

    Q. The people who had fallen were the ones that had been closed
       out? - A. Yes.  Obviously there was a rush of people trying to
       get in at once, and the gates were closed in between.  So one
       group of people were admitted in and the gates were closed on
       the second half of the group.

    Q. These people that fell, were they behind you or in front of
       you? - A. Behind me.

    Q. You saw that, did you? - A. Yes, I saw the gates open and
       people falling down.

    Q. You had time to consider what was happening to the rear of
       you? - A. Yes, because I had climbed under where the crush
       was.   Where the blue lines are indicated along the side, they
       were barriers. So I climbed under that barrier and I was then
       in that area there that he is pointing to there, and the crush
       was at the other side of the barriers. So when I turned round
       then the gates were opened and people fell through.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Did they pick themselves up or
         what happened? You did not see it? - A. I did not see.     I had
         turned round by then.   I just saw another crush so I did not
         want to get involved in another one.

    Q.       MR. WOODWARD:    When you say the people who fell were the
         ones that were closed o u t , what do you mean? Closed out and
         that caused them to fall? - A. No.     If you picture everyone of
         a large group of people coming down Leppings Lane towards the
         perimeter gates on the outside, the gates were open, and the
         first so many hundreds or may be a thousand - I don't know
         the numbers - were admitted. When it got too congested
         inside the gates were closed, so the people at the rear end
         or the middle of that large group were closed out and they
         were just supposedly, I presume, the only reason to do it
         was so the turnstiles would do their job and that would
         filter out and then they could open the gates again for them
         to come in. They did not do their job.     The congestion did
                               17

                                                N. FITZMAURICE


     not stop.  It just mounted up.   The people were still there,
     and the people were outside.   Instead of some sort of
     filtering system being done back up to Leppings Lane so that
     the pressure on the gates again was relieved, it was n o t .
     They were still crushed up against it all the time.

Q. When did they fall? - A. When the gates were opened again.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When you said before - I may have
     misunderstood you - right at the beginning ofyour evidence
     you said that the Police had to open the gates? - A. Well, I
     believe that was the right decision.

Q. Were you referring to those outside gates? - A. The very
   outside gates.

Q. You were not referring to the concertina gate? - A. No, the
   outside perimeter gate.

Q. So there was a crush against the outside gates? - A. Yes.

Q. And then you say they were opened and the people who were
   closest to it fell in? -A. Seemed to fall in.  They moved
   forward with the pressure of the gate opening.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   Did anybody fall when the concertina
     gates were opened? - A. No.

Q. May I read something to you, please:

          "I went to the ground with a group of friends of mine,
          and although we seen many police officers, when we were
          walking towards the stadium.  When we actually arrived by
          the gates, there was only I think 3 officers on duty at
          the time".

     Those would be the outside gates, would not they? - A. Yes.

Q.       "When I got near the entrances to the stadium, it was
          obvious there was a severe crushing problem, there was
          people literally passing out outside the ground, and at
          that stage, it was my opinion that the gates to the
          ground had to be opened or the crowd pushed back, there
          was no help from the police officers in pushing the crowd
          b ac k ...."

     Which gates are you talking about there? - A. I am talking
     about the perimeter gates, the very first gates you would hit,
     the ones that are being pointed to now.

Q. They were closed when you arrived? - A. No, I am talking there
   about when I first got inside the stadium there, are not I?
   That is when I was inside the gates and the gates were closed
   behind me or behind the people that were behind me.

Q. Those gates - may I ask you again:
V




                                 18

                                                   N. FITZMAURICE


            "When I got near to the entrances to the stadium, it was
            obvious there was a severe crushing problem, there was
            people literally passing out outside the ground, and at
            that stage, it was my opinion that the gates to the
            ground had to be opened . .  "

       - A . Yes.

    Q. What gates are you talking about? - A. The perimeter gates.
       The passage you have just read out is what I am saying.  I
       was still outside the ground, but I was in between the
       perimeter gates and the turnstiles, but that is still
       outside the ground.

    Q. But those gates were open, you said, when you came to it? - A.
       They were, but they were closed behind me.

    Q. You really mean there, do you, that the gates you are speaking
       about were the outside gates? - A. The perimeter gates.

    Q. Which were opened when you went in and were closed behind you?
       - A. Behind the crowd, yes.

    Q. And it was your view ought to be opened again? - A. Only for
       the simple reason, I turned round and saw people crushed up
       against the gates. There was no other way to relieve that
       crush.  I was on the inside.  People had not yet even got
       inside.

    Q. How were you able to look round to see this? - A. I climbed
       under the barrier, and there was actually room on the other
       side of that barrier.  Nobody was there.  Nobody wanted to
       walk round the side of the ground.  They all wanted them
       turnstiles.

    Q. So you went on, this is the statement:

            "So the police officer at the gate had really no
            alternative ;but to open the gat e s, as people were
            obviously being crushed".

       - A . Yes.

    Q. You saw people being crushed outside on Leppings Lane, do you
       mean? - A. I saw people up against the gates.  The gates are
       see through gates.  They are just iron railings.  I saw people
       up against the gates, and even then there was a noise being
       made.

    Q. What you would have the Inquiry understand is this, that the
       situation on Leppings Lane, not inside the enclosure to get to
       the turnstiles, but outside on the highway, was such that
       people were being crushed to such an extent that the outside
       gates had to be opened? - A . Y e s , exactly.

    Q. And when you talked about gates having to be opened those were
       the gates you were intending to refer to, were they? - A. The
I'l
  f
                                     19

                                                      N. FITZMAURICE


           perimeter gates, yes.

      Q. Not any other gates? - A. No other gates.

      Q. You are sure about that? - A. Positive.

      Q. And it was when those gates were opened, those perimeter
         gates, you saw people fall to the ground? - A. Yes, I saw
         people fall.

      Q. And crushed and trampled on? - A. Probably.  I saw the gates
         being opened, people falling in and rushing in behind them.  I
         turned round, and we are talking about 15 or 20 feet away, and
         I did not stick around for that.

      Q. How thick was this crush from the highway to the perimeter
         gates? How many people deep was it? - A. I have no idea.   It
         must have been very deep.  I have no idea.  You could not see
         past them.  I don't know how high off the road it went.

      Q. Your statement reads on in this way:

                "When the gates were opened, many people fell to the
                ground in the rush to get in.” .

           - A . Yes.

      Q.        "....we got in the area behind the goal, it was really
                tight".

           Is that what you would have us understand? - A. That is
           missing off the concertina gate.

      Q. This is the statement we have been provided with.  There is no
         reference, is you are right, to concertina gate, is there?
         What reference did you make to the concertina gate, Mr.
         Fitzmaurice? - A. I am sure I said there was a concertina gate
         opened to the side.

      Q. What do you want to tell us about the concertina gate? - A.
         After the main railings were opened again, the perimeter gates
         leading from Leppings Lane into the turnstile area, a side
         gate was opened higher up to let people through.

      Q. Which you call the concertina gate? - A. Yes, it sort of
         folded, ribbed.

      Q. What do you want to say about that that is not in this
         statement that I have read to you? - A. I can't understand why
         it is not in the statement because that is what I said.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, Mr. Woodward.   I don't
           want there to be any misunderstanding about this . I would
           like to know, this statement, Mr. Goldsack, can you help about
           this? The pages are not numbered, which is a pity.    On the
           second page we seem to begin with a comma.  I am just
           wondering whether there is a page missing or there is not.
                                    20

                                                   N. FITZMAURICE



             MR. GOLDSACK;   Sir, the same thought is going through my
     mind.     This is a statement we have been supplied with.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is what I wondered.     We will
     trace it back.  Now, Mr. King?

          MR. KING:   This statement in fact was faxed through I
     think yesterday.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        From?

          MR. KING:   From a firm of solicitors in Liverpool to
     those instructing me today.  What I will do is make enquiries
     now to ensure we have a complete statement. What is going
     through my mind also is it does not logically flow.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   There is no reference in here, for
     example, to going through the tunnel at all.   It may be there
     was none in the statement, but it may be there was.
     Accordingly, I don't want Mr. Woodward to proceed, and I am
     sure he does not want to either, on a misapprehension.   I can
     follow why he is asking the questions he is on the statement
     as it stands.

             MR. KING:   Sir, I will make urgent enquiries.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You don't happen     to have a copy of
     your statement? - A. I have not been given a     copy of the
     statement I made, not at all.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Woodward, I just don't want us
     to get off on the wrong foot.

          MR. WOODWARD:      It may be, sir, I have wasted about
     quarter-of-an-hour.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It may be, but it may be you have
     not, and it is certainly not your fault if you have.

             MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, I apologise if I have:

Q. What would you want to tell us about the concertina gates? -
   A. They were opened obviously by the Police or by the
   stewards.

Q. You saw them opened, did you? - A. No, the fans could have
   opened them.  I presume it was opened by somebody in
   authority.

Q. They were not opened in your presence? - A. No.

Q. They were already open when you set eyes on them? - A. Yes.
   We were told they were open and we could be sent through t h a t ,
   so that is where we went.  That was when the crush was bad in
   the actual entrance to the turnstile.  That is why I never
   actually saw the turnstile, because I entered through the
h'

                                    21


                                                      N. FITZMAURICE


          concertina gat e s.

     Q. You were able to make your way to go through the concertina
        gate? - A. Yes.

     Q. Was that a convenient way of going in? Did you have
        any difficulties? - A. Not really, no.  It was quite loose,
        considering.  There were a lot of people, you know, as the
        crowd catches on more with the flow, but because I was handily
        placed I was just out there.  I was one of the first people to
        see the concertina gate opened, so I went through.

     Q. You were one of the first people to see the concertina gate
        opened? - A.  I am sorry, not see it.  I was one of the first
        people to see it open.

     Q. You were one of the first people to see it was open? - A. Yes,
        so I could go through.  So there was very little trouble
        getting through there.

     Q. Were there many people going through the concertina gate
        ahead of you then? - A. Not many, no.

     Q. But you would have the Inquiry understand that you were one of
        the first to see that the gate was open? - A. Yes.

     Q. And ahead of you going through that gate there were not a
        number of people, a few? - A. No, a few.

     Q. And those few made their way on to go towards the tunnel? - A.
        Yes.

     Q. You did not see anybody fall at those gates? - A. No, not at
        all.

     Q. And once you were inside those gates you were free to go as
        fast or as slow as you wanted? -A. Yes.

     Q.   There was no great surge? - A. Not at that time.

     Q.   You did not see any great surge   go through that gate, did you?
          - A. No, not at all.

     Q. Of course, it may be when you went through the gate, but
        according to your evidence and understand you were one of the
        first to go in? - A. Yes.

     Q. And having gone in you were able to pause and make your way to
        the tunnel? - A. Yes, I paused to try and find the lads I had
        actually gone in with, because I wanted my lift back home
        after the game.   I couldn’t find them, and my brother was
        there that I had just met just outside.    He said for me to
        come with him:   "If you can't find your mates come with me",
        because I had not actually gone   down with my brother. I said,
        "I've got to stay with my mates   because where my lift is", and
        then they came out of the toilets.    They had obviously just
        gone to the toilets, or two of them had.    So I just rejoined
                                22


                                                  N. FITZMAURICE


     with them then,   and then we went through the tunnel.

Q.   About what time would this be? - A. Probably about a minute to
     the kick-off, if not the kick-off.   The time itself I have no
     idea of at all.

Q.   When you got through the tunnel did you see any players on the
     field? - A. No.   All you could see was - the photo I have in
     front of me - all you could see really over the heads was
     about a foot may be of light.

Q. that is photograph 21 you are looking at which shows the
   entrance into the tunnel? - A. Yes.  If you can imagine the
   tunnel, the actual fence going down the middle I did not know
   actually existed until I went down to the ground a week later
   because the crowd was so b a d .

Q. And you went to the left? - A. Yes, I went to my left.




                                  /Q. What was it caused you
                                     23


                                                 N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q. What was it caused you to go to the left?   A.   Simply,
   I was coming down the tunnel when the little boy in
   front of me who I had been on the mini-bus with, who I
   didn't actually know, he was getting ----    He wasn't moving
   as fast as the crowd was, you know, he was sort of dragging
   his feet and he just ended up on the wall at the side
   trying to get his feet so I put my arm round him and lifted
   him forward with me and that just put me on to the left-
   hand side.

Q.   That was a natural thing,       was it?          A.       It was just
     something that happened.

Q.   You went to the left     and continued         on the left?                 A.     Yes.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Mr. Fitzmaurice, do you think
     you    mentioned about the little boy in   your statement?
     A.      I am not sure.   I am definitely   sure I mentioned the
     c oncertina gate and the tunnel.

          MR. WOODWARD:       It may be,     sir,      there is a complete
     page missing.

          LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:        It may be,       yes.

Q.       MR.   WOODWARD:      So you went to the left?                      A.        Yes.

Q.   Can you see in that picture the wall against which the
     little boy was?    A.   Yes.   It is not actually on the
     photograph.    If I could lift it up, it is this wall
     here.

Q.   Further   towards   the camera?        A.      Yes.

Q.   And out of picture     on the left-hand side by the gate?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   What was the mood when you got on to the terrace there?
     E xcitement?  A.   Yes, excitement and just people
     waiting for the game to ---    Well, the game had started
     so people waiting for some action.    There was a lot
     of excitement because one of the players, Allan Hanson,
     hadn't played for a year and he was back in the side and he
     was sort of a bit of a hero, you know, so people were
     pleased that he was playing again.

Q.   There was a time when Liverpool almost scored.    A.   Yes,
     I believe so.   Peter Beardsley hit the bar, yes.    I
     missed that.   I am glad.   That was the far end of the
     pitch.

Q. Where did you get to on the terrace at this time?
   You had gone in with the little boy.   Photograph 21 -
   does it show your position?   A.   Well, yes, more or
x>$3
                                         24


                                                   N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

            less   in that   line.

       Q.   Straight down?   A.   Straight down until I couldn't go
            no more, which was just by that brick wall at the side,
            really, only further across towards the goal.

       Q.    The brick wall on the left?    A. Yes.    Level  with
            that only, you know,   a bit out.   I was about 8 ft.
            inside the terraces, or 10ft. maybe.     I moved forward
            a little bit more and then stopped and the crowd come
            in behind me then and I couldn't move at all.

       Q.    If you look at Photograph    27, that shows    the left-hand
            side of Pen 4.   A.   Yes.

       Q.   The yellow ---       A.   Where the yellow lines were,              just
            before that.       Just behind that barrier.

       Q.    You were behind that barrier that has got the white flag
            attached to it?    A.Yes, I presume, yes.      I mean,
            there was no way of finding out where you were because
            you just couldn't see anything on the floor, but that
            is roughly whereabouts I was, right behind the goal but
            far back.

       Q.   When you got into that position, how long did you stay
            there?   A.    Initially about two or three minutes
            before I decided I wanted to move.

       Q.   So having made your way down the tunnel,         the little boy ---
            A.   Yes.

       Q.   Taken up your position, you stayed there for two or three
            minutes and then decided you wanted to move?     A.   Well,
            yes.    As soon as I got into where that crowd was, as I
            said before, it hit me and pushed me out into where I was,
            really.    The little boy was struggling, that's why I
            grabbed the little boy.    The force from the tunnel behind
            me swept me through the last couple of feet and just sort
            of plonked me where I was.

       Q.   Took you to the left?    A.   Yes. Well,          I    mean,       I was
            just naturally on the left-hand side.

       Q.   Somewhere behind     that barrier on the left?          A.        Yes.

       Q.   Then what happened?   A.   I can remember saying to the
            lad I was with, Stephen, the crush was bad on my back, I
            couldn't -----   It was pretty bad and I said to Stephen,
            I shouted, "I can't manage this for 45 minutes" because
            that was the first half.

       Q.   So the game had started?       A.   Yes,   the game had started.
                                25


                                                 N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q. When you were coming on to the terrace and you had been
   in that position for two or three minutes?    A.     Yes,
   trying to cope with it.   Usually, I mean, this type of
   thing only not quite as intense happens every Saturday
   normally for me.   A crowd does get congested    and
   then sorts itself out.   It might only be somebody wanting
   to go to the toilet will move and, like, 30 or 40 people
   will crush for that and then just come out again.

Q. Were you happy to be there at that time?              A.   Initially
   yes, until I realised that ---   I mean, I            was because I
   thought deep down inside that I could just            turn round and
   go out again, so that's why I was happy to           be there.

Q.   The situation was such that you thought you could turn round
     and go out again?   A.   Well, no, sorry.    I thought ---
     I mean, I didn't know what the situation behind me was
     like but I just naturally thought, due to other experie nces
     in football matches, that I could go out.

Q. At that time you had no concern about being able to get
   out if you wanted to?   A.   No.

Q.   That's right, is it?   A.   You just naturally             think you
     can, so that never comes across.

Q.    At tht point and at that time, would it be right to say
     you regarded yourself as being quite c om fo rtable? A.                No,
     I wasn't c omfortable at all but I thought ---

Q. What    was the problem?    A.   The problem was very tight
   but    I just didn't panic at first because I have been in
   that    kind of situation before and it has cleared, but
   that    never.

Q.   Eventually,   did you panic?    A.   Yes.

Q. Would it be right to say that you got yourself into a
   panicking and screa ming state?   A.   Yes.   At one point
   I was just screaming, "I'm dying", you know, stuff like
   that.

Q. Would it be right to say tht at that time people were
   milling round doing all sorts of things?     A. People
   were just pushing.   It was just like a sea.

Q. Was it chaos?   A.   There was no room for chaos.   It was
   chaotic, the whole bunch, but it was just like being in
   a sea.   It was like drowning.   There was no way anyone
   could move.

Q.   Where were you in that position when you panicked?
     Whereabouts on the terrace were you?   A.   Roughly where
     I was on page 27, roughly by that barrier.
                                      26


                                                 N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q.   You were still by the barrier?             A.      Yes,     there was no
     way of moving.

Q. Do you mean that?   Up by the barrier at the  back there
   at about two or three minutes after you had got on to
   the terrace?   A.   Yes, I would say so.

Q.   You were there p anicking?  A.   I think I was further
     I mean, I definitely wasn't touching the barrier but that
     was roughly the position.  I was panicking.

Q.   What happened then?   A.   The guy next to me tried to
     lift himself above the crowd because that seemed to be
     Once the person had scurried over the top of us, people
     got it into their heads that if they lifted themselves
     above the crowd ---

Q.   This is at the back of the terrace?                A.       No,    this    is
     forward about 8 or 10 ft.

Q.   Forgive   me.     A.    Yes.

Q.   As it were on the back half of the terrace?                       A.      Yes.

Q. And if anything only about 8 or 10 ft.                from the wall?
   A.  Yes, absolutely.

Q.   Up to that stage, two or three minutes of you being on
     the terrace, two or three minutes into the game,   up
     to that time you were not --there was  nothing around
     you, apart from it being tight, that was causing you
     any concern?   A.   No, not fir the first two or three
     minutes, no, there wasn't great concern.    It was just
     a feeling of, "My God, this is a bit tight", like, but - —

Q.   It did not occur to you or there was no sense    or sign or
     feeling or differen ce that suggested to you that something
     had happened?   A.    No, only the tightness, as I say.
     People were singing.    The crowd were actually singing.

Q.   The people      around you were singing?           A.     Yes.

Q.   And moving?        A.   Yes.

Q.   Swaying   just as though       ---    A.    Well    ---

Q.   -- so far as they were concerned it was a normal                       football
     match?   A.   Yes.

Q.   And this is after       the kick-off?       A.       Yes.

Q. Within those two or three minutes the people                     at the back
   of the terrace are behaving ---   A.   Yes.
                                  27


                                               N. FIT ZMAURICE

Q.   -- just   as you would have expected    them to?     A.     That's
     right.

Q.   At a well attended   -- a high -a tt en da nc e match?    A.   Yes.

Q.   In which there was   a lot of interest.      A.    Yes.

Q.   By the fans and you were - if tragedy or disaster had
     happened down at the front you were quite unaware of it?
     A.   Quite unaware at the time.

Q.   Were you aware of Police   Officers after the kick-off
     trying to get people to go back?    A.   No.   From actually
     inside where I was now on the terraces?

Q.    Yes.   If your time is right,    it has happened    down ahead
     of you.    A.  Yes.

Q.   Gates were being opened and people were coming out.
     People were being helped, climbing over.   Did you see
     any of that?   A.   I saw people climbing over.    I saw
     a Policeman standing on, like, whatever it is, one of
     the billboards or whatever, with their arms over.

Q.   From what you could see of it there, did that cause
     you any worry or concern - there was somebody climbing
     over?    A.   Well, obviously it was tight at that point.
     That was when ---

Q.   That is all it meant to you?   A.   Yes.   People were
     climbing over.   I mean, a lot of people in the ground
     themselves thought that people were just trying to jump
     on to the pitch at first through the excitement.

Q.   It took a while,   did it not,    for people to appreciate.
     A . Yes.

Q.   What was happening and you did not appreciate it for some
     long time, until you yourself        A.   I didn't
     a ppreciate it until I said to Stephen, "I am going" and
     I went to move and I couldn't, I could just move my neck.
     That's when it dawns on you that there is nothing you can
     do.

Q.   So far as you were concerned, what was causing you to
     want to get out was not because of something that had
     h appened to other people, it was because you did not like
     being there any more.   A.   Didn't like being there because
     it was tight.    I was completely unaware of anything going
     on at that time.

Q.   At this time, if you are correct about it, were people
     going back from the tunnel?   Did you see anybody?
     A.   No.
                                   28


                                           N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

Q.   If there had been people down at the front saying, "Back,
     back", were you aware of anybody going back?   A.   Certainly
     the pressure on my back was not eased at all, which it
     would have been if somebody had been going back.   It was
     still there.   The same pressure was there.

Q. Which way did you get out of the pen?    A. If you have
   got Photograph 27, just on the far left there is a railing
   going up and I climbed over that railing.

Q.   I am sorry, there are a lot of railings on that picture.
     Could you hold it up, please?   A.   Yes, sure.   That
     railing going up.

Q.   The radial fence - the fence that runs from left to right
     in that photograph?   A.   Yes, there are two about
     2 or 3 ft. apart.

          LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:        Between 4 and 5.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:    That was the way you                got out?
     A.   Yes, I climbed over that in the end.

Q.    What time would that   be,   do you remember? A.                I     have
     no idea at all.

Q.   Very difficult now to have any thought of the time?
     A.   Yes.   I had no idea.   I mean, the whole day seemed
     to last ---   All that ensured on the pitch seemed to
     last for hours.   I just had got no idea of the time
     whatsoever.   By that time my watch had come off anyway.

Q. Did you see Police endeavouring          to help people?
   A.   Individual Policemen, yes.            The overall feeling
   I got, though, was the majority          of Police just could
   not cope with the situation.

Q.   What do you mean, "the majority of Police"?   A.                        Well,
     most of the Policemen I saw.   I mean, there were                      individual
     Policemen helping.

Q. Are you just talking about one or two?                   A.        No,   obviously.

Q. What do you mean?   A.    Out of a group of, I d o n ’t know ---
   They seemed to be across the half-way line.    There seemed
   to be at least over a hundred Policemen just standing
   across the half-way line.

Q.   Is your  picture and impression of the Police really
     coloured by the fact that you saw a number standing, so
     far as you were concerned, not doing anything useful
     in a cordon across the pitch?   A.   Yes, and I did see
     a number just standing around, and I was also coloured
     by the three people - Police - who tried to stop me from
    6   '



                                                  29


                                                        N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

                 pulling    the   fencing down at the    front.

            Q.   Were you in a panic and a          screaming    state at that          time?
                 A.   Not screaming, I was         shouting.

            Q.   Youvere very, very worked up by that time?    A.      Yes,
                 but not ---    As I say, just more anxious to get things
                 down.   I wasn't ranting and raving.

            Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you know what you were
                 shouting then, what sort of thing?   A.  "Pull down
                 the fence."   "They are pulling down the fence" and, "Help
                 my mates to pull down the fence."   It was that sort
                 of thing but there was no answer from them.

            Q.           MR. WOODWARD:        Are you able to identify              any of
                 those    Policemen?     A.      Not at all.

            Q.   You see, it may be that you were in such a state, and there
                 were people there who were in such a state that they had
                 to be restrained.   A.   Quite possibly but ---

            Q.   They were so worked up that they had to be restrained.
                 A.   Yes, I would imagine maybe there were people there but
                 myself I was not worked up in any way.   I am sorry, I
                 mean I was not worked up in any way to cause a ggravatio n
                 with anybody.   I was just more anxious to try and get
                 people out or to try and rip that fence down.

            Q.   Of course, if you felt,         rightly or wrongly, that you had been
                 prevented from helping,         that would have been very upsetting.
                 A.   Yes.

            Q. And would have caused you to react,              perhaps,           at that time
               with great anger.   A.   Yes.

            Q. May you have reacted at that time in great anger?      A.  No.
               What I   did, well, I was shouting for the fence to be
               pulled  down.    He was stopping me.   Then when he turned
               his back to go to the fence to either pull it down, which
               I doubt very much - he was trying to stop people from
               pulling it down.     As he turned around, the fence come
               away and I shouted, "Yes, the fence is down".      Well, I
               shouted, "Yes," screamed, "Yes", and he just spun round
               again,  grabbed me again where he had been grabbing me
               and then just two others come from nowhere and ---

I           Q.   Forgive me but when you said you screamed                 and shouted,         "Yes"
                 you had got your fist raised.  A.  Yes.

            Q.   Whatever you had meant by that, that was perhaps capable
                 of being misunderstood, was it not?       A.   Possibly was
                 but even under st an di ng that fighting was going to be  going
                                30


                                         N. F I T Z M A U R I C E

     on at such a ridiculous situation, I can't understand it at
     all.   I knew what was going on so why didn't they?

                       By LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:

Q.    Can I just see if I understood what you meant by your
     feelings when you were being squashed.    Does it come to
     this, that you had been to a lot of matches where there
     have been moments when you have been squashed very hard,
     crushed?    A.   Yes.

Q.   In a way which, if it had gone on, would have made you
     very anxious indeed for your safety?   A.  Yes.

Q.   But in the past somehow or other it has always managed                to
     clear itself?   A.   Yes, all the time.

Q.   But there have been nasty moments in the past?                 A.  Yes,
     one or two moments when you have thought, "God,                that was
     a bit close," you know.

Q.    Yes, and this time your feeling at first was, "Well,
     it will pass as it has always done before"?    A.  Yes.

Q.   But       it did not. A. B u t it did not. The first moment
     of panic that hit me was - I was so naive about it - was
     turning round to go.     I just shouted to my friend, "I am
     g o i n g ."

Q.   Your feeling really ---     Do not agree with me if it is
     not right, but your feeling is that on other occasions
     you might have been crushed beyond what is reasonable
     but   somehow, as luck would have it, it cleared?
     A.     Yes.   Not so much to that extent.    I mean, I
     have always been         I have been in a lot of situations
     where it has been a bit tight but I have never thought
     about panicking at all.      It is usually when there is a
     surge at football or the players come towards the end
     of the crowd or the crowd surge     forward and then surge
     back and there are some times -- or people going past
     you to go to the toilet or something but this ---       That's
     why I wasn't panicking at first because there were
     moments        I mean, you don't stand in the Kop with
     room.   There is never usually much room.      You are always --
     got your hand on someone's shoulders and someone has got
     his hands on your shoulders.




                                     (But you are confident...)
                                     N. FITZMAURICE


But you are confident that because it always has sorted itself
out in the past it would again? - A. That is what everybody
thought.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, thank you.

      MR. KING:   Sir, initial enquiries have been made as
to the statement.   Unfortunately it appears that this is
one of many statements which goes first to a central collecting
place in Liverpool and then passed on.

      We have however now traced the original source.  That
original source is hopefully going to send through by the
end of the morning a statement in that original source and
we will, I suspect, see a much fuller statement.

      Sir, I apologise to everybody in the Inquiry for not
noticing it sooner, but it is obvious    If one looks at the
statement, it is obvious that it does not even begin with
a capital letter on page 2.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Thank you, Mr. King.  I think
what I suggest is if it is not inconvenient to Mr. Fitzmaurice
if he likes to stay just in case when we have got the full
statement anybody wants to ask him anything more, may be
they won't, but will he just stay until that happens?

      MR. GOLDSACK:    Sir, yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.


                     F.J. ECCLESTON Called

      MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, before the witness gives his
evidence, sir I do apologise for interrupting, in relation
to Mr. Eccleston's statement that was furnished to us last
night in the copy that you probably have before you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

      MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, looking at that statement tended
to suggest that there might be more to it.  I am not sure
how many pages you have before you because on the last page
that we were supplied with, the third page of it, again
these pages are not numbered, the statement ends:         place
for him to get treatment" and then there appears to be
"the longest hour-and-a-half of my life" at the bottom.

      We enquired whether that was the whole of the state­
ment and today have been furnished this morning with a
further six pages.

      THE WITNESS:    I have some spare pages sir, if they
are any use?
                                       DISCUSSION

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Just one moment please,
Mr. Eccleston.

      What I have got at the moment is, as you say, up to
five pages ending with the phrase you mentioned and
additions.

      MR. WOODWARD:   We have had three, sir.

      THE WITNESS:   There are two pages of personal
observations after that.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You have not got five pages to
start with?

      MR. WOODWARD:   No sir, we had three, which are fax
numbered at the top.   The first fax number is P22; second
fax number P23; the next page does not have a fax number
on it and has at the bottom, because of the way it has been
photocopied, sir, if you would bear with me for a moment,
a line at the bottom.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think I saw a different copy.

       MR. WOODWARD: Which is our page 3 and there it has
ended.   It is appreciated that there is a considerable
pressure and endeavour upon everybody to get this done
with the most haste,   but we have been inadequately provided.
It is not a complaint but it indicates, sir, we are not
apprised of what this witness is going to say.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Have you got a full copy?

      THE WITNESS:    I have indeed.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Does the full copy consist of
pages 1-5 plus two pages headed "Personal Observations"?

      THE WITNESS:    That is correct, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Have you not got that now,
Mr. Woodward? The complete statement, as I understand it,
has five pages ending with the remarks about the "hour-and-
a-half" and then two pages which begin with a heading
"Personal Observations".   Have you not got that?

      MR. WOODWARD:   We have that now sir, thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I think I am in the same position
as you.  I have only just got it now because I got the
one that ended with an unsatisfactory type at the bottom.

      MR. PHILIPS:  Sir, that is right in fact.  Last night
the only version that anybody had was the one which was
incomplete.  We picked that up this morning and took steps
to find the full statement and that was in fact provided
                                   DISCUSSION



this morning to everybody, ourselves included.

      I don't know if it would be possible for Mr. Eccleston
to come back at some future time if that is what my learned
would wish?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: If any Counsel want to make
any representations about that I will listen to what they
have to say. What would you like to do about it,
M r . Woodward?

      MR. WOODWARD: Simply we      are saying, sir, we have not
had the opportunity to read it     and I am sorry to say if
this matter continues in this      order I will be rising to
my feet again because there is     another incomplete statement
that was given to us.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I appreciate your problem.  My
question is what do you want to do? Would you like this
witness to be put back?

      MR. WOODWARD:  We would like the opportunity to con­
sider all the material, but that may not be consistent at
this stage with the best endeavour.

      Sir, would it be helpful to continue with those
witnesses whose statements we have had and are complete?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Certainly we could do that.
It may be that will take us to 1 o'clock.

      I am sorry about this, Mr. Eccleston, it is not
your fault, but you appreciate, I hope everybody appreciates
that we have all been doing the best we can to mount this
Inquiry as quickly as possible.  It has not been possible
to have that long run up which is sometimes criticised
in the law for preparations before a trial for their
length, but they do have the advantage, usually, that
by the time you get to Court the papers are all in order.
We are doing the best we can and I am afraid it means that
I am going to have to ask you to stand down for the moment.

      THE WITNESS:    Right sir.


                 ANGELA HOCKBNHALL Called
                Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

      MR. GOLDSACK:  Sir, this is a statement taken by
the West Midlands Police.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.

      MR. GOLDSACK:    Mrs. Angela Hockenhall, is that right?
- A. That is right.
                               34

                                       A. HOCKENHALL



Q.   Mrs. Hockenhall, Ithink you and your husband live and work
     in the vicinity of the Hillsborough ground? - A. We do,
     yes.

Q. Where you have your own business? - A. That is right.

Q. And so you are presumably used to the build up of people on
   football match days? - A. Yes.

Q. Were both you and your husband in your workshop on Saturday,
   15th of April? - A. We were, yes.

Q. And did you become conscious as the morning wore on of a
   build up of people in the Leppings Lane area? - A. We did,
   yes.

Q.   At      what time were you first conscious of that   build up?-A.
     It started earlier than it usually does, possibly about
     half-past-10, 11 o'clock when the first people started
     arriving.

Q. When do people usually start to arrive? - A. Normally a
   little bit later but these people I suppose had further to
   come.

Q. And by mid-moring then, what were you conscious of people
   doing? - A. People were sat about eating, drinking, just
   generally waiting, I think.  It was a nice day.  They were
   sat about.

Q. At what stage did you have cause to take particular notice
   of what people were doing? - A. We tended just to keep
   glancing out of the window.  We did not actually pay
   any attention until quite late on when people actually
   started coming into the garden.

Q. Can you put a time on when people started coming into your
   garden? - A. It started, I d o n ’t know, about 11, half-past-11,
   I had just started to do the washing so I was stood in front
   of the kitchen window.

Q. Was it apparent what they were coming into your garden for?
   - A. It was, yes, they were coming in .to find somewhere to
   urinate.

Q. Was that just the odd person or two? - A. At first, yes.

Q. Did you take any steps to deter them? - A. Well at first
   I started to rap on the window and wave them off.  They
   were quite civilised about it. They nodded as if apologising
   and went out of the garden.

Q. Did the situation remain of being just the odd person or
   two coming into your garden? - A. At first until the crowd
   thickened and then more and more people started to come
   into the garden.
                                   A. HOCKENHALL


What time are we talking about? - A. It started to get busy,
it started to thicken up about 1 o'clock, between 1 and
and half-past-2 and then after half-past-2 there did seem
to be more people.

Between say 1 o'clock and half-past-2 how many people were
coming into your garden? - A. It would be difficult to say,
quite a large number of people, several dozen over the span
of that time.

What condition did they appear to be in? - A. Most of them
appeared to be quite drunk.  They appeared to have been
drinking anyway.

Were you still trying at that stage to deter them? - A. Well
at that stage I started to actually go down the garden and
ask them to move off in person rather than just relying on
the window.

And what sort of reaction did you get? -   A. A   mixed reaction.
Some of them just sort of apologised and   went   but a lot of
them started to get mouthy:  "Don't know   what   you are worried
about, it is only lager anyway" and that   sort   of thing.

You say a number of them appeared to have been drinking.
What if any evidence was there out in the street of drinking?
- A. The street and the walls of the houses on the street
were well littered with cans.  They were not all beer, though,
there were pop cans, milk bottles, things like that, but a
large quantity of them were beer cans.

And by about half-past-2, as we know from other witnesses,
there was a substantial build up of people in Leppings Lane?
- A. Yes.

What evidence did you see of people drinking at that stage?
- A. People were sat about in small groups on the walls,
just stood at the side of the road with beer cans, packs
of beer, bags of chips, things like that.

Those that had cans of beer with them was it just one can of
beer or what? - A. Some of them had just got one in their
hand.  Others were holding perhaps a four pack with one out
or two out.

I know it is difficult but can you give us any idea of the
percentage of people who were sitting around with cans or
standing around with cans? - A. It would be difficult because
I had only got a narrow view of the front of our property
but possibly 20-30 people sat in that area that I can see.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Roughly how far from the
perimeter gates of the ground are you? - A.
                                            I d o n 't know
now far it is in metres.
                               36

                                        A. HOCKENHALL


Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:   Now what about ___

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                          - A.
     That is right, yes.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:  What about the last half-hour or so
     before kick-off, half-2 to 3 o'clock, were people still
     coming down? - A. People were still coming in quite large
     crowds.

Q. And by "large crowds" you mean what? - A. Well taking over
   the road, sort of spilling off the pavement on to the road.

Q. And how many were coming into your garden at that stage?
   - A. At that stage quite a lot. They were coming down in
   large groups of perhaps 20 at a time.

Q. Now once you were conscious of groups of 20 or so coming
   into your garden what did you do about it? - A. Well I
   wanted to keep going down but my husband said I shouldn't
   because large groups it would intimidate them, so first
   he went down but that did not really do any good, so my
   husband went out and found an Inspector who positioned a
   Policeman at the foot of the garden to keep people out.

Q. And did that succeed? - A. Yes, that succeeded.

Q. You had a Policeman right in front of your garden? - A. Yes,
   that is right, yes.

Q. Mrs. Hockenhall, was the behaviour you have described of
   people coming into your garden to urinate the same as most
   other football days or different? - A. We do tend to have
   a problem with it on an ongoing basis but not such large
   quantities of people.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Was it the same last year? -
     A. It would be difficult to say because last year I was
     not in the kitchen so I did not sort of pay as much attention.

Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:  From your own sightings of the number
     of people in Leppings Lane were there appreciably more
     people there than on usual league fixtures? - A. Oh yes,
     a lot of people.

           MR. GOLDSACK:   Yes, thank you.


                   Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mrs. Hockenhall, can you tell us where is the nearest public
   lavatory to your house? - A. There are a set of small
   toilets at the top of Leppings Lane.

Q. Do we have a plan available? - A. It is off the plan again,
   right up at the top end near the entrance to Hillsborough
   Park.  I don't know if that is on the map.
                                   A. HOCKENHALL



      MR. JACKSON:  Has everyone been supplied with a plan
that I have not yet been supplied with?

      THE WITNESS:   Close to Middlewood Road, I don't know
if that is any good.

      MR. JACKSON: As it is going to be a matter that is
going to be ventilated, can you point out on the plan
exactly where you live? - A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Do we need to do that? It is
near                I I think that is good enough, but we
want to know where the toilets are.

      THE WITNESS:   Right. I live just off
                                  11
are one set of toilets just off Parkside Road.  In fact they
are marked on the map with a 'T' and there are another set
on Penistone Road again which are marked with a 'T' at
the bottom of Parkside Road, but there are not any actually
close to us.

      MR. JACKSON:   There are not any close to you? - A. No.

Perhaps you as the first local to give evidence can tell
us this:  this is a ground designated as the appropriate
ground for some 55,000 travelling fans without a car park?
- A. Yes.

Therefore it would be anticipated that a great number of
people would pass up and down the streets near to you? -
A. It would be, yes.

Can you assist as to arrangements for litter collection
because I understand that quite disgracefully you had to
take part in collecting litter that had been just dumped
in the streets? - A. Well out of my own garden.  I don't
expect the Council to make facilities for that.

Were there any facilities for putting in pop bottles, chip
papers or the like? - A. There are dust bins all the way
up Leppings Lane.

Standard ones or specially for this particular game? - A.
Well the little yellow ones that tend to be mounted on
telegraph poles.

Are those the same as are featured on all parts of Sheffield
everyday of the week, or were there special arrangements
made for litter on this particular day? - A. No, I don't
believe there were any special arrangements made.

You would therefore anticipate would you, as a resident,
"once again we are going to have problems with litterH?
- A. We don't tend to have much of a problem because they
are very good at cleaning the road after the match.
                                  A. HOCKENHALL


I appreciate that someone has got to clean it.

Mrs. Hockenhall, may I ask you this:  you have given evidence
today and may I make it quite clear that I hope I don't
represent those people who you have had to describe.   I
speak on behalf of all the people who attended? ~ A. I
understand, yes.

In the concern about giving evidence have you translated
the one or two who were noticeably drunk to "most of them
seemed to be quite drunk"? - A. No, I think I would stick
with the fact that most of them did appear to be quite drunk.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: When you say "quite drunk"?
- A. Well varying degrees of drunkenness.

They were coming into your garden to urinate.  Somebody
made some flippant remark about "It is only lager" but what
were the other signs that they had not only had some drinks
but they were quite drunk? - A. Well they spoke with slurred
voices.  One or two of them did actually have difficulty
standing up.  To me that gives the impression that they
were quite drunk.

      MR. JACKSON: Mrs. Hockenhall, I would be the last
person to suggest that there weren't one or two people
the worse for drink and go as far as to concede that
some were very drunk.  I am concerned with your description.
May I read to you the contents of the statement that
you made about this matter? - A. Yes, certainly.

The second page.

      "One or two were quite noticeably drunk.  I
      remember one telling me in a slurred voice:
      'I don't know what you are worried about,
      it is only lager'".

A. That was at an earlier stage.  That was before the
bulk of them came down at half-past-2.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Further down the page is the
sentence you really ought to put to the witness.




                   /Q. MR. JACKSON:   It says
                                    A. HACKENHALL



Q.       MR. JACKSON:   It says:

         "From about half past two there was a noticeable
         surge of fans towards the ground.   In the main
         mostly drunk, in my opinion.”

-A. That's right.

Q. Are you saying the earlier arrivals, there were one or
   two who were drunk who were urinating? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Later on, as they were surging past they appeared mostly
   to be drunk? - A. The ones I spoke to and saw in the
   garden were mostly drunk.

Q. If you had ten people in your garden and six of those
   were drunk, I would for a moment suggest you were
   inaccurate or unreasonable in your observations.   I am
   concerned, when we know that some 20,000-odd Liverpool
   supporters went to that end, to hear them described as
   "mostly drunk".   You see the difference? - A. I
   understand what you are saying.

Q. If you will accept that you are referring only to those
   who were misbehaving in your garden, and putting a
   number of those, the majority, as being drunk, I have no
   further questions.   I am concerned with the vast
   majority of people going to the ground that end. - A.
   The ones who actually came into the garden were nearly
   all drunk.   The ones on the road, quite a large
   percentage of them I would say had been drinking.   I am
   not saying they had all been drinking.

Q. Had been drinking.    I do not think we have heard from
   one - maybe one - witness who had not had a drink.
   That is not what I am asking about.    We are concerned
   with the effect of drink on the behaviour at that end. -
   A. I understand that.

Q. You were asked by my Lord earlier on as to the
   difference between this year and last year.    The number
   of cans that were in your garden at the end of last
   year, you perhaps not having seen how they got there,
   was that the same or greater? - A. I would say there
   were probably less cans last year.

Q. By a noticeable amount? - A. Well, this year we have
   recently acquired an industrial dustbin which is a large
   dustbin which the cans were put into and the cans this
   year nearly filled that.   Admittedly there were other
   things, but they nearly filled that.   Last year we did
                             40



                                      A. HACKENHALL


     not have that and we did not feel the want of it so I
     would assume there were not as many cans.

Q. The exactly positioning of your house in relation to the
   Leppings Lane end or the other end, can you tell us from
   the position of your house how the people were known to
   be the Leppings Lane end? - A. I'm sorry, could you
   repeat that?

Q. Your home is approximately there? - A. Yes.

Q. That apparently is nearer to                - A. Can I
     show you on the map again?   This is Leppings Lane
     coming up from the roundabout.



Q. I appreciate that, but how would you differentiate
   between one set of supporters and another from your
   position? - A. It would be difficult.   The only thing I
   had to go on was the fact they were going up Leppings
   Lane towards the ground.   I would have assumed the
   other supporters would have been going alone Penistone
   Road.

Q. You merely assumed they were going... - A. I only
   assumed.

Q. I am not suggesting there is anything improper about
   that.   You have assumed, because you know the area
   particularly well, that visitors would also know the
   area equally as well? - A. No, but the Police were very
   good at sort of filtering them in the direction they
   should be going.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not suppose anybody is
     suggesting that all the Nottingham Forest supporters
     were teetotal! - A. No, I am not saying that.

                Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. You were going about your daily business that day? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You have described how the crowds built up.   This
   behaviour that you have given account of began at about
   what time in the morning? - A. Which behaviour?

Q.   Urinating inyour garden. - A. It started at about half
     eleven.   That is the time I noticed it from.  I do not
     know if anybody had been in before.

Q.   At that time I think you are saying that even then   those
     who were doing this contained one or two who were
C'V                                41
Jl

                                            A. HACKENHALL


           noticeably drunk? - A. I would say they had been
           drinking.

      Q. This was an observation made from your kitchen window? -
         A. No, that was when I was going down the garden...   I
         stopped going down the garden until they started coming
         very thick at half past two.   My husband and I had both
         been going down the garden at intermittent spells to
         move them on.

      Q. Is it just your garden that was selected for this
         behaviour? -A. No.   I believe a lot of local residents
         have a similar problem.

      Q. Are there local residents who are somewhat reluctant to
         come forward? - A. I would not have thought so.

      Q. There are local residents who are prepared to talk
         amongst themselves about it? - A. Yes.

      Q.   These people who were relieving themselves in your
           garden, they were carrying cans as well as having beer
           inside them? - A. Some of them had cans, yes.

      Q. The cans you and your husband picked up from your
         garden, you had filled that container? - A. Almost.        It
         was over three-quarters full.

      Q. Was it just light lager they had been drinking? - A. No.
         A lot of the cans were sort of Tenants Super Strength
         and that type of high gravity lager and beer.

      Q.   And more expensive beer? - A. Iwould say so, yes.

      Q.   You have been asked about the litter bins, but how did
           those cans get to your garden?   Who brought them? - A.
           The fans when they had stood up from sitting on the wall
           to drink had either left them on the wall or just pushed
           them over the edge of the wall.   Some fans sometimes
           jump over the wall and put them in the bin themselves.

      Q. Do some take them away? - A. Very rarely.

      Q. Is your experience this, that unless there happens to be
         somebody on point duty, in effect, this behaviour goes
         on and on and on? - A. Yes.

      Q. Your reasonable protestations, your objections, you say
         on this day were met with various kinds of response? -
         A. That's right.

      Q. Were these just individuals who happened to have been
         taken short and found themselves embarrassed when you
         came to speak to them? - A. Some of them were.
                                 A. HACKENHALL


What did others do? - A. Other either became abusive,
said that I was being unreasonable and on several
occasions towards half past two, three o'clock, some of
them actually waved their genitals at me.

This was at a time when they were coming in in groups of
twenty or so? - A. That's right.

Could you see any reason why that should be done? - A.
None at all.

How did that affect you? - A. I was very upset by it.
I did get a bit overwrought by it and my husband at that
stage decided he would go and find somebody who was in
charge and have something done about it.

Your husband himself had been out to try and stop it? -
A. My husband had been out on several occasions.

Was there similar response to his requests?   Did he
meet with similar response? - A. I do not believe
anybody actually waved their genitals at him, but they
were certainly abusive.

It necessitated on this occasion having to get a
valuable Policeman to stand at your garden gate? - A.
That is right.

How long was there a Policeman occupied from keeping
people from urinating in your garden? - A. For about
twenty minutes.

How many houses are there along Leppings Lane?  What
number does it go up to? - A. I do not know. About one
hundred I believe.

You have described the build-up of the behaviour and how
it seemed, if my understanding is right, to get
significantly worse during the day? - A. That is right.

Did the state of those who were doing it appear to you
to be significantly worse? - A. In my opinion the ones
that came from about half past two to three o'clock did
appear to be more intoxicated than the others.

Did those who were coming at that time appear to be less
co-operative, less shameful? - A. Yes.

Was there any humility or shame shown by... - A. Very
little.

You have described their behaviour.   I want to ask you
about the quantity of people and the crowds.   Did there
seem to be a lot of people coming later this day? - A. I
5                                43




                                           A. HACKENHALL


       assumed they were coming a lot later than they usually
       are.   I do not always pay that much attention.

    Q. You perhaps do not have your attention drawn so often.
       However, it was your impression that as the morning got
       close to the time of the kick-off and that compared with
       your usual experience, there were a lot more people
       somewhat much more drunk than before, significantly less
       co-operative and arrogant and selfish in their
       behaviour? - A. Yes.   The road is usually clear by
       about ten to three.    It was still very full coming up
       to three o'clock.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

    Q. Can I just make sure I have understood the position of
       what you have just been talking about?   Am I right in
       thinking that you have a crowd coming past your house
       approximately every other weekend throughout the season?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. I do not want it to sound offensive, but it is one
       Saturday of unpleasantness and then one Saturday of
       normality? - A. It is not always unpleasant.

    Q. That is what I wanted to ask you about.      We all know on
       this occasion, of course, it was a capacity crowd and
       presumably occupying the position they do in the First
       Division this club is attracting tens of thousands of
       people on the days they play at home?       Is it regular
       that you have a continuous stream of supporters coming
       past   even on a usual home weekend? -A. Notusual, no.

    Q. Not as many as this? - A. No.

    Q. In your answers to my friend who has just sat down,
       Mr. Woodward, what you are saying is that not only was
       the quantity significantly greater, but the behaviour
       was noticeably more offensive and drunken? - A. Yes.

    Q. Than with any other group of supporters you have seen? -
       A. Yes.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you very   much.

             MR. PHILIPS:      Mr. Lee Oxley please.

                            LEE OXLEY Called

                      Examined by MR. PHILIPS:

    Q. Are you Lee Oxley? - A. Yes.
                                        L. OXLEY



Do you live in the Leppings Lane area of Sheffield? -A.
Yes.

How long have you lived in that district? - A. Twenty-
six years.

I think you have lived at your present address for
something like six years? -A, Yes.

Are you quite accustomed to the crowds going to
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground? - A. Yes.

On the 15th of April were you at work or at home? - A.
No, I was at home.

Were you at home with your wife? - A. Yes.

I think she is a nurse? - A. That is right.

Can you say what time it was when you first went out of
the house into the area round about? - A. Yes, it was
about twelve o'clock.

Where did you go at that time? - A. We went to some
friend's house.   Their little daughter, it was her
birthday and they were having a party and we just went
up to show our face really.

Did that involve your going along Leppings Lane? - A.
Yes, it did.

I think vou then went up to
      ™ A• Y6S ^  . «   /• ••
     is a continuation of it.

Can you tell us how your journey was when you first went
out along Leppings Lane? - A. No problem at all.
Obviously there were supporters there mingling in
groups, but we had no problems getting up Leppings Lane
at all.

When did you leave the place where you had been to? - A.
It was about 12.30, twenty to one time.

Where did vou go then? - A. We walked on the shops on
                because we were going to the
Hillsborough Arcade, the shopping area in Hillsborough.

You were with your   wife? - A. That is right.

You are going down   to the Hillsborough shops? - A.Yes.
                                      L. OXLEY


Did you notice anything in particular when you were at
the shopping centre in Hillsborough? - A. There were
fans down there, obviously, mingling in with just the
normal everyday shoppers.   There was nothing out of the
ordinary.   It happens every semi-final.

You did your shopping and set off to go back? - A. That
is right.

What time did you get back at the top end of Leppings
Lane? -A. Two-thirty.

What did you see when you got there? - A. There was just
an enormous crush.   I have never seen so many people at
a semi-final at that time, 2.30.

When you say "at that time", had you seen as many people
at a semi-final before? - A. Well, yes, but not
congested around Leppings Lane like they were that day.

Had you seen the people arriving for the previous year's
semi-final? - A. Yes.

What had the situation been like at that time, at 2.30,
the previous year? - A. Nowhere near as bad as that, not
at 2.30.   A lot of people are in the ground by 2.30.
There are people walking on Leppings Lane but nothing
like that at all.

Could you help us by telling us when the main influx of
people was on the previous year?   During what times? -
A. I would say probably about one o'clock, one-thirty
time it was quite congested with people making their way
to the ground.   This timethere did not seem to be any
great hurry to get tothe ground.    It was just packed.

At 2.30 you found a lot of people in Leppings Lane.
Were you able to go down Leppings Lane, you and your
wife? - A. With difficulty, yes.   It was that packed on
the pavements and the road with all the traffic and
people that we had to walk right up against the wall all
the way down and just keep weaving in and out and
getting jostled by people.

When you talk about "right up against the wall", which
wall do you mean? - A. I mean on Leppings Lane, across
the road from the football ground, not on the football
ground side.

On the left hand side as you are going down towards
Penistone Road? - A. That is right.

Was the road open for traffic at this time? - A. It was,
yes.
                                        L. OXLEY


Were the fans on the pavements and the road as well? -
A. The fans were on the pavements but they were spilling
on to the roads as well and the coaches were lining up
all along Leppings Lane dropping supporters off.

Coaches were lining up on Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Did you see supporters coming out of them? - A. I did
not really notice.   1 saw coaches.

You saw coaches? - A. Yes.

You said dropping supporters off? - A. Well, I assumed
they were dropping supporters off.

You did not see any supporters actually getting out of
coaches? - A. No.

Were the people you saw going in the same direction as
you were going? - A. Some of them were, yes, because it
is how the ground is situated.     Ifyou are at the top
of Leppings Lane obviously you   have towalk down the way
we were going, but the majority of people were coming
back towards the ground from the other direction.




                             /Q. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                               47

                                                   L. OXLEY



Q*       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can I just be clear what you are
     calling the top of Leppings Lane.  Is that the roundabout end
     or the football ground end? - A. The football ground end.

Q. That is the top? - A. That is the top, yes.

Q. And you were at this time walking down, were you? - A. Down
   from the top, yes.

Q. From the top towards Bickerton Road? - A. From the top back
   towards Bickerton Road.

Q.        MR. PHILIPS:     Yes.  You had come in fact from
     Hillsborough, up Middlewood Road and turned right into
     Leppings Lane.    Is that right? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Having walked past the park? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any conversation between you and any of the fans as
   you walked down? -A. No.  I had a little conversation with
   this supporter in the chip shop on the way back up from the
   shopping centre.  He was just asking me who was going to win
   the match.  I don't know if he thought I was a supporter.   I
   said, "I don't know".  I said, "I'm not bothered who wins, to
   be honest".  Then there was.a bit of good humour between a
   Forest supporter and a Liverpool supporter who were in the
   chip shop.

Q. Were you asked anything as you went down Leppings Lane? - A.
   There were pockets of people asking if anybody had got spares.
   I didn't know whether they were directing the questions to me,
   because I just walked straight forward.   I didn't answer
   anybody at all, but people were asking for spares.   I could
   hear people saying that, "Have you got any spares, mate? Have
   you got any spares".  I presumed that was tickets.

Q.    Did you notice anything about the condition of the people who
     were walking up Leppings Lane? - A. Walking down.    Walking
     down towards the ground?

Q.    They were going towards the ground, yes? - A. They were in
     general high spirits.   There were one or two who looked a bit
     groggy, and there was a strong smell of alcohol in the air.

Q.   Did you see them carrying anything? -A. Oh, yes, cans.

Q.   Carrying what? - A. Cans.   I saw them carrying cans of beer.
     Obviously some were carrying soft drinks, but they were
     carrying beer.

Q.   How long did it take you to get from the Middlewood end of
     Leppings Lane to where you were going? - A. I would say about
     15 minutes.

Q. How long would it normally take you? - A. Two to three
   minutes.
                                48

                                                    L. OXLEY



Q. So what time then did you get home?      About quarter-to-3? - A.
   Quarter-to-3, yes.

Q. As you were turning into           from Leppings Lane did
   the crowd show any sign of thinning out? - A. No.

Q.   I think then you heard no more about it until you saw
     something or somebody told y o u , came round and told you   of
     some trouble at the ground.   Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. That was after 3 o'clock, was not it? - A. Yes, about quarter-
   past-3.

Q. And your wife being a nurse, responded to the call for
   nurses to attend the ground? - A. That is right.  What it
   was, my father-in-law actually came round and knocked on
   the door.  We were actually watching the television, and
   were not aware of what was going on.  He came and said,
   "There has been some trouble at the ground and they feared
   that people were dead". So we just ran out of the ho u s e |
                                                     land
   looked down into Leppings Lane, and saw all the people
   walking away from the ground, thousands of people just
   coming out in droves.

Q. This was at what time? - A. This was about quarter-past, 20-
   past .

Q. Quarter-past or 20-past-3? - A. Yes.

Q.   People coming out of the ground in droves, you say? - A. Yes.

Q.    Your wife went to the ground.   Did you go with her? - A. I
     did, yes.   The neighbour said they had been appealing for
     help, doctors, nurses, first-aid attendants, so she just set
     off running towards the ground, and I followed her.

Q.   And were there any Policemen about when you went to the
     ground? - A. Yes.All along the roads they had got   them
     sectioned off, the top of the roads, and there were two or
     three Policemen on every r o a d .

Q. Did you see any other emergency services there as you were
   going? - A. Not straight away, no.

Q. You got to the ground, and I think your wife helped a lot
   there.  Did she go round to the pitch? - A. No, we didn't go
   in the ground at all.

Q. Where was she helping? - A. Through the perimeter gate, just
   near where the concertina gate is, C, down by the side of the
   slip road that runs up the ground.

Q. And were there people there who had been injured and affected
   by the crush? - A. Yes.
                             49

                                                L. OXLEY


Q. And you did what you could to help, did you? -A. Yes.

Q. Did you come across any medical personnel, apart from your
   wife, of course? - A. Yes, there was one chap who had like a
   white coat on, and I assumed he was a doctor of some kind.
   There was what I thought was a staff nurse who was pointing
   people and generally organising people.

Q. Did the assistance that was being given to those who had
   affected seem to you to be reasonably well organised or
   disorganised or what? - A. No, it was all organised.

Q. Did you see any ambulances? - A. Yes.

Q. When did you first see ambulances? - A. Probably within 5
   minutes of getting actually within the perimeter gates.   There
   were ambulances arriving all the time then, ferrying the
   injured off, one in, load the people on and off.  They just
   kept following each other in.

Q. As you were there participating in the assistance, were people
   still at that time leaving the ground? - A. People leaving the
   ground, y e s .

Q. The whole time you were there? - A. Certainly, yes.

Q. Thank you very much.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Oxley, will you have in front of you composite album No.
   1, please.  Before we look at an individual photograph will
   you confirm you moved along Leppings Lane
   to the ground at what time? - A. 12 o'clock.

Q. Everything at that time was quite normal, a few people around,
   not too many? - A. Yes, a few people around.  Not too many.

Q. You were expecting perhaps what, 10, 15 times the number of
   visiting fans than you would expect for a normal home game? -
   A. Definitely.

Q. Then we come to your return journey at about 2.30? - A. Yes.

Q. You were outside the ground, the junction of Leppings Lane and
   Vere Road at some time, were not you? - A. Yes.

Q. What time would that be? - A. Some time between 2.30 and
   quarter-to-3.

Q. Would you look, please, at 10/20A? - A. Yes, I have got that
   one.

Q. That is a photograph taken by someone standing immediately
   outside the Leppings Lane entrance looking at the junction of
   Vere Road? - A. Yes.
                               50

                                                       OXLEY


Q.   The actual time of that was 2.25? - A. Yes.

Q.    Bearing that in mind as a scene apparently with abus going in
     the reverse direction of the crowd and the road rather emp t y ,
     or virtually empty except for two or three people and a dozen
     Police Officers, can you tell us what it was like at that
     point the 10 or 15 minutes later when you arrived? -A. As I
     say, where the bus is we were on that side of the road further
     up.

Q. I appreciate that. - A. That was really, really congested.

Q. The point I am trying to make, I hope, is you are able to
   confirm at apparently 2.25 there was an orderly crocodile,
   just one or two on the road coming along towards the
   ground, but some minutes later when you were observing it
   the entire road was packed? - A. No.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not sure you need to look
     many minutes later.  If you look at the next photograph, which
     is one minute later.  The bus is going along occupying the
     road on 20A, and when the bus has gone past look at 21A.


          MR. JACKSON:   If we continue we will see the same thing
     on 22A perhaps equally:

Q. 22A shows the crowd only taking one-third of the road? - A.
   Yes.

Q.    By the time you say later on it was all across the road?   -A.    I
     would not say it was all across the road.

Q. You tell us what you saw? - A. I said there was people lining
   both sides of the road and spilling on to the road, and
   coaches parked up letting supporters off.

Q. Perhaps I have misunderstood.     Are you   saying those pictures,
   2 0 A , 21A and 22k, reflect the position   as you saw it? -A. It
   was more congested than that.

Q.   The crowd had increased after that time? - A. Yes, definitely.

Q.   You say at that time you saw people, or did you
     say, carrying any cans of any kind? - A. Cans, yes,
     certainly.

Q. Were   there the same number of Police Officers there at the
   time   you were speaking of as there are on the photographs? -
   A. I   am sorry, to be honest I did not notice how many Police
   were   there.

Q. Again I will explain my question.  It would appear that 25-
   past-2 there was an orderly crowd with a considerable number
   of Police Officers on foot apparently having no problems at
   all? -A. That is right.
                                                      ♦
                                51

                                                    L. OXLEY


Q. We now all know that some 20 minutes later there were far too
   many people for the Officers to control. - A. Right.

Q. That is why I am asking the questions. - A. Yes.

Q. Do I take it from that, therefore, that these photographs show
   a less crowded situation than you saw 15 minutes later? - A.
   Y e s , s i r , they d o .

                    Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Oxley, you know of the matches that occur in your
   neighbourhood.   This particular one, the Semi-Final, 1989, did
   you have the impression there were a lot more people coming a
   lot later than usual? - A. Yes, I did.

Q.   And that that throng of  people was not just as you described
     it round by the gate but they were still coming? -A.Yes.

Q.   Hundreds of yards up the road? - A. That is right.

Q. Still flowing in down to this entrance? - A. Yes.

Q.   So one should not have the impression of only a crowd at the
     gate, although it was very dense then? - A. No.

Q. And this is getting quite close to the kick-off time? - A.
   Yes, 2.30, quarter-to-3.

Q. And that really is unlike your previous experience? - A. That
   is right.

Q. And amongst that crowd there were people carrying cans of
   drink? - A. Yes.

Q. People drinking? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you notice also amongst the crowd there were a lot of
     people wanting tickets?    Were you stopped a number of times
     and asked? - A. No.   As I say, I didn't know whether they were
     directing the questions at me.    I just carried on walking.

Q.   You didn't want to be involved? - A. No, I didn't.     I didn't
     want to open my mouth.

Q.   Why was that? -A. From Sheffield, these were - well, I'm
     saying they were Liverpool supporters, if I had just said,
     "No, we have not got none” , I d i d n ’t know what would have
     happened.

Q. You were apprehensive, were you? - A. Yes.

Q. I think your wife got rather frightened? - A. She did, yes.

Q. You obviously did not linger, if you could avoid it? - A. No,
   I didn't.
                                52

                                                     L. OXLEY


Q. Nor get into conversation with these people? - A. No, not
   with anyone.

Q. But they were directing questions to you for tickets, were
   they? -A. I don't know.

Q.     You didn't want to know? - A. I d i d n ’t want to know, no. I
     went just straight ahead and kept my head down and carried on
     walking when I heard these people saying, "Have you got
     spares?".

Q. So they were saying, "Have you got spares?”? - A. Yes.        I
   don't know if they were directing it at me.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   He is just saying he did not know
     whether they were saying it to him.  They were saying it
     generally.

Q.          MR. WOODWARD:   No, no. - A. There were that many people
     about I don't know whether they were directing   it to me.

Q. That was a constant request or a constant enquiry? - A. Just
   at the top of Leppings Lane, yes, Catchbar Lane, off
   Middlewood.

Q. Catchbar Lane:    that is the other side of the bridge? - A.
   That is right.

                                     / Q. And the crowds that were.
                                   53


                                                        L. OXLEY

Q.   And the crowds that were approaching               this entrance were
     coming from both sides?   A.   Yes.

Q.   On the bridge    and up Leppings      Lane?         A.      That's    right,
     yes.

Q.   And was their quantity,     their spread and their               lateness
     very nuch the same?  A.       Yes.

Q.   You said that you were being jostled?    A.   Well, us
     path wasn't clear to walk.   We were, like, weaving in
     and out of people and bumping into people's shoulders.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You were swimming against
     the tide, were you not?   A.    That's right, yes, just
     the word I was looking for, yes.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:      And was there a noticeable               air of
     alcohol about?    A.     Yes.Most definitely, yes.

Q.   That was quite strong,      was it?      A.        Yes.

Q.   That was throughout     your journey?         A.         Yes.

Q.    More than you ted noticed before? A.   Yes.   As I   say,
     the crowds had never been that dense at that particular
     time for a Semi-Final.

Q.   I think in your    statement you said you could smell                     alcohol
     quite strongly.      A.   Yes.

Q.   Your journey    was on the left-hand      side of Leppings                Lane,
     was it?   A.      It was.

Q. Not in the area that we see in the p ho to graphs?                      A.         No,
   no.

Q.   On the bus side.       A.    On the bus side,             yes.

Q.    But even on that side of the road you were having                   difficulty.
     A.    Yes.

Q. C o ns iderable difficulty in getting along.   A.                    That's
   right, yes.     We were laden down with shopping,                  and that
   doesn't help.

Q. When the bus went along,       obviously        it made its way.
   A.   Made its way, yes.

Q.   What was the effect of the passage of the bus?   What
     happened to the crowd?   A.   I don't know, I didn't see
     the bus.

Q.   Of course.   Was traffic going along the road?                       A.      I
     presume it must have been.   I didn't ---
I'


                                       54


                                                          L. OXLEV

     Q.    You are not aware of any?    A.           I am not aware of any,
           no, except for these coaches.

     Q.    You had got your head down and       you were going home?
           A.    Yes.

     Q.    How far away is your home from the entrance to the
           ground?    What sort of distance are we talking about?
           A.    300 yards, something like that.   Certainly no
           more.

                              CONSTANCE     SWEET,   called

                             Examined by MR.     GOLDSACK:

     Q.    Is it Constance   Sweet?   A.      Yes.

     Q.    Mrs. Sweet,   I think you are a resident       of Sheffield?
           A.   Yes.

     Q.    And you have a friend who lives near to the Hillsborough
           ground?    A.  That's right.

     Q.    Do you quite often spend time at that         friend's at the
           w eekends?  A.   I do.

     Q.    And so are you used to the situation when there is a
           match at H il ls borough on a Saturday? A.  Yes.

     Q.    I think from time to time you and your friend Mr.           Bartholomew
           in fact go out to watch the horses?   A.   I do.

     Q.     On Saturday, 15th April, did Mr. B ar th olomew come home
           from work some time after 2 o'clock?       A.   Yes, about         ten
           past two.

     Q.    And a little later did the two of you decide to go out
           into Leppings Lane?   A.    We did..

     Q.    What time did you actually go into Leppings         Lane?
           A.   It would be about quarter to three.

     Q.     And did you join it somewhere towards the Penistone     Road
           end and walk down towards the M iddlewood?     A.    No,
           we joined it in Leppings   Lane, at the end of Leek Road.

     Q.    And then you walked   down   towards the ground, is that
           right?   A.    Yes.     We call it going up to the ground.

     Q.I    am sorry, my mistake.   You walked up towards the
           ground.   When you first got on to Leppings Lane, what
           did you notice?   A.   We gradually noticed the crowds
           and there was a lot coming down from the -- ground is
           at the top as we were going up but there was crowds
                                      55


                                                          SWEET

     coming   down as well   asking    for tickets.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, there were crowds
     going up towards the ground but there were some coming
     the other way?   A.   Coming  down, yes.

Q.          MR. GOLDSACK:     Had you been in the area of              the ground
     for   the Semi-Final match last year?    A.    Yes.

Q.   Did you notice   any immediate difference between this year
     and last?   A.     The crowd was a lot larger this year.

Q.   You mean at the time that you were on Leppings               Lane?
     A . Yes.

Q. Did you, in fact, walk all the way ip to the ground and
   beyond it?   A.   Yes.   We got up to Vere Road and we
   couldn't go any further so we decided to cross the road
   to the other side of the road.

Q.   Well now, on the part between where you             joined at Leek
     Road and Vere Road.   A.  Yes.

Q.   What proportion of the pavement or road was covered by
     people?   A.   All the pavement was covered by people.
     We were walking into the road then.

Q.   How would you describe the demeanour of most of the
     people you saw?   A.   Well, a lot of them was, you
     know, alright, they were just going on their way but
     some was boisterous and some had been drinking.
     Shouting and that, you know, as they were going up the
     road.

Q. Did you see any with drink?             A.   Yes, carrying   cans.

Q.   Just one or two or large         numbers?      A.    No,   several
     carrying cans.

Q.   Just the odd can or so or several cans?   A.               No, in
     the four packs, you know.  They had got their              fingers
     through the plastic.

Q.   Were any people drinking     as they walked along?           A.      Yes,
     out of the cans.

Q. And what was happening to the cans when they had                    finished
   them?   A.   They just threw them on the floor.

Q. And at the time you were progressing up Leppings Lane
   what was the state of the floor?   A.   The floor?    There
   was chip papers, chips and fish and everything all over
   the road and the pavement, and the cans was on the floor.
*\~y6^r
                                                   56


                                                                C. SWEET

               We were kicking     the cans as we were walking.

          Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You say you were kicking
               them?      A.  Yes, as we were walking.

          Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   Is that a  usual Saturday state
               of affairs?   A.   No.   You sometimes see chip papers
               and things like that but this one was a lot worse with
               the rubbish.

          Q.   You have mentioned        that there were people coming            towards
               you?   A.   Yes.

          Q.   Asking     for tickets?       A.     Tickets.

          Q.    Just the odd one or two?   A.   No, several.   As they
               ran past you, you know, they said, "Tickets, tickets",
               and I just ignored them.    I let John answer them,
               you know.

          Q.   Did you notice anything in particular about the people
               who were asking for tickets?   A.   They were on the
               young side.   They wasn't, you know ---

          Q.   Mainly     young?   A.       They was young people,         yes.

          Q. Do you have the p hotographs in front of you, the smaller
             bundle of West   Midlands?   If you look at the first
             photograph, that shows where you were walking, does it
             not?   A.   Yes.

          Q.   And you were coming         towards the cameraman?           A.     Yes.

          Q.   And you mentioned something about a sweet shop;   is that
               the sweet shop we see on the right-hand side?    A.   Yes,
               this one here.   We crossed the road there.    Where the
               bottom shop is, we crossed the road from there.     We call
               that the barber's shop.

          Q.   By "the bottom shop" or "the barber's shop", do you mean
               that one on the right-hand side of the photograph?
               A.   This one here.

          Q.        LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR -        The blue one on the corner?
               A.   Yes.

          Q.        MR.    GOLDSACK:        That is where you crossed the           road,
               is it?       A.   Yes.

          Q.   Having initially been on the right-hand side as we look
               at the p ho to graphs? A. Yes, coming up that way.

          Q.   Why did you cross the road there?                A.   Because      it was
               just packed.   We couldn't get any              further.
                                  57


                                             C. SWEET

Q.   Was it an easymatter, that far back from the gates of
     Leppings Lane, to cross the road?     A.    No, we had to
     push.    John got hold of my arm to pull me through,
     you know, and we were sort of pushing our way through to
     get to the other side.

Q.    Did you eventually   get to the other side of the road?
     A.     Yes.

Q. And continue    up Leppings   Lane on the other      side?
   A.   Yes.

Q. Did you at that stage, when you were about opposite the
   entrance to Leppings Lane gate, see the police horses?
   A.  No, I didn't.   As we got over there, I saw one but
   I could only see its head, you know.   Not like we usually
   go and see the police horses.   You couldn't see them.

Q.   On other occasions w h er ea bo ut s are the police horses?
     A.     You know the gates - they always stand there, like,
     there are two or three in groups together.

Q.   On the outside of the gates or on the inside?              A.    Outside
     of the gates, in the street.

Q. And the one that you could see the head of, do you know
   wherea bo ut s he was? A.  He was in the crowd.   Where
   they usually stand but there was all crowds round him.

Q.   Was it only further down the road as you were walking up
     that you were asked for    tickets or did that happen -?
     A.    No, all the way >-P* All the way ip we were asked for
     tickets as people pushed their way through, as they pushed
     past you in the crowds, they were saying, "Tickets",
     asking for tickets.

Q.   If you had had tickets on you, can you give any idea of
     how many you could have sold as you walked up --- ?
     A.   We could have sold no end.   In fact, I didn't
     bother answering them because I let John, you know,
     keep saying, "No", or we just ignored them.

Q.   Whereabouts did you eventually stop?   A.   You go
     over the bridge - there is a river goes underneath and
     you go over the bridge and then there is a green piece
     of waste ground.

Q.   Turn over to Photograph 2.         Does that help at all to
     show where you went?   A.         Yes.   The ground is at the
     end of that bridge.

Q.   The entrance to Leppings     Lane is just on the left,          is it
     not?   A.   Yes.

Q.   Whereabouts did you stop?         A.   We went on this waste
     ground.   It is like ---
\
                                          58


                                                              C. SWEET

    Q.   Can you hold it up so we can see where you are pointing.
         A.   There is the garage and there is the bridge and
         there is some waste ground there.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is the waste ground beyond
         the garage or this side of the garage?   A.   It is in
         between the garage and the bridge.

    Q.         MR.   GOLDSACK:        Where we see the wall?        A.     Yes.

    Q.   Where that ends?        A.     Yes.

    Q.   Is it just there?        A.      Up there,   yes.

    Q.    I see.   So at that point you are just past the entrance
         to Leppings Lane gate and are you above it?     A.    Yes,
         overlooking it.

    Q.   Look at No. 3, would you.    Once you had taken up a
         position on the waste ground, how would your view have
         c ompared with what we see in Photographs 3 or 4?    They
         are, of course, taken when no-one was present    but
         did they show the area that your view would have covered?
         A.    Y e s , N o . 4.

    Q.   No.   4 is perhaps best,       isit?   A.     Yes.

    Q.    What time do you think it was when you got on to that
         piece of waste ground?    A.    I should think it would
         be about five to three.

    Q. Do you have any idea how many people there were at that
       stage outside the gates?   A.    Oh it was packed.  It
       was absolutely packed by that time.

    Q.    Had you    ever seen that number of people          at a game   outside
         before?       A.  No, never.   Never.

    Q.   Once you were in that vantage point you have described,
         could you see any other Police presence?    A.   Yes.
         We could hear the P oliceman with the loud-speaker and
         looking down on to him, he finished -- he got on top
         of the car and he was begging them to stop pushing.

    Q.    We have not so far heard about this so can I take it
         with you a little slowly.     What vehicle, what Police
         vehicle are you talking about?     A.   It was a Landrover.

    Q.   Where was that parked or stationary?    A.   It was where
         the road would   be, in front of the ground here, somewhere
         there.

    Q.   Can you hold it up, please, so that we can see where you
         are pointing.     A.   The gates is there and the car would
         be here.    Somewhere here.
                                               59


                                                      C. SWEET

    Q.   Look across there.            Do you see the perimeter   gates
         on that model?   A.            Yes.

    Q.   W hereabouts -- ?        A.      It was infront of the gates.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:     On the dark part or on the
         light part?    A.      I think it would be onthe light
         part.

    Q.   Up towards   the top of that light part,         is that it?
         A.   Yes.     No, in the middle.

    Q.   In the middle?      A.         Yes.

    Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:    Had you seen that vehicle at all as
         you walked past?   A.    No, we were at the other side
#        of the road then, no.

    Q.   Where was the Policeman in relation           to that vehicle?
         A.   He was on the roof.

    Q.   Standing?   Sitting?   A.   No, you could see him to
         his waist.   I don't know if he was sitting or kneeling
         but I could see him to his waist.

    Q.   And what was he doing?   A.   He was appealing for the
         crowds to stop pushing and he kept repeating this message
         all the time.




                                                     (How was he doing...)
                                      C. SWEET


How was he doing that.   Did he have any form of hailer? -
A. Yes, he did.

The sort you put to your mouth and just speak into? - A.
I don't know.  I know it was a hailer because I could
tell with the sound. I could hear it on this bank side,
so I knew he was speaking through some kind of hailer.

Had you heard any such announcement before you reached the
piece of waste ground? - A. No, no.

As you had passed the crowd what was the noise level? -
A. It was very noisy.   It was noisy from the crowd, you
know, shouting and singing and things like that.

If there had been loud speaker announcements at that stage
do you think you would have heard it above the noise of
the crowd? - A. Oh yes, I did hear it.

Before you got to the ....   A. No,     because I did not hear
it then.

Well now once you did hear it, how many times did you hear
it? - A. Oh he kept repeating it. He was saying:  "This
is a Police message.  Will you please stop pushing at
the turnstiles as people are getting squashed".  He kept
repeating it and repeating it and I felt sorry for that
man listening to him how he was asking for them to stop
pushing.

Could you detect anything from the   tone of his voice as
he was saying it? - A. Yes, he sounded not upset but his
voice was altering as he spoke, as he asked them to stop
pushing.

What happened as a result of that request being repeated
over and over again? - A. Nothing happened.  The crowd was
still there.

Presumably there were some people at the rear of this crowd
of people? - A. Yes.

Did you see any evidence of any of those moving away after
these announcements? - A. No, the crowd just stayed as it
was.

Were there still other people arriving at this stage? -
A. Yes, but it was not as packed coming down.  They were
not arriving like that then.  This crowd just stayed as
it was.

Could you tell from your position how packed together people
were? - A. Oh they were very packed.

What did you see people actually doing towards the rear of
the crowd? - A. Well there were youths urinating on this
                              61

                                       C. SWEET


  waste ground where we were.  They just stood there.     There
  was about six of them in front of me.

Q. And the people towards the back of the mass of people were
   they just standing or were they actually using their hands
   or body to get into the crowd? - A. No, they weren't standing.
   The crowd was sort of moving like that.

Q. Did you see people trying to push   their way further into
   the crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. What proportion of the people were trying to get towards
   the front of the crowd? - A. Well those at the back were
   trying to ease their way down to get to the front, you know,
   where the turnstiles were.

Q. When you say "ease their way" I know it is difficult, but
   can you describe what you actually mean? - A. I don't know
   how to describe it to you really.  They were pushing their
   way down.

Q. Were they having to move other people to one side? - A. Yes,
   pushing them.

Q. Whilst you were on the area of waste ground were you still
   being approached for tickets? - A. Yes, a young boy he
   asked us for a ticket.  He was stood at the back of us on
   this waste ground and he asked us for a ticket as well.

Q. What did the state of the crowd appear to be? - A. I suppose
   they were all trying to get in the ground, you know, they
   were pushing and shoving to get in.

Q. Did you see any sign of panic? - A. Yes, I should think
   it would be panic because it would be nearly time for the
   whistle to go, for the match to start.

Q. I suppose there may be more than one reason for panic.   There
   may be panic because people want to get in before it starts
   and there may be panic because people are in distress.   Which
   if either did you see? - A. Well  I thought they were trying
   to get in because I did not know  there was any distress at
   that time.

Q. In addition to the Police vehicle that you were able to
   see when you were higher up, did you see other Policemen
   or women around? - A. Yes, you could see odd ones in the
   crowd but the crowd was so dense that you could not just
   pinpoint anything like that.  You could see Policemen's
   helmets.

Q. Foot Officers? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you give us any idea how many there were scattered in
   amongst the crowd? - A.No, I could not.
                                  C. SWEET


Are we talking of one or two, ten or a dozen or what?    - A.
Oh no, three or four I should think.

Three or four scattered in amongst the crowds? - A. Yes.

Now whilst you were still in that vantage point that you
had did something happen concerning a gate? - A. Yes, I
was speaking, two Liverpool supporters came to stand to
speak and they said they were not going to attempt to get
in this crowd, they were going to wait there and eat their
sandwiches while they had gone in and then while I was
speaking to them John said something about this gate, so
I looked across and I could see them going across into
the gate at the side of the river and they were pushing
into there.  The crowd sort of turned from the turnstiles
to go to this gate, the same mass.

By the time you looked at that gate do I understand it was
already open? - A. Yes, it would be open.

You did not actually see it opened? - A. No.

What proportion of the crowd moved towards that gate? - A.
Well most of them turned that way to go, started pushing
that way.

When you said that:  "pushing that way", you actually put
your hands up and moved them forwards in a pushing movement.
Is that what you saw people doing that afternoon? - A. Yes.

Pushing the person in front in the general direction of
the gate? - A. Yes.

And did the large mass of people fairly quickly disappear
into that gate? - A. Yes.

Where did they all go, could you see from where you were?
- A.No, I don't know where they went.

So you had no view inside the perimeter wall? - A. No.

Once the large mass of people had gone through that gate
what did you do? - A. I went up to the shops.

That is on Middlewood Road, is it? - A. Yes, up Catchbar
Lane.

Roughly how much later was it when you were coming back?
- A . I called in two shops and we came back, it would be
ten minutes, quarter-of-an-hour later I should think.

Now as you turned into the top of Leppings Lane on your
return trip, were there many people outside the gates?
- A . No, as we turned the corner the first thing I noticed
was a Police car.
  ■
0 fa
r                                  63

                                             C. SWEET


       Q. Where was that? - A. At the corner of Catchbar Lane and
          Leppings Lane.  I said:  "What is he trying to do?” because
          he was manoeuvring this car.  I realised then he was trying
          to block one side of the road off and when we got round
          the corner into Leppings Lane there was people stood over
          on the bridge looking at the ground at the gates.

       Q. At that stage was there much noise coming from the ground
          itself? - A.No, but when we were in the shop on Middlewood
          Road it looked like the butcher's boy from the shop next
          door came in and he said:  "I don't know if they have scored.
          There has been a right roar from the ground".

       Q. So there had been a roar at the time you were in Middlewood
          Road? - A. Yes.

       Q. But when you got back to Leppings Lane was there noticeable
          noise coming from the ground or not? - A. It was quiet.

       Q. Then when you actually got to the gates of Leppings Lane
          itself did you see other vehicles there? - A. We got to
          the bridge and there was people stood on the bridge then
          looking at the ground and when we got there the first
          fire engine arrived.  He came past us and pulled up at
          the gates.  My first impression was there had been an
          accident in the lane itself.

       Q. Whilst you waited there, over the next few minutes did you
          see other emergency service vehicles arrive? - A. Oh yes,
          ambulances and fire engines.

       Q. Of course what you now know was the rescue operation
          getting underway? - A. Yes.

       Q. And then I think you then saw a lot of obviously very
          distressed people beginning to come out of the ground? -
          A. We did, yes.

       Q. A lot of things were said by various people in the heat of
          the moment? - A. Yes.

       Q. Was there much Police activity outside the ground at that
          stage? - A. No, there wasn't.  There was Policemen stood
          around in Leppings Lane.

       Q. When you say "stood around" do you mean stood around apparently
          doing something or apparently not doing something? - A. No,
          I think they were there to try and control the crowds.

                MR. GOLDSACK:   Yes, thank you.


                        Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

       Q. Mrs. Sweet, we have heard of people with tickets; we have
          heard of people who had not got tickets, but this is the
S'
                                 64

                                          C. SWEET


        first sightseer we have seen.

        You, as I understand it, went there to look at the Police
        horses? - A. Yes.

     Q. And despite seeing the crowd you continued and your attention
        was on the crowd.  You were not trying to get into the
        ground, you were looking at the crowd? - A. Yes.

     Q. So as a member of the Sheffield public you were perhaps one
        of the very few who was looking, paying attention and
        noticing what was going on.

       Now you are the first person to tell us about a Police vehicle
       with someone asking the crowd to go back.

        May she see composite Album No. 1 please.  First of all can
        you try and pinpoint the time you were walking down Leppings
        Lane in the crowd? - A. When we set off?

     Q. Yes, you set off from home? - A. About quarter-to-3.

     Q. Would you look please at Photographs 21, 20A, 21A and the
        like.  21, 22A, just flick through the photographs.  22A,
        we know they are timed about 14.27.  22A, 23A, 24A.  Was
        that the sort of scene you saw as you were walking along
        Leppings Lane? - A. No.

     Q. I am right, aren't I, that there were very many more people
        than that? - A. There was, yes.

     Q. It may be of significance, if you were to look at those
        photographs it does not appear that very many are carrying
        beer? - A. No.

     Q. It may be that the odd one can be seen but apparently
        a series of photographs at that time without revealing
        anyone carrying any alcohol? - A. Yes.

     Q. If you were to turn back, to be absolutely fair, to
        Photograph ISA taken at ll-minutes-past-2 does reveal
        amongst the dozens of people four or five carrying some­
        thing? - A. Yes.

     Q. Would you agree that those photographs do not reveal very
        many people carrying alcohol? - A.No, they don't.




                                /Q. I am reminded
                                   C. SWEET



I am reminded and it is right to say, it looks at that
time as though there are adequate Police Officers to
control the apparently well behaved crowd? - A. Yes.

That all changed? - A. It did,

I suggest if it had got very dangerous at that time you
would have gone back home? -A, No, because we were going
to the shops as well.

If it had got dangerous you would have gone home?   I do
not suppose you would have voluntarily gone into a
dangerous crowd? - A. No, I do not think we would have
gone into a dangerous crowd, but...

You   do not sound too convinced? - A. Well, it was just
the   crowd.   We went to avoid it to the other side of
the   road.   We could not have gone through the crowd at
the   football side because it was too packed.

Are you saying you may well have gone into a crowd that
you thought was dangerous? - A. No, they didn't look
dangerous.

Of course not.   When you were taking part in the walk
down Leppings Lane it was crowded because it was a
football crowd? - A. Yes.

A semi-final? - A. Yes.

Despite my learned friend's saying about Sheffield's
position in the league, there were rather more people
visiting this day than expected during the season.
However, when you got to the edge of the ground you saw
the position was quite different and then it began to
build-up? - A. Yes.

Can you pinpoint the position of the Officer in or near
to his vehicle?   Perhaps it would be of assistance if
you first used the model. - A. There.   That's it.   He
was somewhere there in the front.

A grey one? - A. In that grey part...

Forgiven me, a grey vehicle? - A. I don't know.     I
could only see the top of the vehicle.

Can you try and pinpoint the time when you heard that
Officer pleading with people to stop pushing? - A. Yes,
it would be about five to three to three o'clock.
                              66


                                       C. SWEET


Q. It was quite clear at that stage that there wasn't a
   hope of those people getting into the ground by three
   o'clock? - A. Oh, no.

Q. You say it as if it is self-evident.       It was so obvious
   to anyone, and must have been for some     considerable time
   before that, that those people had not     a hope of getting
   into the ground by three o'clock? - A.     No.

Q. I know you are not an expert and I do not suggest you
   should be, but can you, looking back, tell us the time
   when it was quite obvious to you that they would not get
   in?   Was it half past two, twenty to three, ten to
   three, when it was quite obvious that the people who
   were queuing were not going to get in by three o'clock?
   - A. I do not know, because I was not in Leppings Lane
   at half past two.   It was quarter to three when we went
   up the road.   They could not have got in when we got
   there, for three o clock.

Q. They couldn't? - A. No.

Q. So even by quarter to three it was quite obvious to you?
   - A. By this time when we noticed the crowds it would be
   five to three and they would not have got in then for
   three o'clock.

                Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mrs. Sweet, you had gone down to look at the horses? -
   A. Yes.

Q.   That was something you likedto do? - A. I do.

Q.   You set off at about quarter to three.    You know the
     ground? - A. Yes.

Q. You know the habits of football supporters and you knew
   the time of the kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you expect to be able to go and look and admire      the
     Police horses? - A. I did.

Q. Without any difficulty at that time? - A. I did.

Q. Why was that?   Why did you pick that time? - A. Because
   that is usually the time we go when there is a match and
   they are usually stood in groups, three or four horses
   together, and you usually can get right up to the
   horses.

Q. What has happened to the supporters by that time? - A.
   Well, usually they have all gone in.
                              67



                                       C. SWEET


Q. You made your way along to have a look at the horses and
   as soon as you came out on to Leppings Lane the
   situation you observed was different from what you had
   expected? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. Was that because there were hoards of people coming down
   Leppings Lane still? - A. Yes, going up and coming down.

Q. I think you went on and decided to cross the road? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Why did you cross the road? - A. Because we could not
   get any further.

Q. When you crossed the road did you see the crowds were
   like that coming in the opposite direction as well from
   over the bridge? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you notice Policemen around? - A. Yes, there were
   Police at the ends of the roads.   The roads were
   barricaded off and there were Police up at the ground,
   but they were in the crowd.

Q. You noticed their helmets but you could not see what
   they were doing? - A. No.

Q. You said in your statement that some of the crowd, or a
   large number of the supporters, were rather disorderly?
   - A. Yes, they were swearing.   They were using
   offensive language and urinating in the streets.

Q. They were actually urinating out on the street? - A.
   Where we were stood on this ground.   There was a line
   of them stood there.

Q. You have gone forward to something else that is in your
   statement.   I will ask you about that now while you are
   dealing with it.   Having gone past the gates to take up
   position from which you watched what was happening, you
   saw there were men doing what? - A. Urinating.

Q. Just out openly amongst everybody? - A. Just stood there
   at the side of this brick wall.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Which brick wall is that? -
     A. The bridge wall.

Q.          HR. WOODWARD:   The parapet of the bridge? - A.
     Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can we just make sure what
     we are talking about?
                               68


                                        C. SWEET


           MR. WOODWARD:    West Midland 1, sir, may assist
     better.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Photograph 2.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:    Photograph 2, Mrs. Sweet.   On the
     right there is the garage and the bridge and the
     entrance to the ground is on the left, the dotted line
     marks the line of the pavement.    Whereabout were these
     people? - A. At this stone wall here.

Q. You indicate along the stone wall we see on the right of
   the photograph? - A. Yes.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You went in off the
     pavement there on to some waste ground where there are
     some tyres and things, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. When you say these people were urinating, do you mean on
   the side of the wall where the pavement is that   we can
   see, or on the other    side? - A. On the other side.

Q. They went off the pavement behind the wall, is that it?
   - A. Yes, on to the stone wall.

Q. They went behind the wall to do it? - A. Yes, on the
   waste ground.   Everyone could see them.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:     Was it just one or two? - A. Oh,
     no, there were six or seven.

Q. I think the Police do not allow alcohol to go into the
   ground, that is, into the sports ground? - A. I don't
   know.

Q. You have been asked about people carrying cans of beer?
   - A. Yes.

Q.   You   saw that, did you? - A. Yes, I did.

Q.    Did that seem to be more than you might have expected? -
     A. Yes, it did.

Q. You saw as you walked along and were in your vantage
   position the density of the crowd up to the turnstiles?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Is this the picture we should have, one of, even though
   it was crowded ahead of people, they still kept coming
   on? - A. They did.   I passed a remark.  I said, "Just
   look up here, you will never see this again", and all
   you could see were faces.   It was so packed, Leppings
   Lane was.
                              69



                                       C. SWEET


Q. That was obvious to people as they came towards it? - A.
   Yes.

Q.    You have mentioned at least two people who said they
     were not going to have any part   of it and decided.•• -
     A. They were on the waste ground.

Q. Was there any reason why sense and restraint should have
   not kept people back from joining that throng? - A.
   Well, it was just that they wanted to get into the
   match, wasn't it?

Q. They had one thing in their minds? - A. Yes.

Q.    You say there was a Police vehicle, and indeed there
     was, a landrover, I think a Mr. Buxton was the Officer
     with it, with a public address system? - A. Yes.

Q. You became aware of it being there? - A. Yes.

Q. You had not seen it arrive? - A. No.

Q. Over a period of time there was a flow of announcements
   from him? - A. Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Have you got a time when
     that arrived?

           MR. WOODWARD:   It is very difficult to identify
     the time, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do we see it by any chance
     on photograph 37 in composite 1, or am I wrong about
     that?   Towards the end of that bundle.

           MR. JACKSON:   Sir, if we can assist.   We have
     had a considerable amount of time expended on that
     particular problem.   We have come to the conclusion
     that that is in fact a Police visor pointing forward and
     not as we first thought a landrover.   If you look at
     the Officer on the right with his visor up.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are we looking at the same
     photograph, 37?   I am looking at the extreme left side.

           MR. JACKSON:   Yes, we all thought it was a
     landrover, but on closer consideration we have come to
     the conclusion that it is an Officer's helmet with his
     visor pointing forward that has caught the light.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I see.

           MR. WOODWARD:   We have not been able to pick it
     out yet.
                                    C. SWEET


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I see, yes, much closer
than we think.    Yes, I am sorry, my fault, a red
herring.

         MR. WOODWARD:   It is the Officer on the white
horse.      His visor is raised and the light has caught
it:

What was the announcement that was coming out time and
again? - A. He was repeating, "This is a Police message.
Will you please stop pushing at the turnstiles as people
are getting squashed” .  He kept repeating that message.

Did that have any effect upon the people who were still
coming along? - A. No.

Did you have any difficulty in hearing it? - A. No, I
heard all the messages.

You were on the other side of the road beyond the crowd?
- A. Yes.

On the waste ground? - A. Yes.

It was quite loud and clear, was it? - A. Yes.

As far as you were concerned? - A. Yes.

Did you see anybody hold back, or appear to hold back in
response to those messages? - A. No.

You started to say something about the Officer and what
you felt for him, which I missed.   What was it? - A. I
felt very sorry for that Officer because after I
realised what had happened at the ground, how the man
tried to control that crowd outside there.   He repeated
and repeated these messages and nobody took any notice.

There was nothing to prevent those, if    they heard the
message, as they were walking along to    join thecrowd,
from holding back? - A. No.

You saw the Police Officers, or some of them, their
helmets? - A. In the crowd.

Did you have the impression that at this time they were
really overwhelmed? - A. Yes, they were.

Did you see the mounted Police endeavouring to do
anything? - A. I could only see one horse and that was
only its head.

Was there much shouting and chanting? - A. Yes, from the
crowd outside and as they were walking up Leppings Lane.
                                 C. SWEET


Would this be fair:  not only did you have the
impression that the Policemen were overwhelmed and that
the crowd was in fact uncontrolled, but really it would
be fair to say it was at this time uncontrollable? - A.
Yes, I think it was uncontrollable.   You could not have
got that crowd into that ground through those
turnstiles, no way.




                      /Q. Afterwards, after this had
                               72                            $


                                                  C. SWEET



Q. Afterwards, after this had happened, you speak of the crowds
   or crowds of people coming out? - A. Yes.

Q.   What time is this that you see them coming out? - A. After the
     accident.That would be, I think, about half-past-3   that was.

Q.   In answer to Mr. Goldsack you said the situation was there was
     some ill-feeling being shown towards the Police? - A. Yes,
     there w a s .

Q. Is not that to put it rather mildly, to put it like that? -
   A. No.   The language was shocking, but I must say this most
   of the supporters were all right.  It was just....

Q. There were a few. - A. Just a few, yes, and they were really
   annoyed.

Q.   They were annoyed, rightly or wrongly, and there were       a few
     who were making a nuisance of themselves? - A. Yes.

Q.   And getting in the way? - A. Yes.

Q.   I am reminded of something I should have asked  you in relation
     to the people going into the crowd.   There were people, even
     though there was the loudspeaker speaking, coming along, not
     simply joining the back, but pushing their way through to go
     in? - A. Yes.

Q. Forcing their way into an obviously congested mass of people?
   - A. Yes, it was packed.

Q. People coming along, seeing that, and still forcing their way
   into it? - A. Yes.

Q. Not just joining it, but forcing their way in?     That is right,
   is not it? - A. Yes.

Q. Thank you.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q.   Mrs. Sweet, one matter.  Did you hear an announcement       from the
     ground from the loudspeaker system? - A. Yes.

Q. After the accident had happened? - A. Yes, when we were stood
   on the bridge.

Q.   Can you remember what was said? Just       take your time.- A.
     Would they move off the perimeter so they could see to the
     injured.

Q. "Will people move off the perimeter"? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the announcement say where they were being asked to move
   to? - A . N o . As we were stood on the bridge that was coming
   from the inside of the ground.
                              73

                                                 C. SWEET



Q. I wanted your own recollection.  Having had that may I just
   put to you the words you used in your statement when you wrote
   it.  It is on page 8. You wrote that your recollection then
   was:

          "Will the people on the perimeter track move on to the
          playing area so we can treat the injured"?

     - A . Yes.

Q.   Can you remember now, and I know it must be a very unfair
     question, but can you remember whether the playing area was
     mentioned? - A. No.  I don't know.

Q. At any event, you do still have a recollection that the
   message was, "Move off the perimeter track"? - A. There was an
   announcement, y e s .

Q.   "So that we can treat the injured"? - A. Yes.

Q.   At that time was there a lot of other noise coming out of the
     stadium, or had it gone quiet by then? - A. It had gone quiet,
     not like it was before the match first started.

Q. And whatever the position inside may have been as to which of
   course you can't help the Inquiry, you had no difficulty in
   hearing that? - A. No, I heard it.

Q. Mrs. Sweet, may I just ask you this.  The crowd you saw going
   into that ground, have you in the past seen numerous football
   crowds? - A. Yes, I often go to see it.

Q. Can I just be clear as to what you are   saying. Are you saying
   that the language and the drinking and   the urinating and the
   unpleasantness that you witnessed, was   this typical of the
   football crowd behaviour that you have   seen? - A. No.

Q. It was not? - A. No.

Q. You are saying this particular crowd's behaviour, are you
   saying, was uniquely unpleasant? - A. Yes, it was unpleasant.

Q. Had you ever seen behaviour as unpleasant as that from a
   football crowd before? - A. Not like that.

Q. Never? - A. No.

Q. Thank you.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.  Can we pause
     a moment.  Mr. Philips, you want to mention in relation to Mr.
     Fitzmaurice?

          MR. PHILIPS:   Yes, sir, the matter has been checked.  It
     appears there is no missing page.  The one bit that is missing
     is the word "when" from the top of the second page.
                                            DISCUSSION



     MR. KING:   Sir, I would be in a position to produce the
original.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   There is no need.  If that is what
it says I accept that.   "When we got in the area behind the
goals", is what it reads?

     MR. KING:   Sir, it would appear this statement was    not
actually written by Mr. Fitzraaurice but was made up from   notes
of an interview between him and the person taking it.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And the person taking it, was     that
a solicitor or....?

     MR. KING:   A solicitor's clerk.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And was it signed?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have not been provided with the
original signature.   I have been provided with the working
notes. The typed statement has certainly been signed.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   Yes, Mr. Woodward?

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, we understand that to a large extent
that is the evidence that was intended to put before the
Inquiry in relation to the people of Sheffield and the
independent witnesses who may be able to assist in
relation....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Local residents.

     MR. WOODWARD:   The local residents, to assist to give
the independent view, as it were.  When this tragedy happened
and the Inquiry was put into the hands of the West Midlands
Police the South Yorkshire Police at that stage withdrew from
taking any part in the investigations.  From material that has
been provided to us and from the information which we believe
may exist there may be substantially more witnesses who can
speak of the problems and difficulties and state of the crowd
and the build up.

     Of course, this is not a trial, sir, and one is not
concerned with weight of numbers. One is concerned with
quality and the detail of the evidence, but it is our
impression there may be more evidence that is capable of being
given.  We do fear, however, and this has been made known to
us, there are perhaps individuals who have been most reluctant
to come forward because of their connection with the locality
and proximity to the are a.

     What I am asking at this stage, if it is the Inquiry's
position that immediately we should move on to the Police
evidence the, sir, that is something we would wish to hold
back from at this stage.  We would wish to be able to make
investigations concerning the evidence that may be available
                                            DISCUSSION


to demonstrate what the Police view of the matter is with
the independent that is available to show how uncontrollable
these people were and how the crowd did in fact build up in
the manner that overwhelmed the method and system that was
there.

     I am asking, if we have got to the end of today's
evidence, and it was intended to move directly to another
subject on Monday, that this matter be adjourned.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.  Before I ask Mr. Philips or
Mr. Goldsack to say whether that is in fact the end of the
evidence they have available from local residents, can I make
it clear - I am sure it is clear to you but just to make it
clearly publicly - what has happened this week is we have had
evidence from those who were actually in the ground for the
most part, and Liverpool supporters principally.    This
morning we moved on to evidence from local residents.    The
door is not shut to producing evidence from any witness from
any quarter if it turns out in the course of the next week or
two or three or whatever it is, that somebody can add
something that we have not had already.    For reasons I don't
want to keep on repeating, this Inquiry has been mounted very
swiftly, and it may well be somebody will turn up, "I have
got something to add", and simply because we have finished
with that group of witnesses as a general group does not mean
we won't entertain an extra witness if he or she has got
something to a d d . So you need not worry about the local
resident element being concluded today, if it has been.

     That in itself I don't think would be a good reason for
my not proceeding with the next stage, but it may be, Mr.
Woodward - I d o n 't know - there are other reasons why you
might need a breathing space.     This evidence has proceeded
fairly swiftly, and I appreciate it is necessary to do an
awful lot of work outside this room in order to prepare and
properly deal with evidence inside the room, and I am willing
to hear anything you want to say about that.

     Can I first of all ask Mr. Philips or Mr. Goldsack - it
matters not which - what the state of the evidence from local
residents is as far as they are concerned?

     MR. PHILIPS:   We have in fact, sir, another seven
witnesses, possibly eight, because we have had a request for a
further witness to be called from the locality.  We would
propose to continue with that next week.  In fact, we were
thinking we might get more witnesses dealt with this morning
than has happened.  We see no reason in fact to start on any
other phases of the evidence until we have completed this
particular phase.  I would have thought there is certainly a
morning's worth of evidence, if not perhaps a little bit
more, still to be heard from people who were in the
locality.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That you were intending to call?
                                             DISCUSSION


       MR. PHILIPS:   That we were intending to call anyway,
yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And then the next stage after that
would be to call evidence from the Police, would it?

       MR. PHILIPS:   Sir, yes, that is right.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.  Mr. Woodward, I don't
know how that affects you.  Can I put it this way.  Are you in
need of time to consider the evidence that will be called from
the Police before it gets called?

     MR. WOODWARD:      Sir, we are in substantial need of time
to do t h a t . The investigations or endeavours we have made are
not complete.     Material is coming in all the time.  We have
not even yet been able to properly take stock of that which
has so quickly passed before us this week.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What are you asking me to do?

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, we would ask for an adjournment of
one day at least, ideally for two days, sir, to take stock and
to consider the position.   If necessary, that might be at the
end of this phase, that is before we embark upon the Police
evidence.  For example, sir, we are not able in relation to
that vehicle which you have heard about to pin-point the
time, if we could pin-point the time about it it would save
perhaps a lot of detail, and might be helpful in marking
matters and be a useful reference point.  There are
Officers who have not been able yet to provide information
to us, and we understand the Inquiry team itself is
receiving considerable amounts of material, not just tens
of but hundreds of statements and documents, which really
require to be considered.  We require to consider our
position, sir, and we would ask for that opportunity to do
it.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sympathetic in principle to
what you are saying, Mr. Woodward, but having made good
progress this week I don't want to see it dissipated by then
taking days off.  What I am prepared to do is to allow a day.
It might be more convenient, I don't know, rather than have
the remainder of the local residents on Monday morning and a
bit of the afternoon and then have a break, I wonder whether
it might be better to have a break on Monday and resume on
Tuesday?   I am in the hands of counsel generally about this.
I am willing to do whatever seems the most sensible thing.

     MR. WOODWARD:   We would ask for that to be done, sir.
May we say this, that ;the taking of the break may lead to
expedition, as indeed for example, was the consideration of
the video film.  That has avoided the pursuit of matters which
people believed to be the case.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is what I hoped might be
be the case, yes.  I think that is sensible, and I will
Sr*




                                  77


                                                 DISCUSSION


      certainly allow that.  I am not minded to allow more than a
      day, I am afraid.  I think we are all going to have to work
      over the weekend, all of us.  We will have to do that on
      Monday as well.

           MR. WOODWARD:   I believe, sir, there is a thing called
      sleep.  I have not seen it for a while.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well.   What we will do is to
      break off now.  I have already indicated that at half-past-1
      today the video - I say the video - I believe there have been
      many, many hours of video in fact provided from which there
      has been distilled and compiled into one continuous film,
      about two hours of video.  That will be shown, starting at
      1.30 in the Mandela Room, and anybody can go and see it.   It
      is not obligatory, but bit is available.

           We will break off until Tuesday morning.  I shall say
      10.30 on Tuesday morning, and resume where we left off.  I
      hope it will be possible in that period for us to make a
      continuous progress thereafter.

           Thank you very much.


       (The Inquiry was adjourned until Tuesday. 23rd May. 1989.
                            at 10.30 a.m.)
