From: Paul Pugh                                              cc Mr Michael
      Head of Operational                                       Mr O’Brien
      Policing Policy Unit                                      Permanent Secretary
      Room 529                                                  Mr Boys Smith
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                         Mr Granatt
      S 273 3141                                                Mr Edmundson
                                                                Mrs Underhill
                                                                Mr Warner
                                                                Mr Owen

             May 1997


Home Secretary


GRAHAM KELLY: CHIEF EXECUTIVE, THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

Issue

The Chief Executive of the Football Association, Mr Graham Kelly, has written to
request a meeting to discuss matters of mutual interest.

Timing

2.        Not urgent, but you may wish to send an early reply to Mr Kelly.

Recommendation

3.      I recommend that you agree to meet Mr Kelly, and that you write to him as set
out in the attached draft. However, you may wish to postpone any meeting until you
have made an announcement on Hillsborough, when you will be in a position to be
more forthcoming.

Consideration

4.      Mr Kelly writes to congratulate you on your election success and to request a
meeting to discuss, in particular, the campaign by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group (HFSG) for the re-opening of the inquest into the disaster, and security issues
relating to England football supporters travelling abroad.

Hillsborough

5.      You are currently considering whether there are sufficient grounds to order a
new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. My submission of 8 May covered in detail
the matters raised in the Granada television programme in December about
Hillsborough, and the subsequent representations received from the HFSG and other
interested parties.



:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90176# 1
6.      There have been two recent developments in the HFSG campaign which have
attracted increased media attention, albeit more locally than nationally. Firstly, a
“Hillsborough Justice Campaign Day of Support” was held on Saturday 3 May, at
which supporters attending the match between Liverpool and Tottenham Hotspur
were invited to send pre-printed cards to the Home Office requesting a fresh inquiry or
inquest; a total of 8,245 have so far been received. Most recently, the “Hillsborough
Justice Concert” was held at Anfield on Saturday 10 May to raise funds for the
campaign to re-open the inquiry, and featured several high-profile bands. Highlights
of the concert were shown on television on Saturday 17 May.

English football supporters abroad

7.    Although Mr Kelly raises the issue of England’s supporters travelling abroad,
we understand the FA do not in fact have any specific concerns in mind in this area
with which the Home Office might be expected to help.

8.      For important matches played abroad, the FA and the police from the Football
Unit at NCIS make pre-match visits and liaise with the local police and football
authorities about such matters as ticket allocations and the location of English fans in
the stadium. When they can they also negotiate to improve safety features. For the
match itself English police officers who are familiar with the particular English
supporters work with the local police acting as “spotters” or intelligence officers.
However, not all countries are as advanced in safety and crowd control techniques as
England, and the facilities would not always satisfy the standards required for the
issue of a safety certificate in England.

9.      The police in other countries often have a more aggressive approach to
policing football matches. Sometimes things do go wrong, as in the case of the F.C.
Porto v Manchester United match in March when the Portuguese police injured some
Manchester United fans with plastic bullets. A FA representative and two English
police liaison officers were present at that match. The Foreign Office responded to
enquiries arising out of this incident.

10.    There are several European committees concerned with violence at football
matches (Council of Europe, the Police Co-operation Working Group) and the British
representatives (including one from the Home Office) can but continue to encourage
other countries to adopt our standards of safety and security at football matches.

Handling/Presentation

11.     If you agree the recommendation in paragraph 3 your office will need to
ensure that any meeting is scheduled for a time after the announcement of your
decision on Hillsborough.




Paul Pugh


:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90176# 1
DRAFT LETTER TO GRAHAM KELLY FOR THE HOME SECRETARY’S
SIGNATURE

Thank you for your letter of 8 May, and for your kind comments on my recent
appointment.


I agree that a meeting would be useful to discuss the matters you raise and I shall ask
my office to find a mutually convenient time. It would be helpful if you could let my
office know in advance of the meeting of any particular issues you would like to
discuss about Hillsborough or football fans travelling abroad.




:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90176# 1
