                                                                 Parly No. I 06654




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER ON MONDAY 26
OCTOBER 1998




Maria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
Department, if all material held by South Yorkshire Police in respect of the
Hillsborough disaster which he ordered to be placed in the Library has now been
deposited.




DRAFT REPLY


As much of the evidence as possible considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
Hillsborough Scrutiny, including that held by South Yorkshire Police, has been placed
in the Library of the House. This includes copies of the police statements, both in their
original and amended form, and copies of other material considered by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith not already in the public domain.


I am aware that the Hillsborough Family Support Group have queried whether there
are any further statements outstanding and this is being followed up by South
Yorkshire Police.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
BULL POINTS
Disclosure of material

Most of the main material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is contained in the
appendices to his report. Much of the other material considered was already in the
public domain.

As the Home Secretary indicated on 18 February, as much as possible of the other
material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now been placed in the Library
of the House.

If required

There are a very few cases where there were overriding reasons against disclosure, for
instance because the persons concerned have asked us to respect the confidentiality of
the material provided.



CPS Review
The Crown Prosecution Service are reviewing the private prosecution brought against
former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray and will
make an announcement as soon as possible.


Norman Bettison

The selection of Mr Bettison as the new Chief Constable of Merseyside is a matter for
the police authority.

If required

Mr Bettison was not on duty at Hillsborough and neither the Taylor Inquiry nor Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny made any criticism of him.


Hillsborough Scrutiny

LJ Stuart-Smith carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive report sets
out clearly the matters he considered and the reasons for his conclusions, with which I
agree, that there are no grounds for a further inquiry.

I am satisfied that he was able to carry out a thorough scrutiny of all the evidence
which was submitted by the families and others.



The Taylor Inquiry


::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
The original Taylor inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.

The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It concentrated
on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, and proposed a range of measures to
improve safety at sports grounds.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
Schedule of material


In addition to the police statements, the evidence deposited in the Library consists of
the following:

       Transcripts of interviews with those who gave evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-
       Smith;

       Other records of discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
       transcripts were not made;

       Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses;

       Other written statements consulted at the request of the families;

       Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by Counsel
       and others on behalf of the Family Support Group;

       South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989 semi-finals;

       Nineteen Statements by the Police Complaints Authority;

       Report produced by David Phillips of Devon & Cornwall Constabulary
       (Report of the police operation at Hillsborough - produced at request of South
       Yorkshire Police)

       Report by Noel Bume (a structural engineer; he was instructed in July 1989 to
       report on and advise the South Yorkshire Police Authority on the safety and
       structural aspects of the Hillsborough ground, in particular with a view to the
       anticipated civil proceedings)

       Police videotapes TB 1,2,3 and 4

       Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s open meeting on 6 October and
       meeting with Counsel on 30 September

       Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by those consulted by
       the Judge


Material not published

     Appendix 9 of LJ Stuart-Smith’s report dealing with individual cases, The
     relevant details of which were sent to the individual families.
     We have not deposited material in the Library where there were overriding
     reasons against disclosure, for instance because the persons concerned have
     asked us to respect the confidentiality of the material provided.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


:odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry. West
Midlands Police investigation begins 24 April 1989

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - mini-inquests to identify each of the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174 witnesses
at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently
passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating to
the incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no longer
subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been dropped
because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the absence of the
more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard promises to consider any
“new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.

18 February 1998:     Home Secretary’s publishes scrutiny report.
8 May 1998:           Adjournment debate on Hillsborough




:odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTIONS
Likely immediate supplementary questions.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Why have the South Yorkshire Police failed to comply with the Home
Secretary’s instructions on disclosure of material?

As I have indicated, as much as possible of the material considered by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has now been placed in the Library of the House.

Where omissions have been brought to our attention, we have followed this up with
the South Yorkshire Police and the material has been deposited in the Library. We
will deal with any further queries which arise in the same way.

Will you intervene with South Yorkshire Police over their refusal to disclose
material to the families?

This is a matter for the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. I understand that the
force has acted in accordance with its legal advice that voluntary disclosure of
material to the parties involved in the private prosecution should be deferred until the
CPS has completed their review of the proceedings.

Have you withheld any material from the Library?

We have not deposited material in the Library where there were overriding reasons
against disclosure, for instance because the persons concerned have asked us to
respect the confidentiality of the material provided. This applies in a very few cases.


NORMAN BETTISON

Will the Home Secretary intervene in the appointment of Norman Bettison as the
new Chief Constable of Merseyside in view of the allegations about his role
following the Hillsborough disaster?

The selection of Mr Bettison is entirely a matter for the Merseyside Police Authority.
I have no doubt that the Authority has given the utmost consideration to the selection
of the best candidate for the job.

If required

Mr Bettison was not on duty at Hillsborough and neither the Taylor Inquiry nor Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny made any criticism of him.


How can it be right for statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers to be
altered before being submitted as evidence?


::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
A number of statements were altered by the officers-concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions of the Director of Public Prosecutions.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
Wider policy aspects


Private prosecution
Will the DPP take over the private prosecution brought by the families against
former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Former Superintendent Murray?


That is a matter for the Director and the CPS. The CPS is still reviewing the case and
the submissions which have been made by the parties involved. The CPS will, of
course, consider the issues carefully.

If required

The options available to the CPS should it decide to intervene are to take over the case
and continue with it; or to take it over and discontinue it.

If the CPS decides not to intervene, the prosecution would remain with the private
prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.


Police Discipline
When will the Home Secretary introduce new police discipline procedures?
New procedures for dealing with unsatisfactory performance and for misconduct will
come into force on 1 April 1999.1 announced to the House in March this year that I
would implement most of the recommendations of the Home Affairs Committee’s
report into police disciplinary and complaints procedures.

I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be changed from
the criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible for officers to face both
criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also accepted the HAC's
recommendation that we should implement a system of 'fast track' dismissal for use in
the most serious cases.


What changes are you proposing to prevent officers escaping discipline by taking
ill-health retirement?

I intend to strengthen the procedures so that where accused officers claim they are
unable, through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in
their absence, with appropriate safeguards. Although ill-health retirement will be the
correct course in some cases, I am also concerned that the existing regulations should
be rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be
completed before any application for early retirement can be considered.




Inquests


:odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
Shouldn’t the inquest verdict be quashed if it is accepted that the police caused the
disaster?

That is a matter for the Attorney-General who has the power under S. 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988 to make, or give authority to an application to the High Court to
hold a fresh inquest and to quash the original verdict.

LJ Stuart-Smith found no basis to impugn the accidental death verdict or for the
Attorney-General to exercise his powers.

Counsel for the Family Support Group stated ‘... it is accepted, eight years and a h alf
years after the event, that it is impracticable and may be undesirable fo r fresh
inquests to be convened.’ It was argued, though, that the Courts should be invited to
quash the verdict of accidental death. LJ Stuart-Smith says that the effect of quashing
the verdict without substituting any other verdict would be the same as if the jury had
returned an open verdict and that is only appropriate where there is insufficient
evidence to record any other suggested conclusion. In practice, he says, there were two
alternative verdicts - unlawful killing or accidental death.


What action is being taken to implement changes to the inquest system to remove
the need for an inquest following a public inquiry?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. A Home Office Working Party,
published in March 1997 proposed to relieve coroners of the need to resume their
inquest after a public inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a
suitable legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government
intends to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so. The families of those who died would have been spared some
additional distress.



When does the Home Secretary expect to be able to provide the information
requested in my [Maria Eagle’s] Question of 21 May about what public funds
were provided in respect of commissioning and challenging expert evidence at
the Hillsborough inquiry?




::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
We have been examining the papers relating to the Taylor Inquiry to see what
information was kept at the time which would help answer the earlier Question more
fully. So far, we have not been able to locate the information requested but I shall
write to My hon. Friend if anything further is found.


COMPENSATION

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for
any hurt or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a
decision for the individuals concerned and the courts.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
BACKGROUND NOTE

The Home Secretary indicated when he announced the outcome of the Hillsborough
Scrutiny in February this year (Hansard extract attached) that he would place as much
as possible of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, including the
police statements in their original and amended form, in the Library of the House -
save where there were overriding reasons for doing otherwise. In response to a request
from Peter Kilfoyle, it was subsequently agreed by Ministers that copies of the police
statements would also be provided to the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


2.     Miss Eagle has been prominent in support of the Hillsborough families and
spoke in the adjournment debate on 8 May (see Hansard attached). The Family
Support Group complained on the day of the debate that a number of police
statements were missing from those already deposited in the Library.

3.      We undertook to make enquiries with South Yorkshire Police to ensure that
any statements which were missing would be placed in the Library and Mr Howarth
wrote to the Family Support Group (copy attached) following the debate to answer
each of the points which had been raised by the Group.

4.     A further 23 statements were deposited in the Library in mid-June and copied
to the Family Support Group. The Family Support Group has continued to raise
queries about the statements which it has received or which it claims may still be
missing. These inquiries have been directed to South Yorkshire Police for attention.

5.      Following the announcement on 29 June of the private prosecution against
Duckenfield and Murray, the South Yorkshire Police accepted advice from the Crown
Prosecution Service that it should desist from providing voluntary disclosure of
material to the parties involved in the proceedings until the outcome of the CPS
review of the case was known. The CPS concern was that disclosure might be
premature before the CPS had decided whether or not to take over and drop the
prosecution. We wrote to South Yorkshire Police on 1 September and again on 7
October to point out that the CPS advice should not affect their adherence to the
Home Secretary’s commitment to place copies of all police statements in the Library
of the House. South Yorkshire Police notified us on 14 October that they would
resume the release of police statements and we understand that a further batch of
about 14 statements was sent to the House of Commons Library on the same date. We
are in touch with the force to try to ensure that any outstanding queries about the
statements are resolved as quickly as possible.

6.       The other evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, not already in
the public domain, has also been placed in the Library, with the exception of
correspondence from Dr Stefan Popper, the Coroner, and Dr David Slater, the
pathologist, who have both withheld their consent to their written material being
released. Material from Benet Hytner QC, one of the families’ legal representatives at
the inquest, has also been withheld from the Library after legal advice that its contents
were potentially libellous and that it should not be released without consent from
former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. (There is little prospect of this being



::odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
forthcoming in view of the current legal proceedings.) Correspondence from Dr
David Williams, whose professional advice was sought in the course of the scrutiny,
has also been withheld because it is considered private to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

7.     The selection of Norman Bettison, currently an ACC in West Yorkshire, to be
the new Chief Constable of Merseyside has attracted attention recently from Maria
Eagle and the local media because of his involvement with the Hillsborough inquiry
when he was serving as a Chief Inspector with South Yorkshire Police. It has been
alleged that, as part of a unit set up in the aftermath of the disaster, he would have
been involved in the alteration of police statements and the dissemination of alleged
misinformation about the Liverpool supporters. Mr Bettison has issued a press
statement (copy attached) explaining his role in the inquiry. The decision to appoint
Mr Bettison rests with the Merseyside Police Authority.

8.     Maria Eagle also asked a Question in May (Hansard extract attached) about the
availability of public funds for commissioning and challenging expert evidence at the
Hillsborough and Stephen Lawrence Inquiries. We have been unable, as yet, to find
information about the costs of the original Taylor Inquiry, but the search continues.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90207# 1
