      THE     ROYAL      TOWN       PLANNING            INSTITUTE

                   planning;a n d football league g r o o d s

            A submission to the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor
                      into the Hillsborough disaster

                                  June 1989
     Introduction
1.   As a result of the Hillsborough tragedy on 15 April 1989, town planning
     issues have again been discussed on the sports pages of national
     newspapers. There have, in particular, been suggestions that Football
     League grounds in inner city areas should be replaced by new stadia on
     the edges of towns, and there has been speculation as to whether these
     could ever be given planning permission.

2.   Such issues are of course secondary to the identification of the cause
     of the disaster and the implementation of measures to ensure that it is
     never repeated.    Most grounds will remain where they are for the
     foreseeable future and need to be made as safe and as comfortable as
     possible. Nonetheless, there is clearly a case for new stadia to be
     developed and this paper attempts to put forward seme appropriate
     suggestions and guidelines.
3.   This is not, however, the first time that town planning issues have
     been raised in the context of league football. Over recent years there
     have been a number of proposals for the redevelopment of football
     grounds. These have sometimes been sensibly and constructively related
     to the provision of a new stadium elsewhere as at Southend and St.
     Johnstone. On other occasions (mainly, but not only, in London), they
     have amounted to no more than property speculation, with the interests
     of football and its supporters of only peripheral significance. This
     paper deals with this issue too.

     Ground Rules
4.   The Royal Town Planning Institute (which is the body responsible for
     the tewn planning profession) believes that, while each case is
     different and depends on local circumstances, seme basic principles
     should be established against which proposals both for the
     redevelopment of existing stadia and the development of new ones should
     be judged. To put it another way, there should be same Ground Rules.

5.   These are discussed under three headings:
     (a) Redevelopment of existing grounds.
     (b) Criteria for new stadia.
     (c) The need for new investment.
     (a) Redevelopment of existing grounds
6.   Football League grounds are vital centres of community pride; there is
     a history and tradition about many of them to which the community
     relates; there is an emotion attached to them which is felt even by
     people who never attend. They are used (even the less popular) by
     thousands of people - with thousands of others ready to attend during
     times of success.     They are often situated in inner city areas. This
     has disadvantages because of congestion, conflict with surrounding
     residential areas, and so on; but it also has advantages because these
     are places where there is a shortage of recreational, entertainment and
     cortrnunity facilities and where the loss of pride and community identity
     has led to such serious and expensive problems for the nation.
To move a football club frcm its traditional hate is not therefore
something which should be done lightly; it would substantially change
the nature of soccer (for better or worse); it is essential to be
sensitive to the views of supporters who are the most important
element of any club. The attraction of a neat and tidy relocation
solution might be out of tune with the feelings and commitment of those
most closely involved.

Grounds have the potential for much greater ccmmunity use.              In
preparing this submission, the Institute has consulted with the chief
planning officers for the districts of all 92 Football League clubs.
Many of them are very critical of clubs for failing to exploit these
possibilities to the full. They vrould like to see much more initiative
in this direction, including the continued investigation of artificial
surfaces. Football grounds often lie unused for long periods of time
vtfiich, especially in the inner city, is clearly a wasted opportunity.

Hie first ground rule therefore is that a Football League ground should
remain as such, and be inproved on its present site, unless there is a
better alternative location which is acceptable to supporters and which
is selected for good planning and safety reasons rather than financial
exploitation. It is particularly important to resist proposals for
redevelopment which do not lead to new facilities in better locations
(proposals of the kind which were ccmman a year or two ago).
Planning permission would be required for change of an existing ground
to any alternative use, other than open space or recreation, and in
speculative cases it should normally be expected that an application
vrnld be refused. However, the planning system as presently operated
may not always be sufficiently strong to mintain this position; the
Institute believes the issue is important enough to require Ministerial
clarification and support, perhaps in part of a Planning Policy
Guidance Note (PPG) from the Department of Environment for which the
Institute has already called on the protection of urban open space and
sports facilities.

Most grounds are privately owned, although seme are owned by local
authorities (which can be an advantage in helping to protect them on
behalf of the ccrrrnunity). In either case, Football League grounds are
in seme ways in a similar situation to many other ccmmunity and
recreational facilities, which often struggle financially. It is part
of the job of town planners to provide and protect these facilities.
That the land on which they stand may sometimes be more valuable if
used for another purpose does not provide any justification Whatsoever
for development leading to any of these facilities being lost.

There may be cases when seme part of a ground, or adjoining land, can
be developed for seme other use (such as housing, offices or shopping)
without prejudicing the future of the ground - indeed, it may help the
club.    This depends on local circumstances and detailed planning
considerations.   It should not, however, be accepted and supported
unless the development is in line with the normal planning policies for
the area.

Seme clubs may have raised loans or mortgages against the potential
value of their grounds for redevelopment, and this raises the question
of what happens in the historically rare event of a club going out of
business. There is a particular danger here in that there have been
              threats from potential developers deliberately to close down clubs, to
              allow grounds to fall into decay, and thus to force local authorities
              into acquiescence. This is clearly unacceptable, and the presumption
              should be that in the event of a club ceasing to exist the ground
              should continue to be used for recreational purposes.

            (b) Criteria far new stadia
        14. The Hillsborough disaster highlighted the relative lack of investment
            even in the best grounds. Many are badly located, often in residential
            areas, and cause serious problems of parking, noise and poor access
            and lack the rocm for expansion or improvement. In such cases the
            planned relocation of a ground to a more suitable location, with better
            access and less effect on neighbours, would obviously be sensible
            provided it was acceptable to supporters.       Redevelopment could be
            acceptable (subject to normal planning considerations) on the vacated
            site in order to assist in financing the new facilities.

flfe.   15. This, of course, is a scmewhat hit and miss solution to theproblem of
            replacing unsafe or obsolete facilities.   If a club happens to be in an
            area of high land values, and if development satisfies planning
            criteria, then finance frcm redevelopment might help fund a new
            ground; but if - by pure chance - the location lacks these advantages
            then the opportunity does not arise.      The replacement offacilities
            should not depend on such randan factors.
        16. When relocation is possible, and acceptable, then town planners should
            assist in finding and helping to develop new sites. This will not be
            nearly so easy as the press and other conmentators have implied - not
            because of a lack of cooperation fron planners, but because it can be
            anticipated that significant and vocal objections may be raised frcm
            any residents in the vicinity of the proposed new location. Every
            case will be different - every situation unique - but the following
            ground rules may be helpful.
        17. Favourable consideration should be given to proposals for new stadia,
            including sites in the green belt or other open areas, provided that:-

              (i) A real and demonstrable improvement in facilities is achieved.

              (ii) The old location either caused problems to local residents or was
                   unsafe and incapable of adequate improvement.

              (iii)The new location does not cause significant damage to the amenity
                   of local residents.
              (iv) The new site is readily accessible by both public and private
                   transport and has ample car parking facilities.

              (c) The need far investment
        18.   It is clear that much greater investment is required in Football
              League grounds, and that most clubs will be unable to provide or secure
              the necessary finance. Additional sources of investment are needed.
              The most premising avenue seems to be for this to cone frcm the
              football pools levy (the Government reducing its. share of this revenue
              in order to enable stadium improvements to be financed).
19. The very much higher standard of many European football grounds is
    often due to municipal or central government investment and there is no
    logical reason why a similar approach should not be taken here. The
    state of football grounds is symptcnatic of a general lack of
    investment in infrastructure and public facilities in Great Britain
    over a long period of time - it is about time we began to renew the
    ageing fabric of society, and we should not be ashamed of allowing
    public investment to play a part.
    Conclusions
20. These ground rules are designed to deal with two situations. Those
    when Football League grounds are threatened by property speculation and
    those when improved facilities are to be provided by relocation.
21. In the first case, the continuing use of the grounds should be
    protected, and the Institute calls upon the Secretary of State for the
    Environment (who is the Minister responsible for both sport and the
    town planning system) to indicate that he:

     (i) Accepts this principle - which is no more than a statement of
         what should be normal planning practice;

     (ii) Will take it into account in the event of any planning inquiries
          being required, and

     (iii)Accepts that it is in the wider public interest for football
          grounds to be safeguarded and protected so far as is reasonably
          possible.

22. Football League Clubs should give much more attention to the conmunity
    use of existing grounds.

23. In the second case, the Institute hopes (without minimising the likely
    difficulty of funding new sites) that the town planning system can be a
    positive force for improvement and that, subject to the ground rules
    set out in this paper, town planners can assist with relocation
    proposals. The Institute would be willing to assist in this process if
    it would be thought to be helpful.

24. In both cases the Institute - in line with the normal practice of
    taking public views into account in the reaching of planning decisions
    - urges that the views of football club supporters, whose interest in
    these matters has long been given too little prominence, should be
    paramount.



RTPI/F8
CJS/DJR/GMD
12 June 1989
