          p s o .vh/simon/Whitmore


      3/    .                                                            Parliament Street
  0          HM Treasury                                                 London SW1P 3AG
                                                                         Telephone 01 270
                                                                           e.   M* UcJiitfS
                                    S z           L J                           Ajs
                                                                                IUs   CrcuJ>
Sir Peter Middleton GCB
Permanent Secretary                              ~Li                            Ais
                                                                                to# <JUt U0-
                                                                               <U.r AA-jSv C^J-Kj
                                                                     21 April 1989
      Sir Clive Whitmore GCB               cvo
      Permanent Secretary                                                              A>u/ T u Tk j u ,
      Home Office
      Queen A n n e 's Gate                                                            A-tv tyddLfifck.
      LONDON SW1
*                                                                                      /Uv U c J & s
                                                                                           h^y ^jLaJJjKjk/
                                                             o   r

                                                        tr                             AM Li d    x y /m
      I was present at Hillsborough on Saturday.  It occurred to me
      that you might like to have some impressions, confined to what I
      saw and felt at the time.

      I was at the ground from about 12.15 onwards.   But until about
      2.40pm I was having lunch and so could see very little. My seat
      was in the Directors Box, immediately adjacent to the press - in
      the stand, but towards the Leppings Lane side of the ground.

      It was immediately apparent that all sections of the Leppings
      Lane end were pretty full. There was no sign of trouble, but the
      crowd there was weaving up and down. The ground as a whole did
      not look completely full; there were spare seats in the stand
      opposite,  and   the terraces looked comfortable. The same was
      true of the Kop which housed the Nottingham Forest supporters.
      As soon as the match started, the fluidity of the mass of
      spectators at the Leppings Lane end, did look alarming. There
      was a continuation of the earlier motion, together with great
      forward thrusts which appeared at the time to be associated with
      the movement of play towards that end of the ground.  So when the
      first spectators came on the pitch - and the police moved over to
      that end of the ground - it looked like an attempt to avoid
      overcrowding.   It was some time later that it became apparent
      that people were seriously hurt; even from my good vantage point
      and with the opportunity to talk to the broadcasters next to me.
      Part of the reason for this was that not all those who spilled on
      the pitch were well behaved. The great majority were, but some
      were haranguing the Nottingham supporters in the terraces and
      others attempted to move to the opposite end of the pitch. There
      was a considerable melee round the Liverpool goal.




                      Switchboard 01 270 3000      Fax 01 270 5653         Telex 9413704
    p s o .vh/s imon/Whitmore


The attempt by some spectators to climb up to the stand

•
contributed to this general impression of mildly disorderly
conduct due to overcrowding.

From where I was observing things,    it seemed that once the
tragedy had occurred, things inside the ground were handled well.
The police kept very calm. They began to clear the central part
of the Leppings Lane end. And they moved calmly and deliberately
to deal with any difficult incidents. Eventually they formed a
line across the pitch through which those on rescue missions
could pass freely.     The Nottingham supporters behaved with
restraint.   They did not know for some time that it was not just
crowd trouble from Liverpool supporters. Yet they waited with
patience, punctuated by isolated bouts of chanting - which did
not cause any difficulties that the police presence was not more
than sufficient to deal with.

There   were    no   announcements - or  at    least   none    that
one could hear - for a long time. I felt that this worked quite
well.   If an impression had been given that the match was to be
abandoned after a short time there could have been trouble both
inside and outside the ground. People would have left instantly
(as they did, despite requests to stay in place when the match
was finally abandoned). It goes without saying that they could
not have been locked in the ground. As it was the vast crowd
was kept in place,      simmering down, coming to accept that the
match could not be played and increasinglyrealising what had
happened.    Dalglish's short announcement    was very timely:   it
simply asked everyone to co-operate with the police and the
announcement abandoning the match was very well done - laying
stress, as it did, on people retaining their tickets.   So though
one is always anxious for information on these occasions, I doubt
whether more announcements would have helped, and they could have
been dangerous unless they had been very well judged indeed.
In my view this sort of event has to be regarded as a natural
disaster - not in the sense that it could         not have been
prevented,  but because crowds of this size have the potential to
cause loss of life in many ways. A certain amount of imagination
and enterprise is always needed to deal with such disasters if
they occur.  I did not really see how the rescue was being
organised;   but there was no shortage of helpers for the police
and ambulance and fire services. Nor were they hindered at all
once on the pitch.

I stayed behind on the ground when most of the crowd had gone,
leaving at about 5pm, so there is nothing else worth adding that
will not have been better described by the television cameras.




                                           PETER MIDDLETON
<5 '




   27 O T 8 9
