NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 13 MARCH 1991


POLICING OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS


Present:       Home Secretary              Mr Denis Howell MP
               Lord Ferrers                Mr Joe Ashton MP
               Mr Goddard                  Mr Robin Corbett MP
               Mr Kornicki                 Mr John Greenway MP
               Mrs Posen                   Miss Kate Hoey MP
               Mr Grantham                 Mr Tom Pendry MP
               Mr Pugh


       The meeting was held at the request of Mr Howell to discuss the policing of
football grounds.

       Mr Howell, on behalf of the delegation, said that although the behaviour of
 ootball crowds had improved significantly, the demands made by police forces on
football clubs were increasingly unreasonable. The charges for policing had gone up by
some 46% over the previous 12 months, following a 15% increase in the previous year.
At the same time, the police were seeking to impose more severe restrictions about
where and when matches should be played.               These restrictions often seemed
disproportionate to the likelihood of trouble at the games in question. The police also
appeared to be using threats to withhold safety certificates as a means to compel clubs
to observe the restrictions which they wished to impose. The Football Licensing
Authority should have its responsibilities extended to include liaison between ACPO and
the football authorities and arbitration in cases of dispute. There should also be greater
encouragement for the training of stewards, which would relieve the burden on police
forces and reduce costs to clubs: the hourly cost of a steward was about one-quarter
that of a police officer. The Football Trust had indicated that they would be willing to
provide financial support for increased training programmes.

3.     Mr Ashton said that there were enormous inconsistencies in the charges imposed
by the 38 different forces involved in the policing of football grounds: in his area,
Halifax were required to pay 40 pence per spectator, while Scunthorpe paid only five
pence. Chief Constables often seemed to make arbitrary decisions about the number
of officers at matches and the level of charges per officer. There was a need for the
FLA to arbitrate and to ensure consistency.

4.      Mr Greenway said that the current arrangements for charging seemed to be
increasing confrontation between police forces and football clubs. Although it was
necessary for the police to retain operational control over the numbers of officers at
a game, this left the clubs with little or no control over the level of charges. It was
essential to devise a formula which would encourage clubs to have sufficient stewards
to maintain safe control of crowds, while acknowledging the right of Chief Constables
ultimately to decide the number of police officers present. The National Football
Intelligence Unit, as well as the Football Licensing Authority, might have a bigger role
in co-ordination between the police and the football authorities. This would help to
avoid confrontation over demands being made by ACPO which seemed unreasonable to
the football authorities: for example, ACPO had suggested th at no more than one
replay should be permitted for any fixture in a Cup competition.

                                            1.
5.     In response, the Home Secretary acknowledged the big improvements in the
behaviour of football crowds, and hoped that these improvements would be maintained.
However, Home Office policy for all police services was to move towards realistic
levels of charging wherever possible. There were outstanding issues about how levels
of policing should be determined and how the charges should be levied, but any
arrangement would have to allow the Chief Constable to retain the ultimate discretion
over operational m atters. He agreed that there might be more scope for encouraging
consistency of approach between the forces involved, but he was not convinced, and nor
was Lord Ferrers, that this responsibility should be given to the FLA. There might be
other mechanisms which would be more appropriate or effective. He agreed also that
more use should be made of stewards at grounds wherever possible, and he would
consider how best police forces could be encouraged to provide more training for
stewards.

6.     After the delegation had left, the Home Secretary asked officials to prepare
proposals to achieve greater consistency of approach between forces and encouraged:hg
provision of more training for stewards. (Mr Goddard for action, please). The
Secretary also agreed th at we should seek to persuade the business managers to asi. •
the passage of Sir John Wheeler's Football Offences Bill after Easter. (I have asked Mr
Kinney to pursue this in the first instance).




Private Office                                       P PUGH
13 March 1991                                    Private Secretary

c.c.   Mr Narey
       Mr Burns
       Mr Boys Smith
       Mr Goddard
       Mr Addison
       McX o gbill
       Mr Bolton
       Miss Goose
       Mr Moorey
       Mr Kinney
       Mr Kerpel
       Mr Grantham
