                         39                 & C tttrf-D ' J   (n/W C rT'C^

                                                 fb mafic.
                                    P. WELLS
                                                                t? ie r0 t T ft-

The second ambulance, it was never intended that that should
be able to get 6n to the pitch, was it? - A. No, it was taken
round that side for any casualties that side.

That happened to appear at the South side.       £3   that it? - A.
Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, thank you very much.             Please
resume your holiday.

      THE WITNESS:    Thank you.

      MR. COLLINS:  I have no doubt we can ask the St. John's
Ambulance people in Sheffield to put in writing their
recommendations?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, or their Chief Commander.

      MR. COLLINS:  I was looking at the letter heading.
Perhaps we could ask those in charge to submit in writing
a list of what equipment they consider to be helpful.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, thank you.


      '“ •'v POL'ICS-’COHSTABIiE-TREVCR--.5-ICHARD Cal-led
                           .•4,♦. **7      .....
                     Examined by MR. COLLINS:
                l
 Yes, it is Trevor Bichard? - A. Yes.
;*              j
 Now you were cin duty at the ground in the Control Room on
 the day in question.      How long, had you done this sort of
 duty, or how often had you done this sort of duty? - A. Every
 home match^'for over a season.

Every match .        A. In relation to the video duties, sir?

Well no, duties in the Control Room? - A. Over a fulL season,
I think it was September 1987 when I took over those
specific duties.

And ever since then you have worked in the Control Room at
football matqhes, have you? - A. I have sir, yes.

I imagine yo ul don't necessarily always do the same thing,
or do you? - A. My specific duty is in relation to the videos
sir.

tlow just looking at the statement that you nave provided us
with, it is prefaced with what appear to be notes with times?
- A. Initially I prepared sort of a log system to assist me
putting together a statement really just to gather ray thought
into some kind of sequence.

 Indeed, I just wanted to ask you when you made that? - A. I
 commenced making the notes on the Sigig-tv morning after the
 events had taken place.
                                   T. BICHARD


I think in fact, when one looks at it, some of your timings
are a little bit out. They were based, were they, partly
on memory and partly on access to a log? - A. They were
purely memory.  I have established since then that memories
are not that good.

I think you are out by five or ten minutes on occasions, are
you not? - A. I believe sometimes even more.




                     /Q.   You have also, I think
    f-                                41


                                                       T.   BICHARD


         Q. You have also, I think, been a spectator at Hillsborough
            from time to time;  is that right?   A.    A very keen
            follower of Sheffield Wednesday, yes, sir.

         Q. And you have, have you, stood on the teriaces of both ends?
            A.   I have over the years, yes, sir.

         Q. I imagine more usually  at the Kop end if you are a keen
6           Wednesday supporter?    A. The opposite, leppings   Lane
            end, because it tended to be more quieter.

         Q. I see.  Have you ever been in the Leppings Lane end in a
            big crowd?   A. Semi-Final match, Arsenal -v- Stoke some
            years ago.

         Q.   Was that when the pens were in operation or before the
                  ------------
              p e n     a      . I would say it was before the pens.   I was
              actually in the tunnel trying to watch the match over the
              heads of people an that specific occasion.       I couldn't
              actually get into the area of the-terrace. -

         Q.    So it was as bad as that then?     A.        It was, sir,   yes.

         Q.   Anyway, I think you were al&o concerne_d, were you not,
D             as the man responsible for the use of the video system,
              about the positioning   of th-e-cameras?  A. Yes, sir, i
              that is correct..  I had some influence over the way the
              system was being developed. •

          Q. Indeed, I think you had decided that there was a better
            ‘ position for the camera to look at the Leppings Lane turn­
E             stiles than that which existed?   A.    Yes.  The initial
              system was based on command and control and overseeing of
              the ground and surrounding areas.    After attending a
              course at-Greater Manchester Police and in conjunction with
         I    a survey by the Home Office it was decided that the camera
              positions could be put to better use either by buying new
              lenses to increase the power or by repositioning and Leppings
              Lane was certainly one that was considered to be inadequate.

          Q. What was the inadequacy as it stood at the time that was
             concerning you?   A.   The basic problem is that the siting
             of the camera is, in fact, on the roof area of the West Stand
             and the distance between the camera and the actual turnstiles
             is lost -- the lense distance that is available is lost,
             so by moving it from that position to immediately above
             the turnstiles, you increase the shot that you get of the
             turnstile area and your view down Leppings Lane in both
             directions.

          Q. Speaking from recollection, your camera shows a reasonable
             view of Gate C and the Turnstiles A-G and about half, or a
             little less than half, of the concourse inside;  is that
             right?   A.   That is correct, sip, yes.

H         Q. And you can also get Gate A?   A.   1he view that you actually
             get, the full view of Gate C, Gate 8 is actually out of view
             because of the alignment of the camera, and the same with
                                                   267
*                              42


                                                    T.   BICHARD


      Gate A - that is the alignment of the camera puts it out
      of view.

Q.     Which camera was itthat was used to go in on Gate             A?
      A.   It would be the camera on Leppings Lanfe.

Q.     So the same camera?   A.   It is the same camera;  it is
      just that its position is high up and directly in line
      with the top of the doors and therefore you cannot actually
      see the gate, you see the tcpsection to it.

Q. Gate A you can see just inside the gate, can you not?
   A.   You can see into the rear area heaiding towards the
   rear of the Stand.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This camera is on the south
^ c o r n e r of the West Stand, is it?

           MR. COLLINS:   I think, it is on the model, where the
      Usher is pointing.-

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, that is it.          That is the
      one?     A.   That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.           MR. COLLINS:      There is also a Club camera, is there
      not , 'which -hasr-a view'ofr, the-'LeppingsnLane 'turnstilea? •
      A.     I do know that there are Club'cameras-but I have
      not' really been involved in that system at all; it is
      purely a Club system.

Q‘.,/The purpose of the Police system is basically what?
    What is it there for?    A.   Command and control initially
    bu-t we are now going into areas of evidence-gathering,
    and I would say that the trend is moving into that field.

^     Is that what the close-up is really for?           A.        That's right,
      sir, yes.

Q. So you can zoom in on an individual if there is a trouble­
   maker?   A.   That's right.    People sometimes misunderstand
   the video system that you : ®e quite capable of identifying
   somebody from a picture just by enlarging it but, in fact,
   if you look at your television screen and have more than
   six heads and shoulders on it, you will not be able to
   get sufficient identification from that, and therefore
   you either have to increase the power of your lense or
   move your camera nearer to the people you want to take
   a picture of.

    Q. Apart from the camera that looks over the turnstiles you
       have, I think, a camera which looks over the West terracing?
       A.   That is correct, yes.

    Q. Where is that positioned?   A. . It is situated just to the
       left-hand side of the Control Box and near to the score- -
       board.
    Q. Again, roughly where the Usher is painting?            A.      That is
       tne position, yes, sir.
                                           T.   BICHARD


We have heard that on the day in question there was something
wrong with that one;  is that correct?   A.   For a number
of weeks we have had difficulty with the camera and they
have been looking into having the camera replaced or
improvements made.   In fact, on the day when I arrived
at the ground Mr. Roger Halsworth, who is the Technical
Officer for the Club, was in fact working on that camera
to try and upgrade the picture that we were actually
getting.

What was the trouble?   A.   When the system had been
switched on, after an amount of time, the picture would go
white - you would lose actually what you could see.    We
believed initially it was in relation to the lighting inside
the ground but we seem to think that it may be a problem
with the electrical supply to that camera.

What was the effect of that on the day in relation to your
ability to look properly at the terraces, the West..terraces?
A.   On that particular day, the picture had been -- t h e -
quality had been improved.    It was not up to mark but it
was a lot better than it had been.     We were getting
pictures, that is the besc way of describing it.

Could you zoom in in the normal way on to the terrsc-es if
you"wanted--to? ^ 'A i - CrTh§v:actGa3Mc?0iitrol-'facilities were !
fully available. ’r,‘                    .......

 What I am getting at is this, would it have been possible,
.if you- were afraid, for example, that they were becoming
 overcrowded, could you take a close-up with that camera?
 A.    You can move ----     A close-up is available to move
 into those centre two pens-.   However, because of its
 position and angle, it 'does give you a false impressio-n about
 the crowd~*that is in there'.  It is quite low down and it
 is set at 90 degrees to the pens rather than looking face
 on-

So what is the falsity of the impression?   Does it show it
fuller than it really is or emptier, or what?   A.   It is
just the illusion.   The picture creates a bit of an illusion
about the crowd"that is in there.   You may be looking at
somebody who is stood in the far corner of Pen 3 and it may
give you the impression that in fact he is stood in the
far corner of Pen 4.   It is because of the angle of the
camera.

I follow    that but we know that those pens did          become over­
crowded.      A. Yes, sir.

Is theresomething in the positioning of that camera which
means that itis more difficult to assess that?    A.   The
physical position it is in is difficult to assess that the
pens would be getting overcrowded.

Is there anywhere else where you think the camera could be
v/hich would improve on that?  A.   That is available?
Really you are looking at a position directly in front of
the terraces.
                                        269
*                                   44
»

                                                                  T.   BICHARD


Q. I can see that that is impractical, is it not?   A.   That's
   right, yes.   You could mount it on the roof of the Kop
   but, again, you are limited by finance and the amount of
   the cost of buying a lense that would be capable of doing
   that.

Q. Because it would have to be right at the other end of the
   ground.   A.   The opposite end of the ground, yes, sir.

Q. It would need a very powerful Jer.se, I suppose?  A.  It
   would, indeed, and the more powerful the lense, the bigger
   the cost.

Q.             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You have got a camera on the
          middle of the South Stand, have you not?   A.   That is
          correct.

f    \    And that does not get straight in front of the terraces.
          A.   It does provide a b_etter angled view of it.

Q. And you        can zoom on that, -can you? ' A.               You can, yes,
          si.r.
Q. So what is that one normally used for?                        A.     That-is a
   coloured system.             The idea behind that was that you had
   a g« ne ra-1’-v i-ew.-a ro'QtitcL.   .g*o-y.rvd; a.n;d *itv w ajs::tn as s is t w ith
   colour of clothing should you identify somebody who had
   committed an offence.              It does not provide s close-a*'
   picture as the one that is mounted on Leppings Lane itself.

    Q.-        MR. COLLINS:   I do not think I need go through the
          detail of the build-up in the early part of the day but
         -I think you were concerned at one stage in the earlier
          afternoon, that is between half past one and two-, with
          potential^fouble on the Kop because of a small area of
          Liverpool supporters that had had to be set aside for
          them on the Kop?   A.   That's right.   Plans had
          been made to move any Liverpool supporters there into
          the corner.

    Q. And you were concentrating on that for a time, were you?
       A.   I was.   Several arrests had been made.   Numbers of
       Officers had gone from the Kop and obviously concern about
       being sufficiently supervised.

    Q. Incidentally, apart from the video, did you have any radio
       responsibility?    A.   On normal match duties, I monitor
       VHF radio which is the Operations Room.    Generally speaking,
       it is purely a monitoring job that I carry out.    I do not
       usually .get involved in using the actual set.

    Q. Did you have that same responsibility on this match?
       A.   I did, sir, yes.

    Q. Which meant that you would listen to see whether there
       were any relevant messages coming through the VHF, is that
       right?   A.   That's right, yes, sir.

                                                  270
*                              42
»

                                                    T.   BICHARD


     Gate A - that is the alignment of the camera puts it out
     of view.

Q. Which camera was it that was used to go in on Gate A?
   A.  It would be thecamera on Leppings Lanfc.

Q. So the same camera?      A. It is the same camera; it is
   just that its position is high up and directly in line
   with the top of the   doors and therefore you cannot actually
   see the gate, you see thetcp section to it.

Q. Gate A you can see just inside the gate, can you not?
   A.   You can see into the rear area heading towards the
   rear of the Stand.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This camera is on the south
     corner of the West Stand, is it?

          M R . COLLINS: I think.it is on the model, where the
     Usher is pointing.-

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, that is it.          That is the
     one?     A.    That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:    There is also a Club camera, is there
     not, ■whichrhasc-a view' ofr= the -'UepptngscLane-’turnstileiS? •
     A.    I do know that thebe are       Club'cameras but I have
     not' really been involved in-that system at all; it is
     purely a Club system.

Q./The purpose of the Police system is basically what?
   What is it there for?    A.   Command and control initially
   bu-t we are now going into areas of evidence-gathering,
   and I would say that the trend is moving into that field.

IT. Is that what the close-up is really for?             A.    That's right,
    sir, yes.

Q. So you can zoom in on an individual if there is a trouble­
   maker?   A.    That's right.    People sometimes misunderstand
   the video system that you : ace quite capable of identifying
   somebody from a picture just by enlarging it but, in fact,
   if you look at your television screen and have more than
   six heads and shoulders on it, you will not be able to
   get sufficient identification from that, and therefore
   you either have to increase the power of your lense or
   move your camera nearer to the people you want to take
   a picture of.

Q. Apart from the camera that looks over the turnstiles you
   have, I think, a camera which looks over the West terracing?
   A.   That is correct, yes.

Q. Where is that positioned?   A.   It is situated just to.the
   left-hand side of the Control Box and near to the score- -
   board.
Q. Again, roughly where the Usher is pointing? . A..               That is
   tne position, yes, sir.
                                            T.   BICHARD


We have heard that on the day in question there was something
wrong with that one;  is that correct?   A.   For a number
of weeks we have had difficulty with the camera and they
have been looking into having the camera replaced or
improvements made.   In fact, on the day when I arrived
at the ground Mr. Roger Halsworth, who is the Technical
Officer for the Club, was in fact working on that camera
to try and upgrade the picture that we were actually
getting.

What was the trouble?   A.   When the system had been
switched on, after an amount of time, the picture would go
white - you would lose actually what you could see.    We
believed initially it was in relation to the lighting inside
the ground but we seem to think that it may be a problem
with the electrical supply to that camera.

What was the effect of that on the day in relation toyour
ability to look properly at the terraces, the West ..terraces?
A.   On that particular day, the'picture- had been — the--
quality had .been improved.   It was not up to mark but it
was a lot better than it had been.     We were getting
pictures, that is the besc way of describing it.

Could you zoom in in the normal way on to the terraces if
y'ou'xanted.--to? '-Ai - ‘--Thi-.^actQai !ddritrol-;facilities‘were :
fully ava-ilable. ’M'                      .......

 What I am getting at is this, would it have been possible,
#if you were afraid, for example, that they were becoming
 overcrowded, could you take a close-up with that camera?
 A.   You can move ----      A close-up is available to move
 into those centre two pens-.    However, because of its
 position and angle, it 'does give you a false impression about
 the crowd-*that is in there'. ' It is quite low down and it
 is set at 90 degrees to the pens rather than looking face
 on.

So what is the falsity of the impression?   Does it show it
fuller than it really is or emptier, or what?   A.   It is
just the illusion.   The picture creates a bit of an illusion
about the crowd that is in there.   You may be looking at
somebody who is stood in the far corner of Pen 3 and it may
give you the impression that in fact he is stood in the
far corner of Pen 4.   It is because of the angle of the
camera.

I follow     that but we know       that those pens        didbecomeover­
crowded.       A. Yes, sir.

Is theresomething in the positioning of that camera which
means that it is more difficult to assess that?   A.   The
physical position it is in is difficult to assess that the
pens would be getting overcrowded.

Is there anywhere else where you think the camera could be
v/hich would improve on that?  A.   That is available?
Really you are looking at a position directly in front of
the terraces.                     269
*                                   44
*

                                                               T.   BICHARD


Q. I can see that that is impractical, is it not?   A.   That's
   right, yes.   You could mount it on the roof of the Kop
   but, again, you are limited by finance and the amount of
   the cost of buying a lense that would be capable of doing
   that.

Q. Because it would have to be right at the other end of the
   ground.   A.   The opposite end of the ground, yes, sir.

Q. It would need a vary powerful lense, I suppose?   A.  It
   would, indeed, and the more powerful the lense, the bigger
   the cost.

Q.             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You have got a camera on the
          middle of the South Stand, have you not?   A.   That is
          correct.

          And that does not get straight in front of the terraces.
          A.   It does p r o vi de a bette r angled view of it.

Q. And you         can zoom bn that, -can you? ‘ A.           You can, yes,
   sir.

    Q. So what is that one normally used for?                  A.     That-is a
       coloured system.        The idea behind that was that you had
       a general-vi-^W/aroTiri^,.iJaerigtoy.rvd; ■ainti -it: vva.sv to ascist with
       colour of clothing should you identify somebody who had
       committed an offence.          It does not provide sb close a*'
       picture as the one that is mounted on Leppings Lane itself.

    Q.-      MR. COLLINS:   . I do not think I need go through the
        detail of the build-up in the early part of the day but
       •I think y.ou were concerned at one stage in the earlier
        afternoon, that is between half past one and two; with
        potential.Jirouble on the Kop because of a small area of
        Liverpool supporters that had had to be set aside for
        them on the Kop?    A.    That's right.   Plans had
        been made to move any Liverpool supporters there into
        the corner.

    Q. And you were concentrating on that for a time, were you?
       A.   I was.   Several arrests had been made.   Numbers of
       Officers had gone from the Kop and obviously concern about
       being sufficiently supervised.

    Q. Incidentally, apart from the video, did you have any radio
       responsibility?   A.   On normal match duties, I monitor
       VHF radio which is the Operations Room.   Generally speaking,
       it is purely a monitoring job that I carry out.   I do not
       usually get involved in using the actual set.

    Q. Did you have that same responsibility oh this match?
       A.   I did, sir, yes.

    Q. Which meant that you would listen to see whether there
       were any relevant messages coming through the VHF, is that
       right?   A.   That's right, yes, sir.

                                                270
                                                       T.   BICHARD


Would those normally be in relation to traffic and that
sort of thing or what?   A.   It can be across the board.
Generally speaking, it is traffic control but also incidents
of public order that are reported on the 999 system would
go through to headquarters.

For example, if there was a major hold-up on the roads
which meant that it was likely that a. large number of fans
were going to be late, is that something which would come
through the VHF?   A.   Yes, that's right, sir.

Did that happen on the 1987 match or were you not there
then?   A.   I was working on the 1987 match.    I believe
they had problems on the Stocksbridge area.

We know that the kick-off was delayed because of road
problems.   Can you remember anything about that at all?
A.   I don't remember it being delayed at all, actually.

I think-    we were told that it was delayed for 15 minutes,
b-yt. you   rem-ember nothing.    As I say, if there had been that
sort of     a problem, you would have expected that to come
through     the VHF?    A.    It would, sir, yes.

.And nothing came through the VHF'*of any relevance in relation
 to faas. arri.ying-late?^^^.;..... ..{\ans,.f:rora NQttingham.,.yes. . ;
 They had -pr tableaus pari way 'on thg Ml.with, the routes that
 they had l4id out for access to the ground but nothing in
 relation to the Liverpool side.

"And it seems that the-Nottingham problems resolved themselves
 because they were all in effectively by kick-off?    A.  Yes,
 the problems -were seen to be solved quite early on.
                          *<
I think again, some time about quarter to twenty past two
when Mr. 3¥ckson was in the Control Box you were asked to
look at a particular spectator who was misbehaving himself.
A.   That is right, yes, sir.

That was in the pen immediately below the Control Box;                is
that right?   A.   That's right, yes, sir.

And at about that time, again about quarter past two, was
there some discussion in the Control Room about the lack
of Liverpool fans?   A.   Yes, we did have a general --
Everybody passed comment about the spaces that were available
in the seats that were set aside for the Liverpool supporters

 Were you aware of the deterioriation of the radio reception?
 A.   Yes.   It appeared that one or two people had made
 complaints of poor radio reception but it didn't seem to
 be a complete blanket problem and one would assume that
 it may be just the Individuals were using the radios
 incorrectly.

 At about half past two I think you *ere aware, were you not,
 because everyone's attention was drawn to the build-up of
 crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles?   A..  That's

                                       271
                           46


                                               T.   BICHARD


    right.   I in fact switched the video system to record what
    was the scene outside Leppings Lane when an instruction
    came in for Leppings Lane to be closed.




B




D




E




                                    /In your p.xperience, was this.




H
                                        272
                           47



                                                    T. BICHARD

Q. In your experience was this a larger build-up than you
   had seen at matches or .... - A. I had only seen similar
   numbers at that stage before when a League match,
   Manchester United, came and we had an arrival of perhaps
   25 coaches all at one time and that would be a similar
   number as was at the Leppings Lane at 2.30.

Q. Can you remember how long that took them to get that
   number through? - A. Not offhand, no.

Q. On that occasion they all arrived at once but were there
   others arriving to build up on them, as it were, or was
   it just that one off effectively? - A. No, it was a one off
   effectively, the coaches arriving at the same tine.

Q. Yes.  On this occasion of course you knew that therewere
   fans still coming in behind, I suppose? - A. Began to become
   aware as I looked down Leppings Lane and carried out a
   view there that there are still foot passengers making
   their way towards the ground.             ... "

Q. Did you form any views about whether that number was
   likely to get through before kick-off? - A. I felt quite
   confident that they would get through.

Q. Hew far up Leppings Lane could you.see with your camera?
   - A. The- camera provides a view right along Leppings Lane
   until it in fact bends to the right-hand side heading
   towards Penis tone Road.

Q.-'Sb how far approximately is that up Leppings Lane?    Can
    you help? - A. Maybe 250/300 yards.

 0. Presumably if you use the zoom' facility you can focus on
A   Leppings Lane and see at least for that distance the
    numbers coming down Leppings Lane? - A. Again, when you
    are using your zoom facility the picture that you are
    getting at its extreme is a rather large and general one.
   *
Q. I follow that* but it gives you an idea, I imagine, of
   the sort of numbers coming down, does it not? - A. Yes.

 0.. Did anyone ask you to make that check to try to assess
     the sort of numbers that were still coming d o w n Leppings
     Lane as the mass of people built up at the turnstiles?
     - A. After I had switched the camera system to take the
     views of Leppings Lane at 2.30 I went along Leppings Lane
     to look at the crowd as it was moving along. Yes, there
     we re foot passengers but it did not seen an exaggerated
     number at that time.

 0. Did anyone suggest that you might keep an eye on the
    numbers coning down Leppings Lane and, indeed, the
    numbers outside the turnstile so that you could monitor .
    the build-up? - A. I was directed to watch the circumstances


                                   273
                               48



                                                       T. BICHARD

        that were developing at the turnstiles rather than what
        was happening in Leppings Lane. Obviously the larger
        number were around the turnstiles.

     Q. I follow that, but did it not occur to you or to anyone
        that the two should not be looked at in isolation because
        the more you have coming down the worse the problem is
        going to get, is not it? - A. I can appreciate that point
B       but speaking for myself my interest was directed at the
        people around the turnstile area.

     Q. It did not get better any way, did it, as minutes went by?
        - A. Certainly not, no.

     Q. Indeed, it got worse? - A. Yes, it did.

    ttQ. Did you volunteer to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield or
         anyone that the position was getting worse? - A. At the
         time that this was happening Chief Superintendent
         Duckenfield was-stood just -in front o-f my-position
         on the monitors.     -

     Q, So he could see them? - A. So he was looking up at the
        monitor we were loplcing at and we were discussing the
D       general situation together.

     0. What was the'discussion as' far.as you can recall?
         Obviously do not expect you to remember exact words.
         - A. The matters we were seeing, particularly
         individual events, was in relation to a mounted Officer
       / who seemed to be struggling with crowds who were pushing
E        his horse around.

      Q. It must have been fair-ly obvious, surely, *that the crowd
     k   was getting worse rather than better? - A. It was obvious
         that the“*crowd was building up, yes.

      Q. Was anything said as time went on that you can remember
         about possible delay of kick-off? - A. A conversation
         did take place between Mr. Duckenfield, Mr. Murray,
         possibly whoever else was in the control at that time
         and I remember Mr. Murray saying that it was not our
         policy to delay the kick-off for people who had just
         arrived late at the ground.  Somebody else threw into
         that conversation if there had been a problem on the
         motorway or roadworks the situation is different.

      Q. So it was your understanding - I appreciate it is not
         your decision. - A. Yes.

      Q. Senior Officers.  It was your understanding, was it,
         that because the fans were choosing to arrive late
         then there was no question of deferring kick-off? - A.
         Yes.  I think the situation is if fans become aware
         that by coming late kick-off will be delayed they will
H
                                      274
%
                               49


                                                       T. BICHARD

      continue to coae late.

0. Yes, I see.  Now again at about this time between 2.30,
   2.40, that sort of period, were you aware of the civilian
   radio communications officer coining to deal with the
   radio? - A. Yes, he did come in and commence work on
   the set which is below the desk in front of me.

Q. We have heard Sergeant Goddard tell us about that and
   I am hot going to ask you to go over the same ground.
   Did there cone a time again shortly after or about
   this tine that you heard something to do with the gates
   over the radio? ~ A. That is right. Mr. Marshall was
   asking for the gates to be opened because of the problems
   outside.  When referring to gates the gates I am talking
   about, it is just C Gate.  Mr. Duckenfleld's attention
   was directed to C Gate as was mine.  That is the gate
   we were looking at.

Q..Which is not surprising because it was basically the only
  - gate t-hat you could really see through that camera? - A.
    That is correct.

Q. And it is the outside of which together with the inside
   of which you could see? - A". Yes.

Q.         . LORD JUSTICE_TAYL0R:\ .. Aye.you simply giving us
       your understanding of it or what Mr. Marshall said?
       - A. No. Mr. Marshall was referring to opening gates
       because of the problems outside.     I directed Mr.
     * Duckenfield's attention to C Gate and, if you like,
       when reference .was made to gates by Mr. Marshall that
       is the gate that I was looking at on the monitor and
       paying attention-to.
                  /
           MR. "COLLINS:  That was certainly the gate that
      you could see in the video.  Did you understand or
      did you think Mr. Marshall was simply referring to
      that gate or to that and the other gates or did not
      you know? - A. My belief was that he was referring
      just to C Gate, possibly because that is where my
      attention was directed from what I could see.

    Q. And you drew Mr. Duckenfield1s attention to Gate C?
       - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

    Q. You were aware, I imagine, that Mr. Duckenfield was not
       experienced at policing or overseeing the policing at
       football match at Hillsborough? - A. I knew he was new
       to the specific duty.

    Q. Yes.   Now, again, your timing is a little out on your
       notes.   We know that it was at 2.48 that the gate in
       fact opened and it was at 2.47, just a minute or so
       before, Mr. Marshall requested the gates be opened?.


                                    275
                                50


                                                           T. BICHARD

          - A. I would accept the differences in time, yes.

    Q. Well, we have got the timing from the video and obviously
       that is more accurate than your memory.  But when that
       gate opened just after Mr. Marshall had asked for the
       gates to be opened what did you think had opened it? - A.
       There had been some conversation on the radio regarding
       pushing at the gates and gates bending and buckling and
8      when that gate appeared to open- my immediate reaction
       was that the fans had in fact forced open.that gate.

     Q.   Did you make some comment to that effect? - A.   That is
          right, yes.

      Q. I think you said something like they have broken down the
    ^    gate? - A. That is the words I would have used, yes, sir.

     Q. Yes.  But in fact after about 20 seconds or so it was
        closed again? - A. That is right, yes.

     Q. And according to your notes you put it thus, you say
        after 20 seconds gate closed.   Appears that it had been
        opened on purpose - sorry - appears that it had been open
        en purpose? - A. Is that on my original statement or the
        notes?

     Q. No. " I am! ■treading out from "the notes'.: You have got a copy
        In fact you time it at 2.40 which we know to be slightly
        inaccurate.     I't is page 6 of ray copy of the notes.   I have
        a typed copy.      I do not know.   It may not accord with the
       /original. - A. Yes.
E
     Q. You have got that? - A.( I have got that, yes.

          As you see' it says after 20 seconds gate closed. Appears
          that it had been open on purpose? - A. Yes. I was unsure
          about actually who had opened it or why it had been opened

     Q.   I want to see whether this is hindsight or whether this is
          what you thought at the time.  Your immediate reaction was
          to think the gate had been broken down? - A, That is right

     Q. That is what you said? - A. Yes.

     Q. It was open for- a very short time and then closed again?
        - A. Yes.

     Q. Did you then appreciate that in fact it had been open on
         purpose or was this something you were told later on in
         the afternoon? - A. It is quite possible that that is
         something that has come out during the events and me
       . actually writing it down.

     Q    I follow.  In any event we know that there was again a
          request from Mr. Marshall? - A. Yes, in relation to
H
                                           276
                                      51


                                                               T. BICHARD

              opening of the gates.   It was more    insistent and far more
              concerned.

     Q. And we know that the gate or that Mr. Duckenfield ordered
        the gate to be opened eventually at about 2.52? - A. Yes,
        after the request had come in Mr. Duckenfield paused for
        thought and made some comment about lives being lost,
        for the gates to be opened.
B
     Q. The first request was 2.47. Mr. Duckenfield did not make
        his final decision until about five minutes later.  Is
        that correct? - A. No, only moments later after that.
        The second request from Mr. Marshall was more concerned,
        more worried and appeared to be more like an order in
        that I want those gates to be opened.  It was more in­
        sistent and it was only a pause for thought about the
        situation before Mr. Duckenfield said open the gates.

     Q. Tell me, you were concentrating, as you have told us,
        upon the video of the crowd at Leppings'" Lane turnstile?
        -A. I was overseeing the videos, yes:.

     Q. You could obviously see all the videos because they were
rv      all on but which one were you concentrating on at this
        time? - A. At that time I would be watching the one at
        Leppings Lane.     From about .half-past-2 that was where my
        at tent ion.,was concentrated.           ....

     Q. There was presumably a video going of the situation on the
        West Terrace? - A. It w a s . • It was operating at that time.
         <5
£    q   '. Were you observing the build-up on the West Terrace at
            this time or were you cpncentrating on the Leppings Lane
            turnstiles? - A. No, certainly my attention was drawn -
            purely to-monitor one which is the camera on Leppings Lane.

     Q. What I am getting at is this. Were you aware or did you
        draw to Mr. Duckenfialds or anyones attention the state^
        of the centre pens on the West Terracing when the decision
        to open the gate was made? - A. When the decision to open
        the gate was made, no.  I was concentrating on Leppings Lane

     Q. Because did it occur to you that if Gate C were opened the
        fans would be likely to go down that centre tunnel? - A.
        The simple fact of the matter is the tunnel is not in view
        from that camera.

     Q. No, I know that. - A. And therefore it is out of mind.

     Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Out of mind? - A. It is out
              of mind, sir, yes.

     Q.           MR. COLLINS:    Yes, that is very fair.  So what you
              are saying in effect is that neither you nor apparently
u             anyone else in the control-room thought of the effect of
H
                                               277
                                  52


                                                          T. BICHARD

          Gate C and the fact the fans were likely to go down that
          centre tunnel? - A. From looking at that picture that
          sutnnarises my thoughts, my personal thoughts.

     Q. Well, effectively it was no thought rather than a positive
        thought? - A. I accept that, yes.

     Q. Now, the gate having been opened you saw nci doubt the
B       people coining in through that gate but did you hear
        later shortly after that another request   this time in
        relation to Gate A? - A. Yes.   That was the first tine
        really that my attention had gone away from Gate C to
        Gate A and it was, I believe, Sergeant Higgins who was
        in charge of ....

          And it was for that reason, I imagine, that you put the
L         camera on to as you could the inside of Gate A? - A.
          That is right.  Obviously I am interested in why he had
          made the request.

     Q. Indeed.    Shortly after that did you or were you aware
        of troubles on the West Terraces? - A. Yes.       Once the
        gates had been open the problem obviously was alleviated
        outside.    The crowds moved in and concern was then more into
D       relation with the fans getting into the stands out of the
        seating--a-rea on -to- the--pi-cch. Obviously that is, if you
        like* -trie next stage we moved on to.

     Q. So Mr. Duckenfield was concerned not with the terrace
        but with the influx through Gate A on to the Worth Stand.
       "Is that right? - A. That is fair comment, yes.

    un.   But you were aware, were you not, or became aware - you
          have seen..the photographs - ’at about' one-minute-to-three
          people began to climb over the perimeter fence? - A.
          They did, yes.

     Q. And began to appear on the perimeter track? - A. Yes.

     0.. You saw that, I imagine? - A. I did, yes.

     Q. Can you remember what Hr. Duckenfield1s reaction was in
        relation to that? - A. Again, speaking as regards my ^ -
        thoughts, it bore strong resemblance to the season before
        when the fans in fact invaded the pitch at the end o? the
        game.

     0.. So your immediate reaction was pitch invasion, was it? ~ A.
         Certainly, sir.

     0.. But it must have become obvious fairly quickly    that it
         was not a pitch invasion? - A. I would not say    fairLy
         quickly.   For a period of time we were looking   at that
         situation and Iwould speak for other Officers     in the
         control room as a pitch invasion.
H
                                           2 78
                               53


                                                      t   .   bicha:


    Q. They did not actually invade the pitch, did they? - A.
       They were climbing the fences, shall we say, in an atte
       in my view to get on to the pitch.

    Q. Well, how long did you continue to believe that you we:
       looking at a pitch invasion? - A. I would say certainl'
       for three or four minutes.

®   Q. I see.  Yes.  Now, at what stage were you asked by any<
       to contact the operations room to call Operation Suppo
       - A. Again in relation to tine between 3 o'clock and*4
       hour passed in my mind in the space of about five minu

    Q. Well, I think we can actually get the time.  We know i
       was at 3.07 that ground control asked for Operation
       Support. - A. I accept that because they have taped
       messages.

    0. Indeed.   That was you, was it, who sent that message?
       I made the radio request on the instruction of Mr. Jac
      - the ACC,


D




F




G



                                    / 0. Was it you


H
ID

Right.
apt,


;e



me
't?
 that
 es.




' A.
.son.
                                 54


                                                     T. BICHARD

    Q. Was it you, too, who made the request for the ambulance?
       A.  I did, yes.

    Q'   And for
               jr
                  the Fire Brigade?      A.   Yes.

    Q. We know the times, because we have got records for that,
       so I am not going to ask you about that. The only thing
       I want to ask you about is this:   Snig Hill appears to
       have believed or got information which was passed on
       both to the Fire and the Ambulance Service, that fans
       had broken down the gates, putting it broadly - that
       thatis what had caused the trouble, that a gate had been
       broken down?    A.  I'm not sure.  If the transcript says
       that that is the message that I've passed to Operations

•
       Room, I accept the transcript, but I don't remember doing
        ic-
    Q. You had initially, you told us, thought that Gate 'C ' had
       been broken down?   A. I did, that's right.

    Q. That was at first?      A. Yes.

    Q. You knew, of course, that. Gate 'C' and indeed Gate 'A1
       had not been broken down when the majority of the fans
       came in?     A. Yes.
                           -\•              •                  i
    Q. Were you given any instructions as to what you should say
       to Snig Hill about what the trouble was?      A. In relation
       to calling Operations Support?

    Q.    In    relation to saying what had happened?    A. No,I wasn't
         given an 3/ instructions in relation to explaining what
_        had happened.    I was given instructions as to what we
0        required. ...

    Q. Because it would seem, on the face of it, that the only
       way that Snig Hill could have got hold of the idea that
       there was a gate broken down was if you had told them?
       A.  I accept that.

    Q.    Can youthink of any other way they could have got hold
         of that idea?    A. Unless some sort of message was
         passed on personal radio, because in fact I believe they
         were monitoring the personal radio channel 25.

    Q.    It    does not appear from the record that we havethatthere
         is any such message certainly on the transcript   that we
         have seen.   It does not mean that there was none, I foLlow,
         but certainLy as far as it has been monitored there does
         not appear to have been.   A.  I accept that. I cannot
         offer you any explanation why they should formulate that
         idea.

     Q. And you cannot now remember precisely what you did say?
        A.  Not at all, no.

                                              2S0
Did you know why you were calling Che Fire Brigade?
What I am getting at is did you know what you wanted
from the Fire Brigade?   A.  I was paying attention to
what Sergeant Goddard was doing in relation to the
Brymac and obtaining the cutters, and when the realisation
was that he was not successful in getting those from
Claywheels Lane, I offered to contact the Fire Services.

But the Fire Brigade would want to know what they were
dealing with, would they not?  It was not a fire, for
example, and they w o u l d   A. Certainly I can remember
passing a message that we required the Fire Service
and for the Fire Service to bring cutting equipment.

      Mr. COLLINS:  I think that is all I need ask you,
thank you, Mr. Bichard.

             Cross-examined bv Mr. HYTNER:

Mr. Bichard, I want to- investigate, if I may, just what .
your duties were.   You clearly were_an expert in
investigating the   monitors and the cameras? A. I think
'expert' might be an exaggeration;   experienced.

Experiened. Were yourduties simply to operate your
machinery, your technology, under supervision and
direction, or did you have duties which derived from
your own initiative?    A.   The supervision of the.monitors
and the operation of them is my initiative.    If I could
perhaps explain:   if I see an incident or notice something
on- the monitors. I will bring it to the attention of
the Control Room staff.    Obviously if they see something
in particular, they will mention it to me.

So this may be two ways.  Somebody may say to you, "Zoom
in on the centre of the South Stand, there's something
happening over there", and you will do it?   A. Yes.

You, on the other hand, if you are watching the monitors,
may spot something and zoom in yourself?  A. Yes .

And if you can see it, youwill then say to somebody
"There is trouble there"?    A.  Yes.

Is there always an officer of the rank of Inspector or
above in the Control Room?    Are there occasions when
the senior officer there is Sergeant Goddard? A. There
are odd occasions when Sergeant Goddard, P.C. Ryan and
myself are in the Control Room.

But would it be normal for the officer in charge of the
game or the commander on the ground to be in the Control
Room?   A. It would be normal for Superintendent Murray
to be present.
                                 56
                                                T. BICHARD


Q. When you are briefed as to what your duties are and
   what initiatives you are to take, what was your
   understanding?   Was it your understanding that your
   principal function was crowd trouble and identifying
   trouble spots so that they could be dealt with, and
   identification afterwards?   A. That is just one of the
   functions.  When the system is installed as command in
   control, you lose evidence gathering.   However, when
   the system is set up for evidence gathering, you gain
   the benefit also of command in control.

Q. What I want to know is this: Was it to your knowledge
   one of your duties in which you were briefed to monitor
   the ground for overcrowding in any particular spot?
   A. No, I have never been briefed in that direction.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYL(DR: Never been briefed . ..?
         A. Never been briefed in that direction in relation
         to monitoring overcrowding.

    Q.        ••.Mr. HYTNER: So. during the cours-e of the build-up
         to what we now know-was a disaster, it was neve’r in your
         mind that you had to watch out for possible overcrowding
         on the Terraces?    A.   That's right, sir, it was never
         in my mind at all.

    Q. Now, -in the- course of-.your— long-experience- on the monitors,
       have you ever actually-noticed that in- a -particular
       corner of the Kop or in a particular corner of the West
       Terraces people are bunched together and look a bit over­
       crowded?     A. No.

    Q. Never?     A. Never.



•
    Q. This question, therefore, may be so hypothetical that you
       may feel ..-it an unfair one, but I shall ask it so that
       you can consider it.      Suppose on that particular day
       you had noticed that Pens 3 and 4 were full to what you
       regarded as safe capacity, using your own judgment,
       let's suppose at 20 minutes to 3. Would you have
       considered it any part of your duty to draw that to
       anybody's     attention?    A. I don't think it would be
       possible to come to that assumption with these scanners.
       Perhaps I can qualify that a little bit further?

    Q. Yes, please.    A. I would think that somebody who was
       actually on the ground in the area is the one that
       would have to make that sort of decision.

    Q. What about looking out as well as looking at the monitors,
       because you have got a clear view through this enormous
       glass window, have you not?   A. You have, yes.

    Q. Are you saying that it would be impossible for you or
       Sergeant Goddard or Superintendent Murray or Chief
       Superintendent Duckenfield, looking down on the Terraces,


                                        282
                                                                T. BICHARD

to notice overcrowding if it occurred?   A. Yes.  I think
an example could be if you were to look at the Terrace,
the West Stand, earlier on in the day when it was obvious
that there was a smaller number in there and look again
at the pictures later, there will not be a great deal
of difference in its actual appearance on that monitor.

I am not going to press you on this, Mr. Bichard.   You
are giving very frank answers and if that is your
considered view, I will leave it.   I merely want to make
sure that this is the situation, because the Sheffield
Wednesday Club may disagree with this - I do not know -
but you are saying that so far as control of capacity,
that is controlling the safe capacity of the Terraces
is concerned, your monitors were useless and in any event
it was not part of your duty to use them for that purpose
A. The monitors give you a. false picture, a false
impression about the numbers in a specific area.   It
wouldn-'t be a sound judgment to make it just from that
monitor. . ~

Is there any liaison at all between Sheffield Wednesday
Control and Police Control, over the numbers arriving at
the ground?   A.- Between the Police Control Room and the
Club video room, is that what you mean, sir?

It is not -just -a 'video ■room, ■ i t may .b.g _t-hr.*t. you do not
know this;   I will ask you:       Were you aware that in
addition to having their own monitors, to. which you had
access ----     A. We cannot see pictures that they are
receiving.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You-cannot see pictures ...?
A. The Club system is not connected to ours; we cannot
see what they are seeing.  However, they have access to
ours.

      Mr. HYTNER:  I am sorry, it is the other way round.
You are quite right, I had got it the wrong way round.
Were you aware that in addition to their monitors, they
also had a mechanical check through turnstiles and
computers as to the numbers coming into the ground?
A.  Yes, I am aware of tftat.

Was there any liaison whatever between you and the Club
Control Room as to how many there were in the ground at
any given time to enable Mr. Duckenfield or anybody else
to assess the numbers still to come?    A. No, I would
have no communication, and never have had any
communication, with that room.   It would not be, if
you like, within my job description.   It's not my area.

Perhaps not your particular one, but you know what is
going on in the Control Room?    A. Yes, I am aware.

Y ou h a v e don e m a n y s e m i - f i n a l s ?   A. Two s e m i - f i n a l s .
                                        I. 3ICHARD

And other big matches?    A.   Certainly.

And has the Police Control Room never received a call
from the- Club Control Room indicating how many people
are in the ground to give some guide as to how many
are still to come?    A. Yes, there has been communication
received.   I can think of a specific occasion off the
top of my head, a Cup Match between Sheffield Wednesday
and Everton when the Kop reached about 19,000, and
obviously that is getting near to the time when the
turnstiles will be closed, and I was asked to look at
Penis tone Road to see how many people were there on
that occasion.

That is precisely what I am asking.  That is vital
information for the police controlling Penistone Road
to know how many more people to anticipate? A. That's
right.   I believe the system does provide a warning
when it is getting near capacity.

You are absolutely right.  The computer pulsates when it
is 85 per cent of capacity, so we are told.  You can
recall this happening at an Everton/Sheffield Wednesday
match?   A. That's right, yes, an evening match.

On this occasion was there any warning ---

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: ’I am sorryj when are we
talking about?    When was the Everton/Sheffield Wednesday
match?     A.  It was a Cup Replay.

Which year?   A.   I'm not sure.

Well, was it more than a year or two ago or what? A. It
was certainly within the previous 12 months.  The idea
behind going to monitor the people who were outside was
thinking along the lines of public order, because
obviously when those turnstiles are closed, if people
are still queueing they are going to be concerned.

      Mr. HYTNER:  There are two problems, are there not?
The first problem is if there are very few in the ground
and it is close to kick-off and it is an all-ticket match,
there are going to be an awful lot of people suddenly
arriving and the Police outside ought to be warned about
that? That is one problem, is it not?    A. That is an
assumption, yes.

Another problem is this: If people have got in without
tickets, for example and, taking the Kop on the occasion
of the Sheffield Wednesday match, the Kop is near
capacity and there are still 3,000 or 4,000 outside,
there could be a serious public order problem when the
gates are shut?   A. Yes.  The match that I am thinking
of was pay on the day rather than ticket.
                             59




    Q. It is a similar problem.  There will be people outside
       who will not be able to get in?   A. They won't be able
       to get into that area, yes.

    Q. On this occasion, the semi-final where the tragedy occurred,
       was there any communication whatever between Police
       Control and Sheffield Wednesday Control over the numbers
       already in the Leppings Lane Terraces or in the North
B      Stand?   A. I certainly didn't make any communication.
       I am not aware of any communication.  However, I am not
       aware of what happens on the telephone.




D




                                  /Q.   Did you hear any discussion

H
                                        9   55*C_ .•
                                            v j
                                        60

                                                    T. BICHARD



        Q. Did you hear any discussion about it? - A. I can't recollect
           any, n o .

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Vie have of course had the
                Sergeant about this?

                     MR. HYTNER:   Yes sir.    I leave that now.
B
        Q. I just want to deal now with this: you talk about the pitch
           invasion and for three minutes or so, three or four minutes,
           you still thought it was a pitch invasion? - A.Quite convinced
           in my mind, yes.

        Q. A pitch invasion presupposes a fan invading the pitch area?
           - A. That is right, yes.

        Q.      There was not any, was there? For three or four minutes the
                fans were in the area between, the pitch and the fence? - A.
                T-hat is right, ves, until- the numbers' built up so much
                so that they did spread oh to the pitch.

        Q. But that was already when everyone realised that there was
           a disaster? - A. I would say_that point is when ’we did
D          realise there was a disaster.

        Q. And before then there was nobody on the pitch, so it is a
           little hard for anyone to have suspected that there was a
           pitch invasion? - A. I think perhaps we ought to qualify
           what a "pitch invasion" is.  If the fans come out of the
           area where they are supposed to be that is a pitch invasion.
           It does not mean to say they physically go on the playing
           area.  If they are on the perimeter track that is a pitch
           invasion.
    #
        Q. You would call that a pitch invasion? - A. I certainly would,
           yes.

        Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Other than to get on the pitch,
                why do they do that? - A. Again one would assume that if
                the fans are coming out of the area where they are, either
                they are trying to get away from some trouble in there and
                escape into the safety of the perimeter track and the pitch
                or they are intent on getting into the playing area to
                prevent the match taking place.

        q   .        MR. HYTNER:   I think we may both have been trying to
                get at your same point.

                      Obviously if they are intent on causing trouble for
                the game, first of all it is unusal for that to happen
                that early, isn't it, when there has not been a penalty
                given or not given and there has not been a goal scored
                and so forth? - A. I have been at football matches when
                people have gone on the pitch before kick-off.
H
                                                  286
                                      61




    Q. All right, well it is a possibility? - A. Yes.

    Q. But if they are over the fence and they are not going on
       the pitch and this is taking place for three to four minutes
       it becomes obvious, doesn't it, that the motivation is the
       other one that you have mentioned/ getting away from trouble?
       - A. I would say not, because if your mind is switched into
       a public order situation, if that is what you are believing
B      then something else has to happen to turn your mind into
       that sort of thinking.

    Q. Absolutely right and that is what I am going to ask you last
       of all.

                  •The whole of the briefing, the whole of your training
            turned your mind solely to the problem of public order.
            That is right, isn't it? - A. I would say that that is a
            very fair comment.

    q   .   And in fairness   to you and other Officers of your rank, your
            minds had never   been adverted by training or briefing to
            the possibility   that there might be overcrowding and
            crushing on the   terraces? - A. Yes, I would agree with you.
D                 MR. HYTNER:    Thank you.


                          Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

    Q. May I deal with one matter.  You received a request from
      'Superintendent Marshall for the gates to be opened? - A.
       More than one request, yes sir.

    {Q.     The first request? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. Am I right that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield made no
       reply to that until what became in effect an order from
       Mr. Marshall for the gates to be opened? - A. A reply in
       that he may have asked him to stand by while he was doing
       whatever he was doing, considering the matter or whatever.

    Q. He gave no response either positively or negatively to
       it?'- A. That is right, yes.

    Q.      Then you had drawn his attention by means of the monitor
            to Gate C? - A. Yes, that is right.

     Q.     That gate was opened? - A. It was sir, on   two occasions.

     Q.     Some moments   later Sergeant Higgins asked for Gate A to
            be opened.   Was there any observation by Chief Superintendent
            Duckenfield to the effect:    "I have given that order some
            moments ago"? - A. Mo, when that second request came in
            it was part and parcel of the first comment about opening
            the gates.
H
                                                1
                                  62

                                            T. BICHARD


    Q. From Sergeant Higgins?   I have left Superintendent Marshall
       and gone to Sergeant Higgins? - A. When Chief Superintendent
       Duckenfield ■said about opening the gates, again my belief
       was that he referred to C Gate and C Gate only and when the
       request came in for A Gate, it was a separate matter.

    Q. Yes, indeed.  That is what I am trying to establish. We
       have had other evidence you see from other witnesses? - A.
B      Yes.

    Q. When Sergeant Higgins made his request for Gate A the Chief
       Superintendent made no observation he had given such an order?
       - A. Not to my knowledge.

     Q. Nor did he reply to it? - A. I am unaware.

          It was Sergeant Goddard, was it not, who gave the order to
          open Gate A? - A. Yes, that is right sir.

     Q. Now may I move forward to the effect of opening C'ates.
        Am I not right that when Gate A was opened; Chief Superintendent
        Duckenfield gave an order as to marshalling Officers to stop
        the crowd going on to the pitch via the North Stand? - A.
D       That is right yes, the North Stand.

    ' Q-.* So indeed when Gate A was opened the Police mind turned towards
           public order and the effect of opening. .it? - A. Yes.

     Q. Quite properly? - A. Yes.

     Q. 3ut the complete reverse took place in respect of Gate C,
        no one paid any attention to the effect of opening Gate C?
        - A. The situation outside the ground was alleviated when.
        Gate C was opened.  From the difficulty we had there it had
        gone.

     Q. That is entirely my fault.     I should of course refer to
        inside the ground.

                In distinction to the effect of opening Gate A, when
          the Police took proper action to deal with the influx of
          people through Gate A, when they opened Gate C they did
          not take any action as to the effect of the crowd going
          through Gate C into the ground? - A. I am' a little bit
          confused as to what you are implying about Police action
          in respect of A Gate?

     Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I think what Counsel is saying
          is this: when Gate A was opened the red light of public
          order problems came on and attention was given to what
          might happen if people came round through the North Stand
          and as you put it before "got on to the pitch from the
          Korth Stand”? - A. That is right sir, yes.

     Q. So there was a deployment of Officers? - A. As I believe
H       there were two lines of Officers placed behind A Gate.

                                          288
                                    T . SICHARD



What Counsel is putting is that no thought seems to have
been given to what might happen inside the ground when
Gate C was opened? - A. I believe that the Officers who
were behind Gate A, or the Officers who were in charge of
that position on the ground, made the decision to form
that line behind the gate.  It was not something that the
Control Room instructed them to do.

      MR. JACKSON: Whoever did it, whatever was done,
something was done? - A. Yes.

In distinction to what happened about Gate C? - A. That is
right.

      MR. JACKSON:   Thank you.


                Cross-Examined bv HR. MULLER:

There is one "question- in .relation to the cam'eras. The-
facility you had ~in relartion to the- colour, camera and the
zoom facility in particular, would have'enabled you, if
you had chosen to do so, to see whether.or not people were
being crushed up against the perimeter fencing? - A. No
sir. The facility is not good enough to get that close.'

Am I not right''-in saying. that th'e zoom facility does enable
you to see the fence? - A. Oh yes.

.And to get a close-up on the people at the fence in colour?
 - A. No, we must define what you mean by a "close-up".
 It is closer than it is closer than in its extreme, yes,
 but it is not a close-up of an individual.   You would
 probably only get 30 or 40 heads and s'houlders at best on
 that picture.

Perhaps that is something people can try for themselves?
- A. Yes, you would have to see that on the system.

 Of course one of the problems is that not until you think
 there is something wrong there will you 2 00 m in on it. Is
 that right? - A. I would zoom in on something if I thought
 that the picture by zooming in would benefit by it. That
 is the best way of describing it.

 Unless you think there may be some problem with crushing
 at the front, you are not likely to be zooming in to look
 to see whether there is crushing at the front, are you?
 - A. Correct sir.

 Even if you have a picture of people at the front in the
 vicinity of the fence, from what you say you are not looking
 to see what the people right behind the fence are doing,
 you are concentrating more on the people who are beyond
 the fence on the pitch? - A. That is right, yes.
                                64

                                                T. BICHARD


     Q. Nov; one other matter I v/ould like to ask you about. We
        have been provided with the VHF Channel 1 tape. I don't
        know whether you have had an opportunity of seeing it? -
        A. No sir.

     Q. I think it may well be that this records what you say
        to Snig Hill, and I put it to you, it is at page 16? - A.
        May I have an opportunity to look at it?
B
     Q. If there is one available.  You see in the top left-hand
        corner it gives the time between 15.13 and 15.14 at the
        bottom. Have you got that? - A. Yes, I have that.

     Q. If you look at the right-hand side, just over halfway down
        it says:

                                     "Hillsborough ground control could
                                     you contact the Fire Service,
                                     Fire Service, we want some
                                     hydraulic -cutting equipment to
                                     the ground to cut some of the
                                     metal fences. Fire Service urgent
                                     required Leppings Lane over".
D
        Then the reply comes, am I right:

              "Roger .Fife Brigade-    - -
              urgent up to Leppings
              Lane Roger".

        A. Yes.

     Q. Am I right in saying what we see on the right is what you
        were saying? - A. That is correct, yes.
It
     Q. Therefore no mention there, if this transcript is right,
        about anybody breaking down the gates or anything? - A. No.

     Q. And what is important, a specific mention by you of Leppings
        Lane? - A. Yes, I did.

     Q. Have you any idea, because subsequently we shall hear, that
        when a message was sent from Snig Hill, the people at
        Snig Hill apparently did not know where the Fire Brigade
        was required? - A. Well it is quite clear, it is the
        Leppings Lane end of the ground.   Obviously the Fire Service
        are not going to bring their fire equipment, the tender
        actually into the ground.   They are going to bring it to
        the nearest point, it is the actual cutting equipment that
        we v/ould require in the ground and that v/ould be dealt with
        on the ground.

     Q. But your recollection certainly accords with that, not only
        did you say Leppings Lane but the person at Snig Hill
H       confirmed Leppings Lane? - A. That is right.


                                        2.o n
                                     65




                        Cross-Examined by MR. GIBSON-WATT:

     Q. Officer, one point first which you have touched on but I
        want to get it clear. When Gate C first opened, just for
        a few seconds, you instinctively said:  “The fans have
        broken down the gate" or words to that effect? - A. I did,
        y es.
B    Q.    That is what you thought.  It then closed and soon after
           that you were getting very strong requests or commands
           fromSuperintendent Marshall that the gates should be opened?
           - A. Yes, that is right.

     Q.     So by the time you were getting thesecommands through it
           must have been obvious to you that the Police had at any
    4^     rate regained control of Gate C? - A. I believe that, yes.

     Q. And indeed that the opening of Gate C originally had been
        deliberate, not a break in by fans? - A. That may be an
        assumption in between the incident happening and me writing
        that down.

     Q. Well what I am-suggesting to you is it is an assumption
D       between the incident happening when you first blurt out
        your thoughts instinctively and realising than Superintenden
        Marshall was still asking for the gates to be opened?- A.
        I am unclear on what you aire actually to gain, sir.

     Q. Let's take it slowly.  If Superintendent Marshall is asking
       ,for the gates to be opened, the fans have not broken in
        and not broken down the gate, have they? - A. There is more
        than one gate though, sir.  It may well be he was not aware
        that that gate opened.

     Q.    Well you are aware when    Superintendent Marshall is giving
           his orders or making his    requests for the gates to be
           opened, that fans are no    longer coming through Gate C.   You
           can see that? - A. I can    see that, yes.

     Q. Therefore at the least Gate C is then under Police control
        and no fans are coming in? - A. Yes, and I am assuming
        that Gate C is the one that everybody is referring to.
        That is where my attention is drawn.

     Q. Precisely so. So you assume        when Superintendent Marshall
        is making his requests, that       everybody is concentrating
        on Gate C and Superintendent       Marshall is asking for Gate C
        to be opened? - A. Yes, that       is right, sir.

         Q. Which means it must have been opened and closed the first
            time and not forced by the fans? - A. It could well have
            been forced.  If the gate has been opened or just taken,
            off lock, the fans could well have forced the gate open and
            we managed to close it again, it does not mean to Sa *u.r - tw-
            is damaged.
H
                                           2 0 1
                                 66

                                           T. BICHARD


      All right, I will accept that.   It has been closed again
      without being damaged? - A. Yes.

    3. And that was clearly apparent to you by let us say at the
       latest 3 o'clock, kick-off time? - A. I was aware that the
       gate had been opened twice, yes.

B




D




                           /Q.   A n d that the Police




H
                                                                      T.   BICHARD



And that the P o l i c e had r e g a i n e d c o n t r o l of it the first
time and it ha d b e e n c l o s e d the first time.            A.   Yes.

You w e r e a wa r e a w a r e of that by k ic k - o f f ;                  it w a s o bv i c u s
to y o u . A .      Yes.
Can you turn, pl e as e, to a b u n d l e of p h o t o g r a p h s w i t h the
W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e b a d g e on the front, P h o t o g r a p h i c
D e p a r t m e n t , the t h i c k e r bu n dl e, pleas e.                 W e s t M i d l a n d s 2.
P h o t o g r a p h 48, p l e a s e .       O f f i c e r , P h o t o g r a p h 48 is p r e t t y
m u c h y ou r p o s i t i o n , is it not?                A.       T h a t ' s ri g ht , yes.

Tho se are s o m e of the c o n t r o l s that you h a v e to o p e r a t e
to d eal w i t h the m o n i t o r i n g s cr ee n. A.   Yes.

Of the ca m er a, and the L e p p i n g s Lane c a m e r a is No. 1 on
the left, the one w i t h "1!' up abo ve it, is it not?
A.   The e x t e r n a l L e p p i n g s Lane c a m e r a is No. 1.

The one that c o m m a n d s the L e p p i n g s Lane t u r n s t i l e s ?
A.   T h a t ' s right, yes.
 This is right, is it not, that the i n d i v i d u a l s c r e e n
 on the c or ne r, b e l o w the b a n k of six s c r e e n s is, so to
 speak., the e v i d e n c e - g a t h e r i n g s cr een , is it n ot ?    That
 is the one that the .video r e c o r d e r will- s+iow?                 A. The re
 i s       The two m o n i t o r s on the -extreme- r ig h t are the
 ones that are the v i d e o --
/ T h e r e . a r e two, in fact, I u n d e r s t a n d and you c an r ec a l l
 on two at once, is that c o r r e c t ?               A.   T h a t ' s right,
  they w or k i n d e p e n d e n t l y .
 You do h a v e a f ac il i t y , do you not, to r e w i n d and r ep l a y
 on one or o th e r o f thse s c r e e n s w ha t has been r e c o r d e d ?
 A.   Yes, th a t' s right.
 T hat w o u l d p r o b a b l y be an u n u s u a l thi ng to do in the c o u r s e
 of a match, w o u l d it not, a c t u a l l y to r e w i n d and r e p l a y ?
 A.   Yes, I view the tap es a f t e r the ac t ua l games.
 Exactly .        Do you r e c a l l w h e t h e r you were a sk e d to r e w i n d
 or r e p l a y on any o c c a s i o n for this m a t c h ?    A.     Definitely
 not.
 D e f i n i t e l y not.   It is s o m e t h i n g you w ou l d r e m e m b e r if
 it had h a p p e n e d , b e c a u s e it is u nu su al , as I u n d e r s t a n d
 it.         A.      Yes.
 Do you rec al l t ha t a ft e r the c r i s i s at about, let us put
 it, q u a r t e r , t w e n t y p ast three, that gives you some idea
 of the time.            A.      Yes.
 Mr. Kelly, the C h i e f E x e c u t i v e of the F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n
 c o m i n g to the C o n t r o l B o x ? A.      Yes, I can r e m e m b e r him
 c o m i n g to the d oo r of the C o n t r o l Box.
___________                     (Luncheon         ad journment;________ •' •*_____________
    INQUIRY    INTO        THE        HILLSBOROUGH

           STADIUM               DISASTER




                          Before


                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     M R . B . JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary;

                            and

                    PROF. L. MAUNDEh.

                         (ASSESSORS)




£
                     The Town Hall.

                         Sheffield.

                            on

               Monday,   12th June,    1989.



                TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                   iAfternoon Session;



          From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd..
               Official Shorthand Writers.
           55. uueen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                         IMDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                         (Afternoon Session)


                                                      Pace


 P.C. BICHARD Recalled

       Ci'oss-Examined   by Mr. Gibson-Watt (cont.)    63
       Cross-Examined    by Mr. Kallipetis             68
       Cross-Examined    by Mr. Glasgov                80
       Cross-Examined    by Hr. Woodward               32
       Re-Examined by    Mr. Collins

^.S.   T0.7LER Called

       Examined by Mr. Collins                         86
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Muller                    3S
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward                  3?
       Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                      90

 F. GODLEY Called

       Examined by Mr. Phillips                        90
       Cross-examined by Mr. Glasgov/                  95

 P.M. SAXTOLI Called

       Examined by Mr. Collins                          95
       Cross-examined by   Mr.Jackson                 102
       Cross-examined by   Mr.Maxwell                 103

 E. GUEST Called

       Examined by Mr. Goldsack                        103
       Cross-examined by  Mr. Hytner                  118
       Cross-examined by   Mr.Jackson                 127
       Cross-examined by   Mr. Muller                 13 3
       Cross-examined by  Mr.Maxwell                  13 5
       Cross-examined by Mr .Glasgov/                  135
                                                                                                                        -jaSSfcSP-J
                                        -.i>;cvs f&'-rixy*.•u
                                                                                                                                           a*




                                                                                      ■W O K

             'S~;P&r-                                       iifalifg}
                             ^pWfcricoNsrAB                                  £ REV 0 HIBICH'A'RD
                                                                                                                                                               r&tf
                                      'Cr a s s-exain t o g t ^ ^ R p ;G I B s 5 C T f f f ^1 ^ 1 ^ 1 1 1                             ■".■&                   ‘■.,.*?"i

                        m&^sSy°s>                                               out^5s^«SaS^e*tnat
                                                                                       sta;-«t.»i's & h £&
                          <3i5VR$fc:P**astrL^-''•?
                                                                srs®2s2

m   f S f f P                       ®           s p S p ^
    wP^Box                            hink            ,A .                  ^   „ - 3 „* „                 t ^                                     ---   — '•• ■«“'
             -'On'that photogrsph                            j u s t to t he ’left . - A r -                     Y es s , t ha t s %
              right..                      :-    .                  ■            .                .      ' ■                          '.   . /'"

             ■You            are      there,          Mr.        Duckenfield                   i s there?      _■_ AT         Yes.
    Q
               Assistant                   C h i e f Constable                  Mr. J a c k s o n is there,                    I think
     Q
               in ^civilian                     clothes.                   A.      T h a t ’s r i g h t , yes.
D              Hid     Mr             Kelly          ask. w h a t     ha d happened?                    A.    T h e r e was a
               c o n v ets                              k ’p l a c e , between'.Mr                    Ducken field and Mr..
               K e l l y , yes
                                                                                                      There    was      a conversation
                S peak              a bit        l o u d e r , please
                                      Hr.        Duc k e n field and                 M r . Ke-ly.

                In the cause of that c o n v e r s a t i o n did.Mr. D u c k a n f i e l d tell
                Mr      K ° 1 1 y that a g ate h a d b e e n forced and t h e r e had been
                a n ' i n r u s h . .of L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s into the g r o u n d ?
                 A.            Yes , that was                       said.

         n       a       a   r« a     hp        in    f a c t , point            to        one    o f - t h e ..TV .monitors-... in. the         - - :
     ?■' " c o u r s e '"o f * t h a t ' c o n y                                                                  0:;:re m e m b e r -that - y ^ r S ?
                                A ,     :;,,]!.] W 9                    '.Have d one,           I'do n ' t remembe.i. xt.~            .... .

         n       . . T fhink from you r a n s w e r s this m o r n i n g if he did so                               ■',:■■
                'wou 1 d ' hav" b e e n a M n t t o r ' "?s h o w i n g L’the“:'curr en t;Jsi t u a 1 1 a n ; ’T-r'
                     w^.,Vd not have b e e n ‘.a -replay; of what had h a p p e n e d ^ e a r l r e r . ;-.




                                                     Cross-examine                                    KAl L

                   4sss^--i                                        av e!ib o t:fP h otoq 'rap h ■?£8;fin
     50 ;
        ~vrMr:S4.Hichac.dSyou
         M ^ S a m hl'r'h § sfiows



                   came i& i& 'A a
                    unceto
                                  *                                                ■:-?                                    ^ S 'v ’* »■ V -                                                      f t ^ V ’i V n " a '- ? ®
%r-#'44*                                                                                                                                                                                      ^;--r<                    i~V^Ete




                                                        ffiWraoFItoE
                                                                .   ;*5^r’
                                                                         ,
                                                                         *r■ei'thec,
                                                                               .witi:                                                                A S S ^ '. T ''#
                                                                        sCructe
                        ‘and tswitch.,:^a£ ^acs*,tbjiC|i
                      --. —
                      ;:pa^flcaiarfxncrxden.                         S fe-,..--
                                                                     ^ *3
                                                                         -lf^ife?n,--«
                                                                                e      -'-•■■                                                 --:-iu ;£ -^ ;, ?ir               3
                                                                                                                                                                    ••>.:, , ^ J' I-v ^r.a-
                                   z£?Z0!m                                                                                                                                                                                   3 » g



   i®

                     =?&•*?
            "U ^-tan^yuu ..i.cua^* r.^-r ;•.— ...                   , *••~‘ -.• ••-  . ~ ,. 1 n
             l^own               VbotK videos, or just :on ;one of t h e m ? ............ ^
                                        o   n                                                                                                                                                                     ^
           ^ f j ^ a n n o t :: f e c o l l e c t ^ he t h e r :; T t ^ a s ; ; b o t h ; o r j n e . ; ■ ^                                                                                                   ^

             0         And t h e                          tapes'from                      those        videos,    w e r e t h e y k e p t by you and
             Q-                                                                      .n. due c o u r s e to o th e r O f f i c e r s ? ^                                                          Yes>‘
                        t h a t _is right.'                                        -                       -        •        .        -
             Q  Did                   e i t h e r of the m stop in the course of that                                                                    afternoon?
             Q*                         yes, the       t apes are 3 - h o u r VHS tapes.                                                                  One e x p i r e d -
                        just                a f t e r .3 o' c l o c k .
      D
             o         Wha^ a b o u t 'the o t h e r ?  A.        The other, tape -,:s o m e w h e r e
                        b   e = „ 2-. 30 and 3 S the a c t u a l function of the tape, the
                        mode of o p e r a t i o n , was a l t e r e d inad-vertantly.                  ....

              n        Rv w h o m 7        A.    Again,    the a s s u m p t i o n is that when the radio
                       ’r p p a i r - m a n came                          1 Box, Mr. O u c k e n f i e l d
                        a c t u a l l y came and s t o o d to my right - h a n d side          b e n i n d the
                        c o n t r o l s and I w o u l d t h e n - m o v e into the l e ft-hand co r n e r
                        and.i have..caught the v i d e o with my knee - the actual
                         operating                            buttons.

                         With                   your 'knee?                                       Yes, sir.

                          One of the' b u t t o n s on the desk there that we see?             ,       -                                                                                                                     '
                          .    ^      , „ tr-6 two v i d e o s them s e l v e s are actua l l y m-'.
                          to t h e ’l e f t - h a n d side of that control pan n e l at knee h e i g h

                          Wh e n                you           we r e '"asked                 by Mr,        Duckenfield                   whether                          o                                      ot;■'-'■:
                           s c eneiL u t . s ^ ^ e c c i ^ ^ ' ta-.*,Jias„.^                        ld^ o u -np -
                       :5fcaC
                                                                 .A.h^'-Yes.' I l o o k e d '.down:,^to^.tne
                          iis ^the'jnach£n V its'e 1 f?                        '

                                                          e
                          ;..maHhin "ahdj'they ’;were "both unctinning i'xght ■•                          J     --
                          D i f V V - W e n t n 6 1. no tice-'th a t .one ■,o F.- t h e m ,was                                                                                      running
                          w . ‘v-/ - .-.„■>• -—-.3 ,?:v .- .= " ■•;•* - -■ ^ M I- 1 € \rcs.r*-'••>-\■.«"»


                                                    6 u ® i n d t f c ¥ ;tha"t';? o n e'^:of-;-it:.he ra.'^wa.s:;in p ^ t^ u .n M a
                                                                                                         Itfe^ar           ■-‘^r-xsr/^z-Y.
                                - ...

                      a^-..th e-^-tim e :;arou n d .?n a.1
                                             ..
                 ->        V -V ? -               i3 -.                                     \?;.:-.s          0'H':r yvy>p::i
                                                                                                                   .


                                                                                            finished          about     6 minutes                             past                    3,          bel'ieve »
                      Q . Yes.   A.                                    And i t
                          one of the                                  tapes.                                     237
                                                 /u



                                                                            7. 21 CHARD


    Q. I' t h o u g h t you told me a m o m e n t ago that one of them, due
       to an i n a d v e r t a n t m a l f u n c t i o n , I th i nk is how you d e s c r i b e d
       it.        A.     Yes.
    Q. D id you not n o t i c e w h e n y ou c h e c k e d to see w h e t h e r or not
       the p i c t u r e s that Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d wa n te d r e c o r d e d w e r e in
       fact b e i n g r e c o r d e d ? A.      Yes.
B
    Q. T ha t on e of the m a c h i n e s - had it been s wi t c h e d off, or
       what?        A.    No.      W h a t h a p p e n s was the s y s t e m was d e s i g n e d
       to o p e r a t e on a t i m e - l a p s e m o d e so that a 3- h ou r t ape wou ld ,
       in fact, cov er 18 h o u r s of pi ctu re s.             B a s i c a l l y it is --

    q.              L O R D J U S T I C E T A Y L O R : A p i c t u r e every few m i n u t e s ,
           is t hat it?                 A. S e c o n d s we are de a li ng w ith reall y, sir,

    •
           and I, w h e n I took o ve r the system, al t er ed it so that the
           t ap e s w o u l d run at a n o r m a l sp e ed so that p eo p l e c o u l d v iew
           t h e m on n o r m a l v i d e o r e c o r d e r s .        However, that a l s o m e a n s
           t ha t the tap es h a v e to be c h a n g e d du r in g the mat ch.                     At
           this p a r t i c u l a r time           w h e n I c h e c k e d them, they w e r e r u n n i n g
           in the c o r r e c t mode,               t ha t is n o r m a l speed.
    q.             MR. K A L L I P E T I S :      Yes, the time that you are. t a l k i n g a b o u t
D          is w h e n you w er e as"ked w h e t h e r the scene o u t s i d e L e p p i n g s
           L a n e was b ei n g r e c o r d e d ?      A.  Th a t' s right, sir.

    Q. So yo u are s a y i n g it is a f t e r t h a f ' t h a t s o m e h o w            the s w i t c h
       is k n o c k e d , are y ou?      A. Yes, that's right.
    q    ..A nd w h i c h s w i t c h was k n o c k e d ? A.      There are t hr e e b u t t o n s
           on the front of the v i d e o r e c o r d e r s and one of t ho s e w h i c h
E          c h a n g e s it from n o r m a l m o d e to 1 8- ho ur time laps e syste m.

    JQ.     W h e n you w e r e a s k e d to take over the VHF link w it h F or c e
           C o n t r o l , can you r e m e m b e r w h e n that was? A.       My c o n c e n t r a t i o n
           w as a p p l i e d to t ha t j u s t aft er 3 o'clock, b a s i c a l l y w h e n we
           r e a l i s e d that t h i n g s w e r e g oi n g wrong.
     Q. B e c a u s e up to t hat t im e y ou r m a i n and p ri m a r y d u t y w o u l d be
        w i t h the v id eo s, w o u l d it not?       A.   It was, yes.

     Q.      You h a v e had a c h a n c e to see the t r a n s c r i p t from S nig Hill,
            I th ink , Mr. B i c h a r d , h a v e you not?        A.     I have now got
            that w i t h me, yes.
     Q. Can you tell me when , in fact, you took over from l o o k i n g
        at the t r a n s c r i p t ?         Do any of the m e s s a g e s ring a b el l w i t h
        y0U?         A.       T he r e w e r e c e r t a i n m e s s a g e s that w e r e p a s s e d
        by me p r i o r to 3 o ' c l o c k .             I w o u l d say a r o u n d 5 past, 6
        m i n u t e s past 3 is w h e n I made a c on s c i o u s d e c i s i o n to pay
        the full a t t e n t i o n to th e VHF radio, if you like, w h e n the
        r e s c u e o p e r a t i o n had be g un .
     Q. Who w a s o p e r a t i n g the VHF rad io in c on ta ct w i t h F o r c e C o n t r o l
        b e f o r e you g av e your c o n s c i o u s a t t e n t i o n to it?    A.      I was
H       m o n i t o r i n g it and o p e r a t i n g it on the odd o c c a s i o n w h e n I
            used     it.                                       ggg
                                                                T.   BICHARD


So n o b o d y else was - is t h a t w h a t you are s a y i n g ?
A.     N o b o d y else at all.

So p r e s u m a b l y then you t o o k a VHF r a d i o up to the desk
with your           v id e o m o n i t o r i n g c o n t r o l s , is that r i g h t ?
A.        Yes,      pr i or to all the m a t c h e s I c o l l e c t a VHF
hand-set,           take it i nto the C o n t r o l R o o m and it is kept
down t o w a r d s the l e f t - h a n d sid e.                B a s i c a l l y , again, b ec au se
of the c o n f i n e d area, t h e r e is o b v i o u s l y t e l e p h o n e s ,
r a d i o s go in g, p e o p l e ' s c o n v e r s a t i o n s and it is not always
easy to h e a r d i f f e r e n t p i e c e s , so I took on the job of
l i s t e n i n g to the VHF set.

J us t r e m i n d me, p le a s e , Mr. B i c h a r d , how do you o per ate
it in o r d e r      to s en d a m e s s a g e            to  Force Control?
A.    It is a        h a n d - h e l d s e t and t h e r e is a c o n t r o l bu tto n
on the s i d e of it w h i c h you p r e s s to o p e r a t e .               A little
red l i g h t then a c t i v i t a t e s to i n d i c a t e that you are, in
fact, t r a n s m i t t i n g .

And w h e n you h av e f i n i s h e d y o u r m e s s a g e you r e l e a s e the
butto n, is that r i g h t ?         A.      T h a t ' s right, sir.

Af t e r 3 o ' c l o c k is w h e n you t hi n k that you w e r e on that
radi o for a l e n g t h of t i m e ? A.              Tha t' s right, after about
5 p as t 3 it            s e e m e d in my m i n d t ha t I was c o n t i n u a l l y on
the radio.
 Can you h e l p me w i t h o ne m a t t e r , p le ase , Mr. B i c h a r d ? I
.put it to Mr. R y a n and I t h i n k he s aid that he did recall
 it but in case t he r e is any d o u b t -about it, can you turn
 to p ag e 8, p le ase , of the t r a n s c r i p t ?    A.   I have
 that page.
Do you se e h a l f w ay d o w n the t i m e is 19 m i n u t e s 50 seconds
into the tape.        A.     Yes.

F or c e Co n tr ol , s o m e b o d y c a l l e d A l f - do you k now who that
is?      A.      No i d e a at all, sir.

And it a p p e a r s to be a t e l e p h o n e but just in case it was,
in fact, the ra di o, I am g o i n g to ask you a bo u t it.                         The
m e s s a g e from F o r c e C o n t r o l to G r o u n d C o n t r o l as k in g w he t h e r
you w a n t e d any a m b u l a n c e s .      Do you rec al l a n y t h i n g of that?
A.        Can I just go b a c k to the c o m m e n t a bo u t A l f and m ake a
s u g g e s t i o n in r e g a r d to t h a t ?

 I am s o r r y ?     A.       C o u l d I go b a c k to the c om me nt , "Yes,
 it is Alf, do you w a n t any a m b u l a n c e s " ?               The s u g g e s t i o n
 is that p e r h a p s t his c o m m e n t w a s p i c k e d up in the b a c k g r o u n d
 w he n the set was b e i n g o p e r a t e d , the h a n d - s e t .        That cou ld
 be a c t u a l l y ac o n v e r s a t i o n w i t h i n the C o n t r o l Room.

 Well, w h o s e s u g g e s t i o n w a s    that, Mr. B i c h a r d ?           A.      That
 is my idea, sir.
                                                299
                                             72


                                                                                  T . BIC H A F»D


Q.     W he n did y ou get t h a t i d e a ?            A.           The idea is t ha t -

Q.     W he n d id you get it?              A.      I h av e    been t h i n k i n g ab o ut it
       just now, sir.

Q. You m e a n yo u teve j u s t t h o u g h t of it?                  A.      Yes.

Q.      If you go b a c k to the p r e v i o u s entry, the n a r r a t i v e , and
       we s h a l l hea r, if n e c e s s a r y , from the per so n who did the
       transcription.               The n a r r a t i v e to the t e l e p h o n e call to
       G r o u n d C o n t r o l , "I d o n ' t k n o w w h e t h e r we need any yet"
       and . p r e s u m a b l y the a n s w e r , "No, I am r in gin g G r o u n d C o n t r o l "
       and in th e r i g h t - h a n d c o l u m n the t r a n s c r i p t i o n is, " Gr o u n d
       C o n t r o l , P.C. Ryan, an d t h e n the message, 'Yes, it is Alf,
       do y o u . w a n t any a m b u l a n c e s ? '        A.      Right, sir, if this
       t r a n s c r i p t is the V H F C h a n n e l 1, I did n' t say that at all,
B      and I w a s the o n l y o n e w h o o p e r a t e d that from G r o u n d C on tro l,
       from H i l l s b o r o u g h S t a d i u m .      N o b o d y else used the VHF set.

Q. Mr. B i c h a r d , you ca n t a k e it -from m e - b e c a u s e I h a v e h ea r d it,
   it is on the t ape w h i c h is. a l l e g e d to be this p a r t i c u l a r
   channel.          A.    Yes.

Q.      But I c a n n o t h el p y ou an y f u r t h e r and nor, dees it appear-*
       can you.        A.    It w a s j u s t an of f er of a s u g g e s t i o n , there,
       sir. •
Q. You t o l d the I n q u i r y , Mr. B i c h a r d , that the first t ho u g h t tha
   you h a d in the C o n t r o l B o x wa s that it was a p i t c h i nv a s i o n .
   A.    T h a t ' s right, yes.

Q.       Is it r i g h t t ha t we se e f r o m this t r a n s c r i p t that from
        1 5. 0 4 t h r o u g h to p r a c t i c a l l y 15.0 8 all the mes-sages e m a n a t i n g
        from the G r o u n d C o n t r o l B ox w er e s ee ki ng a s s i s t a n c e to'
^       c o n t r o l a C T o w d on the p i t c h .        I can s u m m a r i s e it for you,
        the re is a cal l for a l l d o g - h a n d l e r s a v a i l a b l e to a t t e n d
        the s t a d i u m i m m e d i a t e l y .     Do you see that on p ag e 9?
        A.         Ueft- hand column,             sir?

Q.     The r i g h t - h a n d c o l u m n , I think, is what is c o m i n g out of
       Ground Control.              At 1 5 . 0 4 H i l l s b o r o u g h G r o u n d C on tr ol ,
      "Ha ve y ou go t any d o g - h a n d l e r s a v a i l a b l e can a t t e n d the
       stadium immediately, please?                      Over."          A.        Yes.

Q.      Do you s ee th a t? A.            Yes.        I can see that now,                  sir.

Q.      And the n e x t m e s s a g e is to go s t r a i g h t into the gr o un d,
        Gate 0, an d then on to t he pitch.                   A.   Yes, I r e m e m b e r
        that d e c i s i o n .
    Q. And t h o s e m e s s a g e s c o n t i n u e , you will see, Mr. B i c h a r d ,
       right t h r o u g h u n t i l 1 5 . 0 6 on page 10 when O p e r a t i o n S u p p o r t
       is c a l l e d .    A.       Yes.
    Q. Now, c an you h e l p me on thi s.                   Was Mr. J a c k s o n in the
       C o n t r o l Box w he n O p e r a t i o n S u p p o r t was c al le d?    A.   Mr.
       J a c k s o n o r d e r e d me to c a l l Oper^ati.on Support.
                                           73



                                                                  T.     BICHARD


Q. It wa s Mr. J a c k s o n wh o s a i d t ha t ?                  A.      Yes, def in it el y.

Q. You are c e r t a i n a bo u t th a t?               A.        Positive.

Q. And at that stage, Mr. B i c h a r d , you are s t i l l c on cer ned ,
   are yo.u not, w it h a p i t c h i n v a s i o n or w h a t you p e r c e i v e d
   to be a p i t c h i n v a s i o n ? A.     It wa s s t i l l in my m ind
   at that time, p it c h i n v a s i o n .

Q. And that was th.e p u r p o s e o f c a l l i n g G r o u n d S u p p o r t ?
   A.   That was the p u r p o s e of c a l l i n g O p e r a t i o n Support, yes.

Q.   I am so r ry , O p e r a t i o n S u p p o r t .        A.           Yes, sir.

     And j us t b e f o r e 15.08 is the m e s s a g e                   for a fleet    of a m b u l a n c e s .
     A.  T h a t ' s right.

Q. You w i l l find that at the b o t t o m of page 11.                    A.     Yes,
   "U-rgent m es s a g e .     A fleet "of a m b u l a n c e s r e q u i r e d to
   Hillsborough .          F-leet o f .a mb ulances , pl e as e.           Over."

Q. Yes.        J u s t pause there for a s ec o n d , p l e a s e , M r . B i c h a r d .
   You are f a i r l y e x p e r i e n c e d in .this p a r t i c u l a r g r o u n d with
   G r o u n d C on tr ol .  A.        Yes, sir.

Q.   W er e you a wa r e of the m a j o r i n c i d e n t              plan?       A.   No,      I
     am not, sir.




                                                              / A r e you a wa r e from your...




                                                             30 1
                             74


                                            T. BICHARD

Q. Are you aware from your experience as a police officer
   of the necessity of informing the emergency services of
   the type of situation that they have to deal with?
   A.  I am aware from my experience, yes, sir.

Q. Because if the ambulance officer 'phoned the Police Station
   and said "Send me 500 police officers", you would not
   do it, would you?- You would want to know why, what they
   were going to, what they needed, and so forth?   A. Yes,
   I would want some background.

Q. Did Force Control at Snig Hill ask you why you wanted a
   fleet of ambulances?   A. Looking at the transcript, sir,
   no, it doesn't appear so.



#
    Well, try your memory, Mr. Bichard. Do you recall them
    asking you for some background detail? A. No, I can't
    recall it, sir.

Q. Do you recall any senior officer in the Control Room
   instructing you what you should say to ground control?
   A. To Operations Room, to Snig Hill?

Q. Y e s . . A.   No, sir.

Q. Do you recall them giving any instruction as to what you
    should say in resppnse to -any-que$tion, "What has
    happened? ? A^ No, I think I pride myself on being a
    practical police officer who has got enough experience
    to actually deal with the matters on the ground.   Every
   ■day, sir, the ordinary P.C. deals with incidents without
    actually having to consult supervisory officers, and this
    is another occasion.

    Yes, but an ordinary P.C., even one as experienced as you,
    would not have called Operational Support, would he?
    A.   I wouldn't have the authority, sir.

Q. No, nor would you have the authority to call for a fleet
   of ambulances, would you?   A. Yes, I think I would.
   If I was the officer on scene and I required that, that
   is what I would ask for.

Q. If that is right, then you would also have to give the
   details as to why they were required and what they were
   required for, would you not?   A.  I would expect that
   that is the kind of message that I would be passing - as
   much information as possible.

Q. Did Force Control ask you why a fleet of ambulances was
   required?   A. Not to my recollection.

Q. You put through another call at the bottom of page 12,
   after 1508, directing the ambulances to Leppings Lane.
   Was that you as well, Mr. Bichard? A. Yes.   Initial
   response was wanted at Leppings Lane.

                                   302
You see, you have been asked how it is that Snig Hill
told the Ambulance Headquarters, when requesting a
fleet of ambulances, the story which has been put about,
namely that- the gate had been forced - "One of the gat»s
has collapsed or broken"?     A. Which page are we looking
at now, sir?

You will not find it in the Snig Hill transcript, because
we have not yet got that one, but you will find it in
the SYMAS transcript.  I do not know whether this has
in fact been made an exhibit.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I have got it but I do not
know whether it has been made an exhibit;  but it
perhaps should be.   This is the one beginning "Track
9", is it?

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:          Indeed, sir, page 3.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            It can be exhibited. "I.think
everybody has got it.

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:  In fact, it is also on the second
transcript which we have been given from Snig Hill, which
is reference KWB 3917.on page.9,. Perhaps you can look
at that, Mr. Bichard. if you have_'chat in front of you
It is just being brought to you.   (Hand'ed to the witness)
Sir, do you have this?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             I am not sure.

      MR. KALLIPETIS:          It is the second Snig Hill tape
to be transcribed.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             I do not think so.

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:          I am told it is SA6, sir, with
your papers.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, it is here.  I have just
been handed these over the luncheon adjournment.

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:           It is page 9 of that, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             Thank you.

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:           Do you have it, Mr. Bichard?             A. Y
I do, sir.

You will see the reference to 1508.14 and Snig Hill,,
which says:

       "So you've got quite a few injured then? A
       lot of injured.  Apparently one of the gates
       has ... They've been pushing and pushing and
       s ho vin g,   I u n d e r s t a n d , a n d one of Che g at e s
                                                              T. BICHARD

        has    ... They've collapsed the gates and there’s ..."

whatever it is.           Our transcript is roughly the same.
A.  Yes.

You see, Mr. Duckenfield told the Inquiry that the only
source of information at Snig Hill would be the ground
control?   A. That is right, via me, or the telephone
system, obviously.

Yes.  But can you recall telling that to Snig Hill?
A. No, sir, not at all.

Did you have any request for information from the BBC,
Mr. Bichard, in the course of this afternoon? A. Did
I have any request from the BBC or for the BBC?

From BBC?         A. Not personally.

Are you aware of any com-ing through to the Police Control
Room asking for information? • A. Not that I can remember'.

Can you account not only for the fact that the Ambulance
Service were told at 1508 the incorrect story, but also
the Fire Service I think at 1511, and also on the BrBC
c o m m e n t a r y ,a.t...l513 Mr. Motson has .precisely the same
story? • Can,-you acco'unt’_for thatT- -A. "No, I can' t say
at all, sir.               When that gate opened, Gate 'C', initially,
I believe that the gate had been forced and my comments
were directed along that line.

Yes, but        they were comments in thebox,                    were they not?
A. They         were to Mr. Duckenfield.

Yes, but-they were not being relayed to Snig Hill?
A.   Certainly not, no.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  But it became perfectly
clear, did it not, within a short time that that was
not what had happened?   A. I wouldn't say perfectly
clear, sir.   It was an assumption that was made at that
time which has become more apparent afterwards.

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:  Mr. Duckenfield has told us that
he was quite clear within a short space of time that the
initial impression which he shared with you he no longer
held?   A.  Again I can't speak for him, but those were
my thoughts and my feelings of what I was experiencing
at that time.

Whatever the position was - and Mr. Gibson-Watt, the
gentleman here, was asking you questions a moment ago -
you were certainly aware that the gate had been closed?
A. Yes.

C e r t a i n l y , w h a t e v e r y o u r initial t h o u g h t s w e r e b e f o r e
k i c k - o f f , you no l o n g e r h e l d chose c h o u g h c s ?        A. Yes.
                              77



                                                 T. BICHARD


             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That is correct, is it?
       A. My initial thoughts were that the gate had been
       forced.  People have come into the ground and we have
       closed the gates.  My assumption would be that the gate
       has not been actually broken.   When we refer to 'force',
       are we talking on the lines of actually physically
       breaking the gate?  That is not what I thought.   I
       thought that the gate had been forced meaning that the
       gate had been opened by the fans to allow them access.

 Q.          Mr. KALLIPETIS:  What was being said to the
       Ambulance Service, Mr. Bichard, was that the gate had
       collapsed.   A. I never told Operations Room that.

       It was, in fact, a bit more positive than that.  It was,
       "They have collapsed the gates." A. I never passed
       that message to Operations Room.  If I did, it would
       be on VHF Channel 1, which is recorded, and obviously
       it-would be in this, transcript.

 Q. You see, at 1513 Mr. Motson says "The gate leading into
    that Terrace was broken.   People without tickets got
    in, therefore overcrowding the.people with tickets and
    that is why the crush occurred. '    That is at 1513.
    A. No idea where Mr....Motjson got that from, sir.

  Q.    At some stage, Mr. Bichard, I think attempts were made   to
       contact the senior ambulance officer in the ground?
       A. Yes., sir, on more than one occasion.

  Q.   Well, Ihave found two.  Are you aware of any more than
       that?  A.  In my mind, sir, it was three occasions.

§Q.     And how did   you do it?   A. VHF, Channel 1.

  Q.    If the tape is accurate   and the transcription is accurate,
       there were only two?     A. Again I accept that as being
       the truth of the matter, that my conversations were
       recorded.

  Q. Why did you use the VHF communication?       A. That is what
     I was dealing with, sir.

  Q.    Did nobody suggest that you should use the tannoy in
       the ground?   A.   Nobody suggested it.  I wouldn't have
       even thought about using the tannoy.

  Q. Why not?   A. Operations Room control contact between
     ourselves and the other emergency services initially
     until senior officers attend at the scene, liaise and
     then act on what is happening in front of them, so they
     can, if you like, build up a communications base between
     all the services who are arriving.



                                     305
                               78



                                               T. BICHARD

     Q. That is very noble, Mr. Bichard, and it is how plans
        should operate, but in fact the first request was not
        until 1531, by which time- the Deputy Chief Ambulance
        Officer had been in the ground ten minutes and was
        already organising things at the Penistone Road end,
        where he is supposed to be?     A. Well, I think I would
        disagree with you there, sir.
8
     Q. Why?   A. I would have to disagree with you.  If the
        Police Control was the initial place where this
        operation is set up from, that would be the point of
        contact for the other services.  The senior Fire
        Officer who attended did come to the Police Control box.

     Q. That, if I may say so, Mr. Bichard,-is because he was
        directed to the Leppings Lane end via Penistone Road
        and parked his fire engine immediately behind the
        Police Control box.A.    And the Ambulance Service    was
        ini-tial'ly asked to attend at Leppings Lane as well.

     Q. That is correct, but what should an ambulance do when
        it arrives at Leppings Lane and finds bodies in need
        of attention?    A. I would assume that it would try and
D       find “the people who are in command.

     Q. Was a senior officer'sent down to 'Leppirigs Lane to li^’-se
        with the ambulance officer?   A. Not by me, sir.

     Q. Was a message relayed to the Leppings Lane end to any
      / officer down there to ask an ambulance officer to come
        up to the Police Control?   A. Again I can't answer
        that., sir.


    (I
     Q. Not by you is the answer, I think?
        by m e .
                                               A.   Again, yes, not


     Q. Nor did you hear such an    order, being given in the
        Control Room?   A. No, I    didn't hear it.

     Q. Just one other matter, Mr. Bichard.   On the tape recording
        of this particular channel, which is what you havetold
        us you had access to and   were using, there is a message
        either to or from Mr.Marshall after 3 o'clock, asking
        for the gates to be closed. • Now, can you recall that?
        You will not find it on the transcript, in fact.     A. I
        remember     On what page would that be, sir?

     Q. You will not find it on the transcript.     A.   Sorry.

     Q. Can you recall that?   A. There was some mention about
        closing gates some time around 3 o'clock.

     Q. By whom?   A.  Again I can't recollect.     Have I actually
        included that in my statement, sir?
H
                                      306
                             79


                                                     *«.*ti .   -
                                                                    'T?"


    Q..If you have, Mr. Bichard, forgive me;  I will look at
       it.  I have page 20 of your statement.  Do you have it
       in front of you?   A. These pages are not numbered,
       sir.

    Q. Are you looking at your log or at your statement, Mr.
       Bichard?   A.  I am looking at the statement that I made.

    Q. You are being given a pagenated copy of the statement,
       if that assists you.  (Handed to the witness). At the
       top of that page, you are dealing with the request by
       Mr. Marshall to open the gates?    A. Can you read out
       the  first line, please, sir?

    Q. Have you got page 20 at the bottom of the page?                A. Again,
       no numbers on this page, sir.

       Go back one page.  I think you have been given 21 by
       mistake.  Have you got page 20 now?   A. I have got page
       20 now, sir.                                 '

    Q. At the top of the page you deal with the. part where Mr.
       Marshall is asking for the gates to be opened? A. Yes.

    Q. And then the middle paragraph, "I remember that about
       the time the-gates were .ordered to be opened, mounted
       officers outside LfcppingS Lane turnstiles had managed
       to create a void.     e t c .? A. Yes.

    Q. And then, "About 2.55 p.m. Chief Superintendent-
       Duckenfield told control room staff to get some manpower
       to the North Stand to stop any possible rush on to the
       pitch"?   A. Yes, s.ir.

    Q. Just read-the rest of it to yourself to see if you can
       find the passage to which you were referring about the
^      gates  being closed again.  A.  I can't find any
       reference there at all to it, sir.

    Q. I am just checking your log to see whether, by any
       chance, it is in there.  I do not think it is. It is
       only because you have said that you have put it in
       your statement, and I accept that.   But you do recall
       some message to that effect being passed?    A. Yes.

    Q. One final matter,   please, Mr. Bichard,   in connection
       w i t h ---

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Which gates are we talking
       about - closing which gates?    A.Again, sir,  my
       assumption has been that we are talking about Gate ' C .
       I don't know which gates you are referring to, sir.




                                       307
                                       80

                                                     T. BICHARD


                MR. KALLIPETIS:  You tell me, Mr. Bichard, because I
          put to you that Mr. Marshall was concerned in this message
          which has not been transcribed and you have already told us
          that he was concerned that Gate C? - A. That is what is in
          my mind, yes.

    Q. 3ut it is true to point out in fairness to you that Gates A
       and B at sone stage were also open? - A. I was aware' certainly
B      of the request for Gate A to be opened and again in relation
       to Gate B I have no knowledge.

     Q.   You weren't aware of the    request for A to be shut? - A. So,
          I can't say I was aware of a direct order or    comment being
          made to shut Gate A.

     Q. In connection with your attempts to contact the Ambulance
        Officers, Mr. Bichard, did anybody suggest that Inspector
        Sewell should be contacted, he being the Liaison Officer
        between the Police and the Ambulance Services? - A. Not to
        my knowledge.

     Q. Lastly this please, Mr.  Bichard, the incident log that was
        being maintained at one stage in the Control Room, did you
        have any part in keeping that log? - A. No sir.
D
               ..MR. -RALLJEPSTISz.   Thank .-you.      -:


                          Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

     Q.-Mr. Bichard, have you still got Photograph 48 in front of
        you.  Could you just help us as to this:  communications
        with the Club is organised from the front row as we lock
        at that photograph, I think? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

         . Either by the telephone that we see on the desk, one of
    <P     those two telephones? - A. Yes, that is right.

     Q. Or by the Club's radio set which is also kept on the front
        desk? - A. Yes.

     Q. You have told us, and of course I accept, that you had no
        contact with the Club Control yourself? - A. That i£ right,
        sir.

     Q. Sergeant Goddard has told us that he did and I just wanted
        your confirmation of this.   You have no reason to doubt
        that Sergeant Goddard is accurate when he says that he
        had contact v/ith the Club? - A. No reason at all.

     Q. During the course of the afternoon? - A. No reason to doubt
        it.

     Q. One other matter on that, Mr. Bichard.  Did you know chat
        anybody was having difficulties, if they were, in making
H       contact with the Club that afternoon? - A. Again not to
        my knowledge.                 3 Q Q
                             81

                                       T. BICHARD


2. You did not hear any conversation specifically from Inspector
   Murray about a difficulty making contact with the Club? -
   A, Again I can't, obviously it is a very active tirae. I
   have no recollection of any conversation.

3. Mr. Bichard, is that the position that a number of people
   were doing different things and not everybody would have
   known what everybody else was doing? - A. Once we were aware
   about the fullness of this incident each individual took
   upon themselves their individual tasks, so you would not be
   fully aware of what was happening elsewhere.

Q. Mr. Bichard, I am sure we all sympathise with that, but the
   conversation that I was putting to you as to whether you could
   help was somewhat earlier.     Mr. Murray thought that he had
   tried to get in touch with the Club before the decision to
   open the gates was made. Again I can only ask you this:       if
 ^p.n fact there were difficulties at that stage, something let
   us._say at about a quarter-to-*-3 .... A. Again it is not
   in my recollection.

Q. And the last matter, and forgive me there is only one question
   on the question of the opening of the gates. Can I just
   ask you to clarify this:     Mr.. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray have
   both told the Inquiry that they had expected all the gates to
   be opened? -.-A. ..f-would accept that if that is what they are,
   saying.

Q. That is what they expected and you have told us that your
   expectation .was different? - A. That is right, Gate C.

Q. And I think you have also said that the reason for that you
   believe, -from recollection, is that because your camera
   happened to Jbe looking at Gate C at that time, you had
^ assumed that was the gate about which Superintendent Marshall
9 was speaking? - A. The actual scene is available on that
   camera.   It shows a clear picture of Gate C. Gate B is out
   of view.   Gate A is out of view.

Q. And that is what you were concentrating on personally? - A.
   That is right.

Q.    And you were unaware of the fact that Mr. Duckenfield and
     Mr. Murray wanted all the gates opened? - A. I am unaware
     of that, yes.

q   . it is just this question in the light of that background,
      Mr. Bichard.  After the order to open the gates was given
      on the first occasion, we can see on the video that you
      zoomed in on Gate C first of all? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember that? - A. I don't actually, because I have
   not had an opportunity ....   I have seen a compilation tape
   but I have not seen the tapes I produced.

0. AIL I v/anted your help with was when y o u did   200 m   in on Gate C

                                     309
                                 82
                                            T. BICHARD


         you said this morning that you drew that to"his attention"?
         - A . Yes.

    Q. Whose attention did you draw to the fact that Gate C was
       being opened? - A. When I made the comment about it being
       forced open?

    Q. Yes?.- A. It would be directed at Hr. Duckenfield, but also
B      to everybody who was in the Control Box.

    Q.   But are you saying that you have a specific recollection
         of drawing Mr. Duckenfield's attention to the gate which you
         were zooming in on at the time when the first entry was
         made? - A- When the gate was, as I believed forced, and I
         have shouted out the comments that I have put in my statement
         and it has been directed to Mr. Duckenfield who has been
         stood just in front of me.

         And likewise approximately five minutes later when there was
         conversation specifically about Gate A, and I think we can
         tell you without fear of contradiction that you zoomed in
         on Gate A as well? - A. Yes, I have got that recollection
         now of seeing two lines of Police Officers behind Gate A.

D   Q. And zooming in on them? - A. And moving in on that scene, yes

    Q. When you zoomed in on Gate A, those minutes later after
        the initial zoom on Gate C, can you recall whether anything
       was said at all inside the Control Bo:-; about why Gate A
       had not been opened earlier? - A. No, I know why I zoomed
       -in on Gate A because of the radio message from Sergeant
       Higgins, that is why I went there, but I have no idea of
E       anv conversation after that.

               MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much.   Thank you sir.

o                      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

    Q.    Mr. 3ichard, may    I askyou about the monitoring at Snig
F        Hill. Until the major incident was declared, was Snig Hill
         listening in to the communications that were passing?
         - A. To my knowledge they were listening to Channel 25,
         personal radio.

    Q.   During the time that you were in the Control Room up to the
         moment that Gate C v/as opened and caused you to shout out,
         had you been expecting that gate to open? - A. Certainly
         not.

    Q. When you observed what was shown on the television screen,
       v/as it a matter of surprise to you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you shout it out? - A. Yes.

H    Q- Hov/ever, did you make any specific communication to Snic Hil

                                       3i   n
                              cTP   T-ixo****   TO    /tfA'/et'T-

                                                              73

                                                     T. BICHARD


                (In the presence of the Jury)

                    TREVOR BICHARD Sworn

                       By THE CORONER

Q. You are Trevor Bichard, aren't you? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. P.C. 1370, I believe? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You are one of the Control Room staff - that is not
   your only job - but you are one of the Control Room
   staff at Hillsborough Football Ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In 1989 how many years had you been there? - A. I
   commenced those duties September, 1987.

Q.’ So quite a few- years, and is it right that you are a
    regular “teafm with Sergeant* Goddard and F.C. Ryan and
    yourself? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were the video operator and the VHF-radio man, is
   that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. On this particular match we are talking about.   It is
   not necessary, I think, to take every single event that
   happened in the Control Room because we have heard the
   various people', but there are some items which you will
   be able to help us on. The first one is this - were
   you in Court when we showed the video just before
   lunch? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you.recognise that as one of your videos or not? -
   A. No.

Q.   You didn't recognise it? - A. No.

Q.    But would I be right in saying those are the sort of
     shots one could get with your equipment if one were to
     aim it at Leppings Lane? - A. The pictures that you
     have seen this morning are greatly enhanced. What you
     must consider is that the screen we are looking at is
     only 12 inch.

Q. You are saying that that screen is very much larger? -
   A. It gave you a false impression about the accuracy of
   the picture you were seeing.

Q.    Are you saying that the video, not the screen but the
     video itself is not -- put it another way, if we had
     shown that video on a 12 inch screen would it have been
     the sort of picture we would have seen with your
     cameras? - A. That is correct, yes.


                                 3i 1
                                                          74

                                                 T. BICHARD


Q. In other words you are saying it is infinitely clearer,
   you can see more detail, when you look at it on a huge
   screen like this7 - A. Yes and obviously it is running
   at a slower speed as well so you have a chance to take
   in what you    are seeing in that picture.

Q. I don't think we slowed it down.    I think it was played
   at the standard rate.- A. It is a little bit difficult
   to explain.    Itwas taken on a time lapse system
   whereby basically a single photograph is taken, or a
   single frame is done every half second, rather than at
   normal speed.

Q. So you can focus onto each frame because you have got a.
   little .... - A. The actual speed of that has been
   altered, yes.  It is not running at the right speed as
   we would have seen it on the camera.

Q. Are you saying that- the time lapsing, is different, what
   we have seen, as to what you.would have seen? - A. Yes.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, perhaps I can assist? The
   view from the-Control Box is of the normal film so they
   would see it at normal speed.  When one records it
   there is a facility to record it in time lapse which
   could then be used to get photographic evidence.   They
   obviously don't see what is actually recorded, they see
   the film running at normal speed then after the event
   you see it at the slower rate.

        THE CORONER:   Thank you.

Q. Is that a correct explanation of what you are telling
   me? - A..."That is perfect.

Q. So you are not saying that we had messed around with
   this film? - A. No.

Q. You are merely saying that the recording facility that
   happened to have been used was time lapse, but what you
   were seeing would have been different because it was
   continuous? - A. Yes.

Q. In the first instance, and on a very much smaller
   screen? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell me about the cameras which can look at Leppings
   Lane terracing? - A. The terracing one?

Q. Yes. - A. There were three cameras actually inside the
   Ground which could get a picture of Leppings Lane.   If
   we were to deal with the camera that is at 90 degrees
   to the terracing area, that was the latest one to be
   installed and it was positioned there actually not to


                                    312
                                                           75

                                                   T. BICHARD


     take general shots of the terracing, but to the
     uncovered seats area where the away fans were adjacent
     to home supporters and we had had some trouble there.

Q. Where was that camera located?   Show us on the model.
   (The witness uses the model to illustrate his
   evidence) - A. The camera was under slung from the
   notice board next to the Control Box.

Q.   Is that the one, the video which we saw? - A. Yes,
     definitely that camera.

Q.   So we will call that camera number one, just for the
     sake of the record. That is the one which looks along
     Leppings Lane from the Contr o l‘Box, is that right? - A.
     It can take that picture but its purpose was to take
     general shots of this area.   It was the uncovered seats
     and where away supporters were next to them.

Q. So that was why that location was chosen? - A. That is
   right, yes.

Q. Where is the second one? - A. The second one moving
   further along, is in fact almost central in the South
   Stand.  It is a colour system and again the object
   behind the camera was to give a.general picture round
   the Ground, an overall internal scene.  The colour
   system was chosen to try and assist in the
   identification of people within the Ground should any
   incident occur.




                                 /Q. Just complete it


                                313
                                                                    76

                                                            T. BICHARD


Q.   Just complete it by telling me where the third one
     was. - A. The third camera which was at the far side
     of the South Stand was set up to take pictures within
     the Spion Xop area.  It was a black and white system
     and that was its main purpose, for that area. You
     could use it to take pictures inside the South Stand,
     but that was its main purpose, for the Xop.

Q.   Come back.  So what we have got is we have got camera
     No.l by the Police Control Box whose objective was
     actually to look tHe opposite way than Leppings Lane?
     - A. Yes sir.

Q.   But you could swivel it round? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   That gives you a sort of slightly-tangential
     longitudinal view along the' terrace if you did swivel
     it round, is that right? - A. it would give you a view
     straight along the terrace.

Q.   The one in the middle* camera 2, the. colour system,
     that was designed to take all the ground apart from,
     of course, the South Stand.  Presumably you could not
     take that because it was behind it? - A. You could get
     part of the South Stand.  It wasn't 360 degrees, but
     it was certainly high - 270 maybe.

Q.   Then the last one was at the far end of the South
     Stand and that was really designed for the Spion Kop?
     - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.   Just to exclude that one, did you use that one at all
     to look at Leppings Lane on the day, 15th April 19S9?
     - A. Not as I recall.

Q.   We saw, of course, accepting everything you have said
     about screen size, and so on, that all the cameras had
     zoom facilities, is that right? - A. They did, yes.

Q.   So you could, if you wanted to, select bits to zoom in
     on? - A. You could get closer, yes.

Q.   You needed that, of course, if you wanted to identify
     anybody in particular? - A. The system as it was set
     up was not able to create a reasonable enough picture
     for identification purposes, and this had been
     established when a survey had been carried out by the
     Home Office.

Q.   Does that include the colour cameras as well? - A.
     That is right, yes.

           MR. I S A A C S :   Sir, I am sorry, was that it c o u l d
     not p r o d u c e --
                                      314
                                                        •• 77

                                                  T. BICHARD


          THE CORONER:    I think he Said it could not.
Q.   You are quite sure about that? - A. I am quite sure.
     Taking the colour camera as an example, if you were to
     take pictures of people below that camera in the
     uncovered seating area, you would get identification
     because they a r e so -close to the camera, but once you
     get to the end of the South Stand area, Leppings Lane,
     the magnification available on that zoom was
     insufficient to create identification.

Q.   So what was the purpose of the cameras? - A. To
     generally oversee inside the ground. That part of the
     system was installed as an origi.nal instrument for
     command and control, rather than for evidence
     gathering.    Obviously identification is part of
     evidence^- gathering.

Q.   So it was actually designed to try and help people to
     see around the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   But it was inadequate for, shall we say, prosecution
     purposes, that is what you are saying? - A. That is
     right, yes.  But in combination with still photographs
     the video action would create an ideal picture.  It
     would give you an overall scene of what took place and
     then we had systems of still photographers who would
     be able to use quality cameras to take close-ups of
     groups of the crowd that could be magnified.

Q.   So it was part of an overall system? - A. A small cog
     in a big system.

Q.   The camera in the middle, the colour one, what sort of
     a view did that get of Leppings Lane? It obviously
     was not 90 degrees, because to get 90 degrees it would
     have had to be in the centre of the pitch, but how
     good a picture could one get using maximum zoom of
     Pens 3 and 4? - A. You would get a reasonable view of
     Pens 3 and 4.

Q.   Could it get a view of the people at the front of the
     pen so that you could distinguish them or not? - A.
     Not to distinguish them, no. You would get a view,
     but obviously it is obscured by the fence and
     hoardings, etc.

Q.   I think I am right in saying that you did not train
     that camera with maximum zoom facilities onto Leppings
     Lane terracing? - A. No, an incident had taken place
     on the Spion Kop where some Liverpool fans who had got
     tickets for that end of the ground had been segregated
     and several arrests had been made, etc., and the
     camera had been set there.

                                315
                                               T. BICHARD


Did it remain set on that location? - A. As far as I
can recall, yes.

But if you had been asked - I say no more - to train
it onto Leppings Lane terracing at about just after 3,
when we know that problems were developing, vould one
have been able to obtain a picture on your screens,
not on this screen but on your screens, which would
have enabled identification of individuals at the
front to be made from your experience of the quality
of that camera? - A. No, it would give you an over
picture only.

So you are saying that it would not have been possible
to distinguish individuals? - A . No.

I'know that was nat done. - A.-1, think actually i_t
was, but it was not recorded'. There are five cameras
but only two recorders.

We will" come to that. - A. I could explain if you wish
about why it did not become part of the recording.

Yes, tell me that. - A. The system operated whereby at
2.30 I should have replaced both tapes.  Because of
what was taking place on the Leppings Lane end I
didn't replace those tapes, and eventually I.think it
ran out just after 3 o'clock. The camera was used,
but it was not taping.

I see, but you said a moment ago that the camera was
actually' trained on the Spion Kop. Are you saying
that it was re-trained onto Leppings Lane? - A. It was
on the Spion Kop, but it was not recording and it was
watching that area until later on. When things that
had developed outside the ground had, in fact, moved
inside, obviously then we moved to looking at a
different camera, we were wanting a different view,
and that was the one we would have used.

You have not understood my question.  I am either
confusing you, or you are confusing me, one or the
other.  Let us talk about the colour camera. You had
loaded a tape for that - right - into the recorder? -
A. Yes.

You had trained the camera onto the Spion Kop? - A.
Yes.

What time? - A. I think it would be around 2
o'clock/2.15.

Were you recording those scenes at that time, as far
as you can remember? - A. Yes.
                          316
                                                                79

                                                        T. BICHARD


Q.   Did you at any time re-train that camera onto the
     Leppings Lane terracing? - A. Yes.

Q.   What time did you do that?   - A. It would be some time
     after 3 o'clock.

Q.   Do you know how much after 3 o'clock? - A. No.

Q.   You are saying there is no film of it because the tape
     had run out and in the heat of the moment you did not
     replace it? I am not blaming you for that in any way.
     - A. No. When the colour camera came into use, the
      tape had expired.

Q.   You had scenes in the Control Room but we cannot look
     at that today from that camera, that is right, is it -
     not? - A. Yes, that is it, sir.
         —   -              .         *

Q.   The other camera, the one where we do have scenes, in
     fact the tape did not run out because it was on time
     lapse? - A. That is right, sir, yes.-

Q.   And it gave an extra life, so to speak?       - A. Yes, it
      did.

Q.   You have already told me - I am still on the colour
      camera - that the scenes that you could see in your
     Control Room on the monitor were (a) less good than
     what x*e would have seen because it was smaller? - A.
     Yes sir.

Q.   And (b) in any event in the Control Box it would not
      have enabled you to distinguish individuals? - A. No,
      the quality of the reproduction on the screens, the
      monitors you have got, is far substandard in
      comparison with what you have seen there.




                                /Q.       The film we saw ...




                                  317
                                                              80

                                                     T. BICHARD


Q. The film we saw this afternoon of the Leppings Lane end,
   which came from what I have called camera 1, I don't know
   the camera number. - A. I would know it as camera 5,

Q. The one beneath or near the Police Box? -A. Yes.

Q. That scene began at about 15.02? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where was that camera looking before 15.02 as far as you
   can recollect? - A. My recollections are that the
   particular camera had been faulty and in fact you saw
   some of the problems, that occurred.      You were getting
   what is called flare.    It is reflection of light
   coloured objects and you lose the picture.       The camera
   was not really being used as much as it would normally be
   because of the sub-standard picture.       It was just left
   in position.   That is why the picture never really moved
   at all because -it was set a n d ”left in that position.
                                   »          *

Q. That is what I am coming to.   Given that it started at
   15.02, let us assume I am right on that time, was that
   the time you moved it and located it and then left it to
   take that shot? - A. No, that probably would have been
   done before that.

Q. Would it have been recording before that? - A. Yes.

Q. So there ought to be a film of.it, prior to that? - A. I
   would have thought so, yes.

Q. Of that same scene? - A. Yes.

Q. If I tell, you we cannot find it would that make any
   difference to your answer? - A. I have no idea at all
   where it could have gone to.    It was part of the tape
   and the tapes were all sealed up at the end of the day.

Q. You saw the beginning of the tape? -A. Yes.

Q. We deliberately started it with a few   frames before it
   flicked.   The recording on that tape   was of scenes
   outside the ground.   Do you remember   that? - A. Yes,
   that is right, it showed the external   view.

Q. That did not come from that camera, did it? - A. It could
   be that that shot before...   They system - I haven't the
   word to describe it.   It can move from camera to camera.
   If I am not viewing a particular shot it can be set so
   that it will flick through cameras 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, at
   set periods.   At that particular time it is quite
   possible that I was operating the external camera on
   Leppings Lane and that had been on time lapse mode.    The
   scene you saw outside at first was part of that sequence.


                             318
                                                             81
                                                      T. BICHARD


   I do not know for sure.   Without seen the whole original,
   tape I cannot really explain how it has got where it is.

Q. You cannot be recording from two cameras at once on to
   one tape, can you? - A. No, there are two tapes and you
   are getting one scene at a time.

Q. From one camera? - A. Yes, either the one you select if
   you want a particular view to be recorded, or if you wish
   for it to flick round the other cameras.

Q. Let's leave the cameras for the time being and let's get
   back into the Control Room.   Can you recollect that at
   some point or other a radio man came into the Control
   Room to   try and fix the radios? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you recollect any request- at that time.to you to make
   sure that scenes outside the ground were being recorded?
   -A, I believe that was made tjy Mr. Duckenf-ield. -

Q. You would have recorded that off a black and white
   camera? - A. It was a black and white camera that was
   situated on the external side of Leppings Lane.

Q. In fact   that is what was being done? - A. Yes.

Q. At some  point or other did you see a gate open? -A-. Yes,
   C Gate, initially.

Q. You saw that.   Did you see that gate being opened for a
   short period of time and then being closed by what looked
   like a mounted Officer to you? - A. Initially I thought
   the gates had been forced open and. that Police Officers,
   including a mounted Officer, had managed to close the
   gates.

Q. Can you actually see the gate or is it just the movement
   of people, which you can see? - A. The thing that drew ray
   attention to it was the sudden influx of people.

Q. You saw that and in fact did you draw people's attention
   to it? - A. I did.   I said that the gate had been forced
   open.

Q. Then the position appeared to be retrieved by the
   Officer, as far as you were concerned? - A. That is how I
   saw it, yes.

Q. Did you subsequent to that hear a request from
   Mr. Marshall couched in strong terms that the gates
   should be opened? - A. I think it was three requests, as
   I call, the initial one being more of a suggested idea to
   relieve a problem that was beginning to build up in
                                                              82
                                                      T. BICHARD


     Leppings Lane, building up to his final request which was
     very, very insistent.

     Did the final request come after the retrieval of the
     situation with that gate, as far as you remember? - A.
     Yes

Q. Did the first request come before? - A. Yes, before that.

Q. We have heard about the gates opening and people coming
   in.    I do not think I need to take you through that.
   Just thinking about. Xeppings Lane terracing now.   At
   what point did you first notice, either visually or by
   monitor, anything that warranted comment, if that is the
   right word? - A. I saw some people climbing over the
   fence and a situation similar to that, people climbing to
   the -stand, had occurred the year earlier.   If you like,
   those would have.been my first thoughts that there was
   anything unusual about what was happening on Leppings
   Lane terrace, that people were climbing on to the
   perimeter track over the fence.

Q. That is the first time your attention was drawn to that
   part of the ground in a significant sort of way? -A. Yes.

Q. Did you see it through a window     or   did you see iton a
   monitor? - A. It is very difficult to remember.    The
   view is partially obscured of what is happening out on
   the terrace because of people walking across the front of
   my position.   I am not sure.

Q. At that point in time your impression was that this was a
   repeat of the previous year's... -A. I thought it was
   some sort of pitch invasion.

Q. Was the previous year at the same time or at the end of
   the game or in the middle, or when was it, as far as you
   remember? - A. I recall it   was at the end ofthe game,
   actually.   Quite a lot of   people came on tothe pitch.

Q. So it was different in that respect - timing-wise? - A.
   Yes.It was the same scene    but a different time.

Q.   But you connected the two in   your mind? - A. I did, yes.

Q.   Did you see the match stopped? - A. No.

Q.   Did you know it had stopped? How did you find out   it
     had stopped? - A. By the volume of supporters who had
     gone on to the pitch and then I realised the players had
     actually been taken off or been asked to leave.

Q. We have heard from several   people that Superintendent
   Greenwood was seen to signal and,   indeed, he radioed in.
                                                                   83

                                                          T. BICHARD


          Did you hear that?   You may not have done. - A. I did
          not hear the radio message but I remember seeing him
^         waving his arms across.

    B   Q. Where do you remember seeing him, as a matter of
           interest? - A. On the pitch near to the goalposts.

        Q. Can you remember the ACC coming in, Mr. Jackson? - A. On
           more than one occasion, yes.




    c



(   D




G   F

                  Q. I am not interested




    G



                                      321

    H
                                                                 84
Q. I am not interested in the first occasion which was
   early on.  I am interested in the occasion around and
   after kick-off? - A. Shortly after three o'clock?

Q. Yes.   Do you remember him coming in? - A. I do, yes.

Q. You may not have done but did you speak to him at
   all? - A. Not directly.  I was having conversations
   with other people and I think the first comment I
   recall is when operation support was called for and
   that was directed to me to use VHF radio to ask the
   Operations Room to instigate that plan.

Q. That was your second, function, was it not, the VHF
   radio? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you decided at some point that that was more
   import suit than the cameras and you may well have been
   right.. Had you decided that before or after the -
   request for operation ..support? - A. I "would, say it was-
   roughly about the-same time. .

Q. I want you to just think hard about this question of
   operation support for a moment.  When was it first
   requested? - A. Very early on after the ACC had come
   into the Control Box.

Q. So it was something that happened after.the ACC came
   into the Control Box but pretty quickly after that? -
   A. Yes.

Q. The second question I want to ask you is, I know you
   were the transmitter, you were the voice? - A. Yes.

Q. But it was not your decision, was it? - A. No.

Q. Who gave you the order? - A. It was the ACC.     It
   required his authority anyway.

Q. That is the reason why I am asking you this because, as
   I understand it, a response came back some time later
   from Headquarters saying, "This has to be authorised by
   the ACC". Why was that necessary? - A. Possibly the
   first message that I passed was just a request for
   operation support and perhaps I did not explain to them
   that the request had been made by the ACC. Obviously
   that would be recorded on tape.

Q. Do you remember this request coming back saying,
   "Authority required" or words to that effect? - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then? - A. I immediately told them that
   the authority had been given by the ACC who was present
   in the Control Room.



                                  322
                                                                 85

                                                          T. BICHARD


Q. They accept his word? They do not want to hear his
   voice if you say it. Control will accept it, is that
   right? - A. That is the only time it has ever happened
   to m e . I would assume the initial request will be
   sufficient.   Obviously it is a major thing to be asking
   for and they would want confirmation to cover
   themselves.

Q . Was it you who contacted the Operations Room for
    ambulances? - A. Yes, sir.

 Q. How did that happen? What happened? - A. As I recall,
    things seemed to have gone on quite a way. Again time
    is very difficult to pin down but it seemed quite a way
    into things when we realised that people had in fact
    been injured and it was not just a pitch invasion or
.. 'the movement "of people around-the ground:

Q. Turn to 517A in the bundle of’documents.      Have you
   found it? - A. 517A.

Q.    You can see this looks like a transcript   of a log or
     part of a log? - A. Yes.

Q.    Is this anything to do with you? Would these be
     messages that you would be transmitting? - A. This
     looks like a transcript of a telephone conversation
     between Ambulance Control and Force Headquarters.

Q.   In other words, not your conversations? - A. Not my
     doing, no.

Q. If you turn the page to 517B you will see at 1508.14,
   can you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    I accept this is not your voice which is speaking but
     there is a comment there? - A. Yes.

Q. On what was required and why.  Can you see it? - A. "A
   lot injured, apparently one of the gates, they've been
   pushing and pushing", that conversation.

Q.    Yes. Have you any explanation as the VHF operator     as
     to how that information got to Snigg Hill for them     to
     pass it on? - A. No, sir.

Q. Pardon? - A. No idea at all, sir.

Q. You cannot recollect passing that type of information
   on to Snigg Hill? - A. No, if I had passed that
   information on to Snigg Hill it would have been part of
   the tape recording of VHF transmissions.  I think that
   has been documented and transcribed.


                         323
                                                       *.      86
Q. You have no recollection of passing anything like this
   on? - A. No, sir.

Q. The timing of that is 1508 or thereabouts? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not know but are you able to say when you. would
   have sent the message to Snigg Hill for ambulances? -
   A. Not exactly but that would be on the transcript from
   the tape.

Q. What about later on? You were in the Control Room, Mr.
   Duckenfield was there a n d .I think various other people
   came into the Contrpl Room, is that right? - A. Indeed,
   sir.

Q. Did you hear any conversations or explanations being
   given as to what caused the problems with which
   everybody was grappling with at the time? - A. Various
   people came to the Control Room and all wanted
   information about what had taken place.  Is there any
   one particular individual?

Q. Yes, when Hr. Kelly came to the Control Room was
   anything said? - A. The Chief Superintendent did have a
   conversation with Hr. Kelly.

Q. That is Chief Superintendent Duckenfield so that we
   know? - A. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Q. Do you recollect what was said in that conversation? -
   A. Not the whole of the conversation but certain
   reference was made to the initial thought about the
   gates being forced open.

Q. You recollect that that was said? - A. Yes..

Q. What you are saying is that you cannot remember the
   full extent? - A. That was only part of the
   conversation he was having.

Q. Would you be able to confirm that the main opening of
   the gates had been authorised from the Control Room? -
   A. Yes, that is right.

Q. At what point did you yourself, never mind what anybody
   else said or did, realise that there was a major
   disaster developing in front of your eyes? - A. I think
   that is really a matter of record again on the tape
   when I passed a transmission to Headquarters saying
   that we now realised there was in fact fatalities.   It
   wasn't just a series of people who were injured.   I
   seem to recollect that would be around 3.15. Again it
   is difficult to tie things exactly down but it would be
   recorded on tape the time that conversation occurred.



                             324
                                                       T. BICHARD


                Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING

Q. Mr. Bichard, can I first of all deal with the message
   whilst it is clear in everybody's mind, that 517B?
   What you are saying about that is that you had a
   recorder on the VHF transmitter including all the
   messages being sent out over that medium? - A. All
   messages that go into Force Operations Room by radio or
   by telephone are recorded.

Q. Therefore, you can confirm by that that was not a
   message which was sent out by you? - A. Yes, the
   transcript that is there appears to be one of a
   telephone conversation.

Q. Whatever source it may have come from did not come from
   within the Control Box? - A. Not as I recollect, no.

Q. I think that so far as the substance is concerned, the
   collapsing of the gate, that too you have checked on
   the tape.  Is that right? - A. I have never had access
   to the tapes.  It was seized by West Midlands.

Q. You are having to work from recollection on that part
   as opposed to the actual record on the other one. Your
   recollection is that that was not said from the Control
   Room? - A. I don't ever remember saying anything of
   that nature.   If the tape was to be presented and said
   that I did....

Q. .That is as much as you can say, Officer. Your
   recollection is that you do not remember that at all? -
   A. No.

Q . We have established and I am not going to establish all
    over again that the Control Room was very much a team
    effort? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. We have established also and I am sure you have sat in
   and heard the questions to Sergeant Goddard that
   although there were obvious differences in rank it was
   something of each person doing a particular job and
   drawing the attention of another person to that
   particular situation? - A. Yes, when things happened
   that I saw on screen, if they had not been seen by
   other people I would bring it to their attention. Very
   often if a message came in over the radio that made
   reference to a particular area of the ground or an
   incident I would direct the camera may be to record
   that particular incident if it seemed to be that
   important.




                            325
                                                              88
Q. These words really, "If I see an incident or notice
   something on the monitors I will bring it to the
   attention of the Control Room staff. Vice versa if
   they see something they would mention it to m e ” . - A.
   Y es, sir.

Q. In fact when the call came in from Mr. Marshall who was
   out in Leppings Lane to close Leppings Lane, did you
   take a look at the monitors at that time into Leppings
   Lane and see what it was that precipitated that request
   from him? - A. As I recollect I took a general view
   along Leppings Lane.

Q. Would it be fair to. say, PC Bichard, from that general
   view as shown up on your monitor there was nothing you
   could identify which could have necessitated Mr.
   Marshall making that request? - A. Nothing untoward at
   that stage.

Q. Of course, he was the man on the spot.. He was the
   senior. Officer who was well versed and able to make
   that sort of response? - A. He would have a better view
   obviously being on the ground.

Q. Can you help us please as to the view your cameras have
   so far as the wall line of the turnstiles is concerned
   at the Leppings Lane end? Are you able to see people
   at the front of the queues waiting.to go into the
   turnstiles? - A. No, you cannot see the external side
   of the turnstiles.

Q. Again when a message was received from Superintendent
   Marshall as to the crushing at the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles, did you wove your cameras then to have a
   look at Leppings Lane and see if you could see
   anything? - A. I think once the first request came in
   it was a continual effort of looking at Leppings Lane
   to see what was actually taking place.

Q. Can you give us any indication of when it was, having
   had the cameras lined up initially on the Spion Kop
   end, when you moved the cameras so as to take a look at
   what was going on in Leppings Lane? - A. The camera
   would have remained on the Kop obviously but my
   attention would have been brought round to Leppings
   Lane probably when the first request came in from Mr.
   Marshall regarding the closing of the road.

Q. So there is the closing of the road but the problems
   with the crowd manifested themselves over a period of
   time.  There were requests for extra serials or
   reinforcement.  There were requests for horsemen to go
   over.  Were you watching the Leppings Lane crowd at
   that time or were you still having to focus on other
   things inside the ground and also, of course, on this
   monitor on the Kop? - A. My attention was purely on


                              326
                                                    T. BICHARD


Leppings Lane.   That is where everything seemed to be
happening.

Would it be fair to say in round terms that that would
be from about five past two onwards? - A. That is about
right, sir.

At that stage how many cameras are giving you a view of
Leppings Lane? - A. One.

That is on to one of. these monitors and without going
over it all again, nothing like what we have seen, just
a small screen and not a very easy picture to
distinguish and differentiate? - A. That is correct,
sir.




                                  / Q . When you looked.



                         327
                                                          90

                                                   T. BICHARD


Q. When you looked out at half-past-2 and saw the crowd
   outside, you are an Officer experienced in looking at
   crowds outside football matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you form any view yourself as to whether in your
   view that crowd would not get into the Ground by kick-
   off time? - A. I was quite happy that the crowd would
   get inside the Ground within the time that we had left.

Q. Thank you.  I will try to pass fairly quickly through
   that succeeding period because I have already touched
   upon the various events that were happening within the
   Control Room, and we know that the Control Room was an
   extremely busy place, at all times but particularly
   during this period, wasn't it? - A. Indeed.

Q. Mr. Marshall made three radio messages that you
   remember? - A-. Yes, sir.

Q.. The third of those radio messages has been described as
    almost a command:  open the gates or someone will get:
    killed? - A. Yes, it was very positive and insistent.

Q. Were you able to give any assistance to the senior
   Officers in the Control Box as to what was going on
   then, from your camera's eye view? - A. No, because the
   view that we are getting is not of what is happening in
   front of the turnstiles, it is beyond, further back
   into the crowd beyond that point.

Q. When the decision was made that the gate should be
   opened, Mr. Marshall having asked for the gate to be
   opened, did you re-train the camera then? - A. Yes.   My
   initial,-thoughts were, again talking about.gate, as has
   been said earlier I was thinking about Gate C. Because
   of the position of the camera the actual angle of Gate
   2 does not give you a view of it, it is looking
   directly over the top of it, and I did not realise that
   the gate was there.

Q. When you trained on Gate 3 you then saw it opened? - A.
   Yes.

Q. But your thought, I think, was that it had not opened
   voluntarily but that it had either gone or burst? - A.
   The initial opening?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

         THE CORONER:   I think you said Gate 3.

         MR. MANNING:   Did I say 3, sorry:




                          328
                                             T. BICHARD


Gate C? - A. Yes, the initial opening I thought the
gate had been forced open.

Then you saw what appeared to be a recovery of that
gate by a mounted Officer? - A. Yes.

Was it after that apparent recovery that the command
message from Mr. Marshall came over the air? — A. There
was another message and then shortly after that the
insistent, the positive demand.

Is it right to say that when the gate, in your mind, in
your view as to what you could see on the monitor,
burst or gave way, that you actually used words like
that within the Control Room, in other words that you
alerted everybody in the Control Room with words like,
"The gate's burst"? - A. I did, yes, "The gate has been
forced".                              ~

In view of Mr. Marshall saying that he wanted the gates
opened, did you keep your camera trained on Gate. C? -
A. I can't recall whether it was just an over view of
the area or specifically Gate C.

Did a time come when the camera was not trained on Gate
C but moved to another gate? - A. Yes, shortly after
the order had been given to open the gate a further
request came from the C and V Serial, Sergeant Higgins,
regarding Gate A, and he too was very insistent that it
was necessary to open the gate because of the danger to
people outside.

You said .a very short time, let me just try and press
you a little if I may as to that, can you give us any
idea what sort of time it appeared to you there was?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I think to be fair he said,
"shortly after".

     MR. MANNING:   Shortly after, P.C. Bichard, can
you give us any idea how much in time, shortly after
the opening of Gate C, you heard the request so far as
Gate A is concerned and moved your camera? - A. I can't
answer that question correctly again, to look at the
video tape, my reactions were to that request and I
moved the video tape across to Gate A.  If somebody
knew the time difference between that, that is an
accurate timing of the occurrence.

Thank you very much.   I certainly won't press you any
further than that.   In all of this did you get a chance
at all to see what was happening on the Leppings Lane
Terraces? - A. No.



                        329
                                                           92
A
                                                    T. BICHARD


    Q. The first time that you got any signal that there was
       any problem so far as that is concerned was when people
       were climbing over the fence? - A. That is the first
       time that I realised that there was something untoward.
B   Q. You are not sure whether you saw that on the camera, or
       the monitor from the camera, or whether it was through
       the window? - A. I am not 100 per cent sure on that
       one.

    Q. But you formed that view instantaneously, that at that
       time there was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

    Q. That was the view that you took then? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you had been present, I think, the year before when
       that had, in fact, been the invasion that the learned
       Coroner referred to, at the end of the match? A. Yes, I
       had.
                                     »



    Q. Is it possible to have a close up view of the centre
       pens from any of the cameras? - A. You really have to
D      be careful on the definition of a close up view.

    Q. I am looking to you, Officer, with probably the best
       knowledge in the Court to help us as to what you can
       see and what you can't see, and how clearly you can see
       it.  It is all right getting up close to somebody but
       if the whole image is blurred it is useless being
       there, isn't it, so if you can help us in that sort of
       context? - A. My idea of a close up view would be no
       more than six heads and shoulders on the picture, for
       identification.  That camera was not good enough to
       give that sort of picture.

    Q. So it was not good enough to give six heads and
       shoulders, and it is obvious therefore it was not
       capable of giving one head and shoulders either? - A.
       Most definitely not.

    Q. What do you say, Officer, so far as the ability of a
       camera, trained from the South Stand, to give you an
       idea in your terms of overcrowding within that area? -
       A. It would not give you a view of overcrowding.

    Q. Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment
       to make any decision about overcrowding from the
       monitor that you would have in front of you? - A. I
       don't think it would be a sound judgment.

    0. In fact, part of the problem is that the position and
       angle of the camera in the South Stand, instead of
       ideally, if you like, being on the centre of the pitch,
       gives you a difficulty because of the angle itself? -


                               330
                                                           93

                                                  T. BICHARD


     A. That combined with the inadequacy of the camera,
     yes.

Q. What you have got is a camera starting off with an
   inherent disadvantage in that it is straining its lens
   over a distance of what, perhaps 100 yards,' before it
   even reaches the subject matter it wants to focus on? -
   A. That is correct, that yardage is effectively wasted.

Q. And it would need a very expensive, sophisticated piece
   of equipment to be able to do that sort of thing? - A.
   That is the principle:  you either move the camera or
   pay more money out for a more powerful lens.
                                                             •

Q. I think it is right to say that there had been
   discussions between you, and I am not quite sure who it
   was but somebody - can you help us with regard to the
   purchase of ether.equipment or different equipment? -
   A. Yes, A review had taken place with the Home Office,
   and Mr. Holdsworth, who was in charge of the
   installation of the CCTV system, and Mr. Mackrell,
   regarding updating the whole of the system all round
   the Ground. “ Perhaps if I could qualify that, the
   system could be improved just by actually moving things
   around, re-positioning, we could achieve a far better
   standard of picture for what we required.

Q. We have talked about what the camera can see and the
   camera can't see. Just help me with regard to this, it
   is right, isn't it, that the camera can t see the
   tunnel off the concourse leading into the terraces
   themselves? - A. The camera can see the front side of
   the tunnel on the terracing when no people are there,
   but you cannot see the rear entrance of the tunnel on
   the concourse.

Q.    Yes, you can see it from the pitch side? - A. Yes.

Q.   Butyou can't see it from the concourse side? - A.     That
     is right.

Q.   You were watching Gate C on your monitor.  You saw what
     you have described as the first opening and closure and
     then the second opening under orders from Mr.
     Duckenfield.  Did you as an Officer experienced in
     working in that Ground draw any connection between the
     people coming in Gate C and the tunnel? - A. None
     whatsoever.

Q. Had you done so, Officer, is that something, if nobody
   else had mentioned it, that you would have mentioned?-
   A. I would, yes.

Q. Thank you very much indeed.



                            331
                                                    94

                                             T. BICHARD


     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, let's pause for about ten
minutes and then we stop at 4 o'clock whatever happens.

                (Short Adjournment)




                        332
                                              T. BICHARD


     MR. KING:  Si r t the position is this. I am
loathe to give my learned friend Mr. Isaacs any
estimate of how long I will be, but I am mindful of
the fact that my learned friend cannot come on Monday.

    THE CORONER: Yes, I had forgotten that.

     MR. KING:  I am quite willing to start, but I do
not know whether my learned friend wants to interpose
himself to ensure that he can complete his cross-
examination.

    THE CORONER: Mr. Isaacs, what do you say?

     MR. ISAACS: What I say is I am very grateful to
my learned friend.  If he will "go on for, say, half-
an-hour, he may finish in-haj-f-an-hotir, and-if he
stops then I could perhaps take the last 5 or 10
minutes.  I will not be any more than that.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, okay Mr. King.   He may not be
as long as that.

     MR. KING:  I have never seen   such looks of hope
from everybody in all my life!

           Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Constable, one thing that does concern me. Your
evidence is that two of the cameras which could have a
view of the Leppings Lane end have a zoom facility, is
that right? - A. Yes.

That is the camera which   is at an angle to the
terracing, 90 degrees or   so and looks along it? - A.
Yes.

And the one which is on the South Stand which can
look, as best one can, at the front of it? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

Your evidence is that it is not possible to zoom in in
such a way as to identify the facial features of
somebody on the terrace? - A. It is certainly not good
enough for Court purposes, yes.

This is what puzzles me.  The cameras, as far as you
know, are they still in the same position today in
1991 as they were in 1989? - A. They are, yes.

     MR. KING:  Sir, it is at this point that I need
to ask a request of yourself.  I have been to the
ground and I do not intend to give evidence, but has

                        333
                                             T. BICHARD


the zoom facility been demonstrated to the Jury in
this case?

      THE CORONER: No.

      MEMBERS OF THE JURY:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:  I was not with them, of course.   I
did not know that.

     MR. KING:  I say that.  It is difficult for me to
put questions in the light of this evidence because it
was demonstrated to me, sir.

      THE CORONER: In that case it has, if the Jury say
so.   T was not with them.'
                    —          »


     MR. KING:   I just want you to think carefully,
Constable.  Do you maintain the view that the zoom
facility is such that it is not_possible to zoom in. so
that one can clearly identify a given individual if
one so wishes to do so? - A. I am quite happy with
that comment,'y e s .

You maintain that? - A. Yes.

I cannot take that any further with you.. That is your
view of that and I assume, therefore, that you are
equally confident about your assertions as to what you
can or cannot see on the terraces generally, the way
you have' described about not being able to pick out
overcrowding and so forth? - A. Yes.

If, in fact, it is the case that the zoom can pick out
facial features, does that mean really that —   Well,
you could have no explanation, you just stick by what
you say, that is right? - A. It could be a matter of
opinion.  If you were to go and stand on that terrace
on your own and people knew you were there and took a
photograph with that camera, I am quite sure they
could identify you, but when there is a group, a large
crowd there, to pick out an individual would be very
difficult.

But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial
features, can you not? - A. I don't think so, sir.

     THE CORONER:  Can we just clear one point.   Are
you saying that you cannot pick out facial features on
the screens? You are not saying that it is not
possible to take a frame of the video and blow it up
as we have done? - A. You certainly can enlarge the
picture, but what you have to do is you stop motion
the video tape, take a photograph of a television

                         334
         A
                                                                      97

                                                              T. BICHARD


                  screen and then enlarge the photograph. You cannot
f   !
                  actually enlarge the video tape picture itself, and
         B        obviously when you take a photograph of a television
                  screen you get lines and interference on it.

                       MR. KING:  Sir, I was clearly putting to the
                  witness what one could see on the screens in the
                  Control Box.

                       THE CORONER: That is whait I thought. I just
                  wanted to be quite sure that we are talking about the
                  same thing.

                       MR. KING:  I cannot take that any further with
                  you, Officer.  Tell jne was it ever part of your
                  briefing in-your position and role in that Control
                  Room to monitor the terrace for overcrowding?.- A. No
                  sir.

i )               So would that perhaps help us to understand why you
                  yourself were not, if I can put it this way, on the
                  day looking out for overcrowding, would that be right?
                  You were not briefed so to do, you did not regard that
                  as part of your, duties, did you? - A. As far as I was
                  concerned I didn't see any overcrowding.

                  But it was not part of your duties to monitor for it,
                  was it? - A. If I had seen it, I would have done
                  something about it.

                  I understand that, but it was never in your mind, was
                  it, to. watch out for possible overcrowding on the
                  terraces during the build-up before the disaster
                  occurred? - A. I was watching what was happening
                  outside on Leppings Lane, that is correct.

                  But it was not in your mind that you had to watch out
                  for it on the terraces then, was it, at any stage? -
    O    F        A. I was concerned about the action that was taking
                  place on Leppings Lane, the comments that were being
                  made over the radio, and that was where my attention
                  w as.

                  I understand that.  I just want to concentrate for the
                  moment on the terraces and what your attitude of mind
                  was, and can I say, Constable, you were not the senior
                  Officer in the Control Room, were you? - A. No.

             Q.   You, without being rude about it, were one of the
                  junior Officers? - A. Yes sir.

             Q.   So no one is blaming you for not looking out for
                  things if it was not part of your briefing, you see,
                  and it is the fact, is it not, that it was never in
                                           335
         H
    .3
                                                         98

                                                 T. BICHARD


     your mind that you had to watch out for overcrowding
     on the terraces when you were in the Control Box that
     day? - A. I think I would like to reverse that and say
     what was in my mind was the fact that I     waswatching
     what was taking place on Leppings Lane, the incidents
     that were occurring there. I do realise what sort of
     tack you are getting on to,but that is how I would
     like to answer that question.

Q.   Mr. Bichard, I want, if I may for the moment, to
     remove you from the events of Leppings Lane and just
     look to what you as someone in the Control Room was
     expecting to have to do when you wenc in there on i5th
     April.  It was not part of your briefing that your
     function was to monitor the terracing for
     overcrowding, that is right, is it not? -.A. I wasn^t
     given a specific instruction that that was what I was -
     to do.

Q.   I will not take that any further with you, but I can
     put this to you, can I not, in the same context? You
     did have a number of briefings, did you not, relating
     to, if I can put it this way, law and order, that is
     to say preventing pitch invasions and matters like
     that? - A. Generally speaking the Control staff did
     not attend briefings.

Q.   When very late on in the events you have described to
     the Coroner you saw people coming over the fence, your
     immediate reaction was as to a pitch invasion, was it
     not? - A. It was, yes.

Q.   Your mind, if I can put it that way, was switched into
     a public order situation, was it not? - A. That is
     what I consider was happening, yes.

Q.   To be fair to you, you had never, as part of your
     training or instructions, been invited at any stage,
     had you, to look upon your role in that Control Box to
     monitor that terracing for signs of overcrowding, that
     is right, is it not? - A. That is correct.

Q.   That may explain or it may not explain it. When you
     were being questioned by the learned Coroner, or it
     may have been ray learned friend Mr. Manning - it was
     my learned friend Mr. Manning - and you were asked
     whether during the time the Gate C request was made
     and when the decision was being made whether to open
     it and when it was opened, you got an opportunity to
     check to see what was happening on the Leppings Lane
     terraces, your answer you said was no because you were
     directing your mind to what was happening in Leppings
     Lane itself? - A. That is correct, sir.

                          336
         A
                                                                      99

                                                               T. BICHARD


I   )             So I take it from that, and again I do not criticise
                  you as a junior Officer, that you yourself did not
         B        turn your mind to the question of what was going to
                  happen to the peopile, the large group of people who
                  were going to be let in through the gates, because
                  that was not part of your function, was it? - A. No.
                  I think the circumstances would have been different
                  had the ground been full and there were a lot of
                  people outside and we were considering opening the
                  gates.  Then I think my mind may well have been
                  switched to what would happen to the people coming in,
                  but the circumstances were that the people outside
                  were coming into the spaces that were available in the
                  Leppings Lane.

                  Of course.  The people inside could only’ go where
                  there was space on- the terrace? that is right, is-it
                  not? - A. That is right, yes.

f)                What you told my learned friend Mr. Manning was, "I.,
                  drew no connection between the people coming into Gate
                  C and the tunnel, but I would have mentioned it if I
                  had noticed it".  That is what you said? - A. Yes.

                  Why, if you had noticed a connection between people
                  coming in through Gate C and the central tunnel, would
                  you have mentioned it? - A. It would be part of an
                  access to the terrace.

             Q.   But why would you have mentioned it? - A.-For the same
                  reason that I might mention anything else that was
                  taking place within the Control Box, if somebody else
                  hadn't put their mind to it.

             Q.   But what was it, what would it be, if you had
                  connected the people coming in through Gate C and the
                  central tunnel at that time, that if you had noticed
                  it you would have felt concerned enough to mention it?
O        F        Why would you have wanted to mention it? - A. I think
                  the easy answer to that is that at the end of the day
                  that was one of the things that brought about this
                  disaster, but it wasn't something that was in my mind
                  when those gates were opened.

             Q.   I understand that, but what you told my learned friend
                  Mr. Manning was that if you had drawn a connection
                  between people coming in through Gate C and the tunnel
                  you would have mentioned it, that is what you told us?
                  - A. Yes.

             Q.   I want to explore with you why that would have been
                  the case because it was simply the tunnel going onto
                  the terraces, why would you have mentioned it, and you
                  expected the people to go on the terraces, why would

    ■)   H
                                             T. BICHARD


you have mentioned it? - A. Because I think that
comment is made with hindsight, that was the result of
what happened when the gates opened because a lot of
people went down that tunnel.

Yes, but so what?

     THE CORONER:   He has just said that the comment
was with hindsight.

     MR. KING: But you have told us that the people
outside could only go to the spaces on the terraces,
that is right? - A. That is where they would go, yes.

Is this the case then, leaving aside that you drew no
-connection between people going-to Gate C and the
 tunnel, if you had noticed it, the reason why you
would have mentioned it would be you would not have
wanted people to go down that tunnel because the
central pens staring everybody in the face looking at
the terrace, if one did, was that those central pens
were full.

     THE CORONER: I have got to give a warning if you
are going to ask that question.

     MR. ISAACS: With respect, he has already said
that the comment he made was with hindsight. We all
know now, and Mr. Duckenfield accepts and indeed other
witnesses have accepted., that at the time
unfortunately the central pens had so many people in
that there was insufficient room for the people who
did eventually go in, and I think that is what he was
saying, with respect.




                         MR. KING:   With respect ....




                         338
                                                         101

                                                  T. BICHARD


        MR. KING:   With respect, sir.

        THE CORONER:   Let me give him the warning.    You
   don't have to answer this question because it may tend to
   incriminate you.    It is your privilege to sayyou don't
   want to say anything in reply to it.    Now can you
   remember what the questions was?

        MR. KING:   I will go in stages in view of my
   learned friend's intervention, which, with respect, isn't
   correct:

Q. You were being asked not whether you knew that the centre
   pens were full.   You weren't asked that question. What
   you were being asked about was whether you drew a
   connection between people coming through Gate C and the
   tunnel, all right? You told my learned friend
   Mr.. Manning that you had not noticed it, but ifyou had
   noticed it you would have mentioned it.   All right? - A.
   Right.

Q. Now what I am putting to you is in two stages.   First of
   all, for you to give us that answer it follows that you
   must have had a view at the time that down the tunnel was
   not somewhere where you wanted that flow of people to go?
   - A. That is something that with hindsight I know.   The
   circumstances that presented themselves on that day, that
   we all know about, if the people had been stopped going
   down the tunnel the majority of this disaster would not
   have occurred.

Q. All right.   I will not take it any further with
   yourself, but you see there are two quite separate
   matters here which I was putting to you quite separately*
   One was the connection between people going through
   Gate C and the tunnel and number two was whether or not
   it could be seen that the terrace was full in the centre?
   All right? -A. Being a football supporter over a number
   of years, there is a tendency in football culture to go
   to the back of the centre of the goal.   There are a
   number of occasions when the terraces have been
   completely empty at either sides, but the centre pens
   have been reasonably full because people like to stand
   there and that is why the pens fill up earlier.

Q. You are telling us that you yourself at the time of the
   opening of the gates did not get a chance to see what was
   happening on the Leppings Lane terrace?   That is what
   you told us? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. You are telling us, therefore, that no-one in the Control
   Box asked you about what was happening on the terraces or
   asked you to look to see what was happening on the




                            339
                                                            102
                                                     T. BICHARD


     terraces?   That must be right? -A. My attention was on
     Leppings Lane and what was taking place there.

Q. You received no requests from anybody senior in the
   Control Box to draw your attention, to ask you about what
   was happening on the terraces?   That is right, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Let me go back to the events at about half past two.    At
   about half past two you actually switched on the video
   system to record the scene outside, didn't you? - A. On
   Leppings Lane?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

Q. What was it that had caught your eye at half past two? -
   A. It was the radio request regarding the closing of
   Leppings Lane.                              ..

Q. Your attention was drawn to a build-up of the crowd
   outside at half past two? - A. Yes, that was part of the
   request.

Q. I think you told us, did you not, that it was at half
   past two that you should have changed one of your tapes?
   - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. And you were distracted? - A. Yes.

Q. What was it that was distracting you? - A. The events as
   they were building up outside in Leppings Lane.
               «           .


Q.    Around that time do you recall any discussion going on in
     the Coritrol Box about delaying the kick-off? - A. I
     cannot give you the time but there were certain comments
     made regarding policy.

Q. That would be around this time at 2.30 when you had
   videoed in on Leppings Lane and you noticed this build­
   up? - A. I cannot give you the time accurately.

Q. Wouldn't it be around that time? - A. No, I am not sure I
   can answer that at this point in time.

Q.    All right.  Let me try and jog your memory about what
     was said.   What do you recall was said about delaying
     kick-off, whenever this conversation took place? - A. You
     would like me to tell you the context of the
     conversation?

Q. Yes. - A. I believe Superintendent Murray, a conversation
   did take place whereby the words were mentioned that it
   was not policy to delay the kick-off unless it was some



                                340
                                                                 103

                                                       T. BICHARD


     outside intervening factor which had affected the fans'
     arrival at the ground.

Q. The word you have used is "policy".   That is what was
   being discussed? - A. That is what I remember, yes.

Q. If there wasn't a reason justifying late arrival, do you
   remember Mr. Murray saying what the policy was then? - A.
   Not specifically.   I could tell you the causes or
   reasons for considering delaying kick-off.

Q.        THE CORONER: ..Tell us that. - A. Outside factors
     such as road accidents, delays, road works etc., or just
     by the pure volume of traffic that was coming to the
     event and it would mean that a large number of people
     were going to be delayed.

Q.        MR. KING:    Wasn't Mr. Murray 'saying that it wasn't
     "our" policy ter delay kick-off for people who had just
     arrived late at the ground? -. A. That would be the
     reversal of that, yes.

Q. He was saying that? - A. Yes, I am quite confident that
   that is what was being said.

Q. Do you recall where Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was
   when you had directed your camera at 2.30 onwards at the
   Leppings Lane end? - A. Whereabouts in the Control Box?

Q. Yes. - A. Stood in front of my position.

Q.         THE   CORONER: In front of your., position? - A. In
     front of .my position, yes.

Q.          MR.   KING: Was he looking at the monitor at the
     same   time as you? - A. Yes.

Q.     Were you  discussing the general   situation together? -A.
     We did, yes.

Q. That would be around the time of this discussion about
   policy and delaying kick-off took place?   It could be,
   couldn't it? - A. It could be, yes.

Q. All right.   I will not take that any further.   Just to
   deal with the opening of the gates, that is Gate C, you
   can confirm that you yourself were concentrating solely
   on Leppings Lane itself? -A. Yes.

Q. No-one in the Control Box asked you the question as to
   where Gate C, which you had your monitor on, led?   Is
   that right? - A. Yes, that's right.




                                341
                                                              104

                                                    T. BICHARD


Q. Is it right you directed the attention of Mr. Duckenfield
   to Gate C? - A. Yes, when it opened originally.

Q. Then you had the camera zoomed in on it? - A. I did, yes.

Q. No-one turned your mind to what the state of the Leppings
   Lane terraces were?   That is right? - A. The events on
   Leppings Lane outside were obviously getting quite
   serious.

Q. But no-one turned your mind?     No-one asked you a
   question about it? .t A. No.

Q. The first time you say that you turned your mind to the
   Leppings Lane terrace was when you saw people coming over
   the top? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Before' that Gate A had ^een opened, hadn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't want to deal with your recollections as to the
   gap of time any further than what you have been able to
   tell us, but I do_want to ask you this: do you remember
   an instruction being given for Serials to be sent
   somewhere to await what was happening at Gate A after it
   had happened? - A. Yes, Serials were sent to the North
   Stand area.-

Q. That was at the time the order for Gate A was given, was
   it? - A. I think that would be after Gate A had been
   opened.      Two Serials were despatched earlier to Leppings
   Lane.      I know one of the Serials to be C&V,
   Sergeant Higgins, who then appeared at the back of
   Gate A....

Q. Yes. - A. Again, thinking about in relation to when the
   gate was opened, I certainly know that Officers were
   directed to the North Stand area.

Q. Do you remember who gave that order? - A. No.

Q. Wasn't it Mr. Duckenfield himself? - A. I am not sure
   about that.

Q. Can I just remind you of what was suggested and your
   answer given to Lord Justice Taylor on that matter, just
   to help you? - A. Certainly.

          MR. KING:   Sir, could he be shown page 62 of his
     transcript please, just above letter D, sir?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you find it?   Just above D? - A.
     Yes, sir.   That is right.   Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield gave that order.



                             342
                                                            105
                                                    T. BICHARD


Q.        MR. KING:   That order was given to stop the crowd
     going on to the pitch by the North Stand? - A. Yes,
     that s right.

Q.. So it is right that at that stage someone in the Control
    Box, and it looks as if Mr. Duckenfield gave the order,
    it would have been him...

          MR. ISAACS:   That is totally unfair, sir, with
     respect.

Q.        MR. KING:   Mr.. Duckenfield gave the order, you have
     told us? - A. Yes.

Q. That order was directed to sending Officers to the North
   Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Gate A was entry point to the North Stand, wasn't it? -
   A. Yes.

Q. So that order was directed to the likely destination of
   the people coming in through Gate* A? - A. Yes.

Q. So it is right that at that stage clearly some thought
   had been given to where the people going through' Gate A
   were going to end up? - A. I think the concern would be
   that Gate A led to a seating area where everybody had
   tickets and if people entered the ground without tickets
   they would be occupying places that either were already
   occupied or that they should not occupy, whereas the
   terraced area was a free standing area.

Q. Yes, the thought as regards the order in relation to
   Gate A was directed to a possible public order problem,
   wasn't it? - A. It was to deal with the people who had
   gone into that area who may not have tickets for that
   stand.

Q. Yes.   It was immediately after that that you saw that
   which you regarded as a pitch invasion? -A. Yes.

Q. Can I just investigate slightly further this matter, and
   I will do it very briefly, the matter as regards the
   message which apparently was being sent out from the Snig
   Hill Operation Force Rcom at eight minutes past three to
   the ambulance service to the effect that apparently the
   cause was the collapse of the gates?   You have no
   knowledge of that?   That is right?    That is what you
   tell us? - A. That's right.

Q. It would in fact from your knowledge not be correct,
   because from your knowledge the major opening of any gate
   when the large number of people came through, was not as
   a result of any gate being pushed open or broken open, it




                             343
                                               T. BICHARD


was as a result of deliberate opening on Police
authority?   That is right? - A. Certainly the second
opening of Gate C was on authority.

That is when the majority of people came through? - A*
Yes.

The first opening, whatever you thought about it, was for
a very short period, some twenty seconds? - A. I thought
it was a bit longer than that.




        Q. It was a very short




                        344
                                                            in-7




                                                       T. BICHARD


Q. It was a very short period, was it not? - A. Probably
   40 seconds which is twice as long as that.

Q. Tell me, when you did witness the conversation you have
   told us about in relation to Mr. Duckenfield with Mr.
   Kelly, this was in the Control Box, was it not? - A.
   That is right. Mr. Kelly came to the doorway of the
   Control Box.

Q. Who was Mr. Kelly, do you know? - A. He was connected
   with the FA. That is my knowledge of him.

Q. How close to the Control Box door were you
   positioned? - A. Perhaps three or four feet.

Q. You clearly do have a recollection of Mr. Duckenfield
    telling Mr. Kelly about a gate ^having been forced? -A .
  - I remember -a conversation taking place and that was
    part of the conversation, yes.

Q. You do not remember any other part of the conversation?
   - A. No.

Q. So certainly you do not remember anything along the
   lines of, "And we, the Police, opened a gate to let a
   lot of people in"? - A. No.

Q. Just tell us again then your recollection of exactly
   what you heard Mr. Duckenfield tell Mr. Kelly? - A. Mr.
   Kelly came to the doorway.  There was a conversation
   taking place between him and Mr. Duckenfield and part
   of that conversation included comments regarding the
   gate that we believed had been forced, which was gate
   C.
Q. And what happened? - A. After the Police had regained
   control of the gates?

Q. No, no, what did Mr. Duckenfield tell Mr. Kelly apart
   from saying that a gate had been forced? - A. I don't
   remember, sir.

Q. Did he not say that there had been an inrush of
   supporters into the ground? - A. If that is part of the
   transcript from Lord Justice Taylor then that is what I
   said and that is what I remember at that time, yes.

Q. Mr. Bichard, there is no ifs and buts about it, is
   there? The impression you gained at that time was that
   Mr. Duckenfield was telling Mr- Kelly of the FA that
   the cause of what had gone wrong was that the gate had
   been forced with the result that a lot of supporters
   had rushed into the ground.  That is the effect of what



                            345
                                                            1o p




                                                     T. BICHAWn


  he was saying as the cause? - A. I don't know what
  other things were being said at the time, that the two
  people there were having a conversation and there were
  other things- happening in the Control Room.

       MR. KING: All right, I will not take that any
  further. Thank y o u .

                Cross-Rxamjned bv MR. ISAACS

Q. Mr. King is trying t.o suggest to you that the snippet
   of conversation that you heard was all that was said
   about this matter and there in that snippet was Mr.
   Duckenfield's whole assessment a number of minutes
   after the event of the cause of what was going on.
   That I think is what is being suggested. Let me just
   try and,put all this in context. First of all, the
   conversation that you did hear was just a snippet of
   the total conversation between the men? - A. Yes, that
   is right.

Q. As I understand it, it was not a conversation that
   concerned you? - A. No, it was not connected with me.

Q. Would it be fair to say that you had a good deal on
   your plate at that time? - A. Yes, sir.
                              •

Q. Therefore, it is fair to say you would not have been
   concentrating terribly on that conversation? - A. I
   wouldn't have been concerned of somebody coming to the
   door wanting further information.

Q. You have fairly told Mr. King that you do not know what
   else was said? - A. No, I don't.

Q. So far as what you heard was concerned that so far as
   your own recollection was concerned was absolutely
   true. You had believed that fans had forced the gate
   and that there had been an inrush of fans into the
   ground? - A. Yes, when gate C opened for the first time
   there was no doubt.  I didn't feel any doubt in my mind
   that the gate had been forced.

Q. In so far as you heard Mr. Duckenfield say that, what
   he was saying so far as you were concerned was
   absolutely right? - A. Yes.

Q. As you told Mr. King, you do not know whether what Mr.
   Duckenfield was saying had a continuation namely "And
   after that the gate was opened on our authority"? - A.
   He may well have qualified that with further
   conversation.




                           346
                                                                     10?
    A
                                                             T. BICHARD


        Q. So far as the Snigg Hill message is concerned/ as I
           understand it, Snigg Hill could have picked up
           information that did not come from the Control Box by
    B      listening into Channel 25, is it? - A. That is right.
           The Control Room at Snigg Hill were monitoring a
           personal radio system as well as the normal VHP
           channels.

        Q. Did you understand that little snippet that you read on
           our Exhibit 517B was intended by the Snigg Hill
           operator to be an in-depth analysis of what had taken
           place and the causes of what had taken place? - A. It
           seems an informed comment that somebody has made but I
           do not know how they have got the information which
           they have.

        -Q. Again it is difficult to understand: but it could have
            come over Channel 25? - A. -Yes, I.know they were
            monitoring Channel 25 because, when I was using VHF I
            could hear that Channel 25 in the background, messages
            that were coming from the ground in effect.
    D
        Q. Possibly from someone who had been in the concourse
           area at the time when the fans did appear to burst open
           the gate? - A. That is right.  The system being on talk
           through any one person on the ground could have been
           speaking and we may not have been receiving that.   If
           we had been transmitting on our hand set it blocks us
           receiving messages.  So they could be transmitting as
           well.

        Q. Police Constable Bichard, two matters about the opening
           of the gates and what was happening at the time.  It is
           fair to say the atmosphere in the Control Box at that
           time was one of great tension? - A. Yes.

        Q. Quite clearly a crisis? - A. Certainly, yes.

        Q. Unprecedented in your experience of being in the
           Control Box at a football game? - A. Yes, definitely.

        Q. You have told Mr. Manning and indeed Mr. King that you
           did not link the entry of fans through gate C with the
           tunnel.  That is right, is it not? - A. That is right.

        Q. You core someone, as I understand it, who has a good
           knowledge of the layout of the ground not only as a
           Police Officer but as a supporter? - A. Yes.

        Q. Would it be fair to say that you did not notice if
           there was any connection between the entry through gate
           C and the tunnel because your attention was directed on
           the crisis and the risk to the people you had been told




    H                                347
o
                                                           110



                                                      T. BICHARD


  about over the radio by Mr. Marshall? - A. The things
  that were occurring outside in Leppings Lane, yes.

Q. At that particular moment when the gate was opened
   surely the risk you had been told about of death to
   people by crushing outside? - A. Yes, outside.

Q. Of course, in your mind to. alleviate that risk of death
   by crushing outside the fans outside would be able to
   go through gate C on to the concourse area? - A. In my
   mind by opening the.gates we had made safe the
   situation outside.

Q. Whereas, of course, when gate A came to be opened there
   was not a concourse area.   There would be somewhere
   where they would go? - A. That is right.   It is a -
   narrow walkway straight .down to the rear of the seated
   area.        -

Q. Do you recollect this at that time that somebody in the
   Control Room, not Mr. Duckenfield, said words to the
   effect, "When they come through gate A it leads to the
   North Stand.  Better do something about it"? - A. Not
   that I recollect, no.

Q. You cannot recollect it? - A. No.

Q. You cannot say it did not happen.  You just do not
   recollect it? - A. I do not recollect it, no.

Q. Is the position this; when these events were taking-
   place you were not thinking, "I had better remember
   this, that and the other in detail because I am going
   to have to be giving evidence about it almost two years
   later"? - A. No, I thought the events would settle
   themselves when we opened the gates.

Q. Just one further point then on the opening of gate C.
   Is it right that your initial recollection was that it
   was just after gate C was opened that you heard the
   message from Sergeant Higgins and seeing this funnel of
   Officers? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. We are not talking about minutes. We are talking about
   a period of seconds? - A. Yes, I think that is fair.

Q. You are not saying that initial recollection was either
   right or not right but that was what it was at the
   time? ~ A. Yes.

        MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much indeed.   I am
   very grateful.



                             348
                                               T. BICHARD


    MR. KING:      There is a very short matter, sir.

    THE CORONER:      Yes.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Your recollection as to the opening of Gate A is aided
by the fact you tell us that as soon as the request
came you directed your camera on it? - A. Yes, that is
right.

And it began to record it? - A. It was recording ....

As you were doing it? - A. It was recording what was
taking place and I moved across to Gate A and in fact
zoomed in on the back of that gate.

So -if we are able to_ find on the video when you began
recording Gate A, it was roughly around that time that
you had just received the request? - A. Yes.

Thank you.


        Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

In case this should become a point, P.C. Bichard is
there some question mark over the timing mechanism on
that particular camera or at that particular time? - A.
Yes. When the Justice Taylor Inquiry was instigated,
or when we were coming down here, I was led to believe
that the timing and date -set on the pictures we had
been taking was, in fact, incorrect with the actual
time on' the day, and the actual time on the day, or the
inconsistency was spotted because of footage from the
BBC.

So we have obviously got to be cautious about that ....

     THE CORONER:   Do you know what the error was? -
A. Again, my recollections are that it was about six
minutes.  It was quite an extensive difference.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

     MR. KING:   I am not concerned with timings now,
Mr. Bichard, just relationship of events.  Pretend for
the moment that we have not got any timings on the
video .... - A. Oh, no, if you want to get a stop watch
and see what time Gate C was opened, and time the time
that Gate A opened you will find the exact period, the
difference.
                                                                           112
                                                                    T. BICHARD


                   Q. Yes, all we have to do is look at the video? - A. Thie
                      video is running at normal time, yes.

(
f ''
       ;           Q. See when Gate C is opened on that video? - A. Yes.
               B   Q. And we can just time it from then onwards, as to when
                      we next see Gate A, and you are telling us that when we
                      see Gate A it is just then that you have received the
                      request that Gate A be opened? - A. Yes.

                           THE CORONER:    I will make a few enquiries about
                      times, but my understanding is that all the times which
                      were given to us by" Inspector Layton at the beginning -
               C      that is why I did it that way - are as accurate as we
                      can get them.

                           We are not finishing today, I am afraid. We have
                      got to stop because we have had a long day.  Back on
           b          Monday, 10.30".

                   Q. Mr. Bichard, we will conclude your evidence.  Remember
                      not to discuss the evidence over the weekend because
O              D      you are technically sitting in that Box until Monday
                      when you come back, and we will see you at 10.30.  You
                      may leave us if you wish.

                                  (The Witness left the Court)

                            THE CORONER:   (Addressing the Members of the
                      Jury) There are two things I want to say.     First of
                       all in a sense the worst is over. We have got a little
               E     - bit of evidence, but it will be much- lighter.  I am not
                      making any promises - every time I have said we will do
                       something I have not managed it - but I am hoping that
                      we will probably finish most of the evidence, if not
                       all, on Monday. The rest of the week will then be
                       spent in legal submissions and my summing-up to you,
                       and the present plan, I am telling you this now so you
                       can do a little pre-planning, is for you to retire, if
                       all goes well, Monday week.

O              F           Now, first of all I am not sure what time I will
                      finish my summing-up on Monday, and the other thing   I
                      have no idea on is how long you are going to take, so
                      it would be wise - this is not an invitation that you
                      should take more than a day - but if it were to be,
                      once you are empanelled you cannot go home in the
                      evening, you have got to stay secluded, so it would be
                      wise if on Monday week you brought an overnight bag
               G      with you.  If it does become necessary for you to stay
                      overnight we will arrange for accommodation.  I am
                      telling you now because you might need to make some
                      provisional arrangements in case, because once you have
                      gone out you stay out until you come back with an




               H                              350
 o
                                                    113

                                             T. BICHARD


answer.  I will tell you a bit more about that - you
can come back and ask questions but in principle that
is what it is. Next week should be a lot lighter for
you, not necessarily for us.

            (In the absence of the Jury)

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, would it be your intention
to begin legal submissions on Tuesday morning?

     THE CORONER:   Yes please, if that is convenient.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:’ In that case, would you think it
a discourtesy if I did not attend on Monday but was
legally represented by Mr. Shaw, who is sitting behind
me today?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Catchpole, we will miss you but
it is certainly not a discourtesy.
                             >
     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, may I now lodge our written
submissions on the law, subject to that reservation
that if anything yet emerges in the further evidence
they have to be amended and, sir, I would hope to be
present, if it is possible, on the day that you receive
the oral submissions but that may not be possible.

     The only other thing I say, sir, is usually juries
are told that they may be locked up together by way of
a threat, to make them come to a decision quickly.  I
am sure that wasn't in your mind.

     THE CORONER:   No, I hope I did not put it like
that. That was one of the things that concerned me but
I did not want to make it either a threat or a promise.
On the other hand, a lot of them have got family
commitments and it is not fair to tell them at the last
minute.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, may I also hand in our written
submissions, subject to the same qualification that we
may amend or alter it in the course of oral
submissions.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, and I have already got a
volume of yours with cases.  Most of those I have seen,
I am pleased to say, not all but most.

     MR. KING:   Sir, this is a public hearing.  All I
am concerned about is, and I don t object to written
submissions going in because you gave the option, but
sir, if they are not to be voiced in public, by which I
mean read out in public, they will not therefore have
been part of the public submissions to you, and in




                            351
                                                          114

                                                   T. BICHARD


those circumstances, sir, are you minded to allow those
of us who would not therefore have an opportunity to
hear those submissions to see what is written?

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, may I say we have copies of
our submissions for each of the- representatives.

        MR. KING:      I am obliged.

        MR. MAXWELL:     They will be distributed when you
rise.

     THE CORONER: " Y e s , that would be fine, if you
could do that.   I would not be prepared to read all the
cases and you would not expect me to do that, but if
need be one could read the written submissions out if
that was deemed necessary.     If, .on the other hand,
let's face it, these are the -legal submissions and
provided you know what is being said that is the
important thing.

        MR. KING:      Absolutely.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, we have copies of our
submissions which we will distribute when we make our
oral submissions.

     MR. KING:   Sir, lest those along there think I am
trying to gain an unfair advantage, I am not seeking to
gain access to their submissions before they would have
given them orally.

        THE CORONER:      But you do need to see them.

     MR. KING:   But as they are on their feet and you,
sir, are inviting them to say what they will, it is
impossible for anybody in my position or indeed anybody
to my left, to know what is being said if part of it is
in writing, that is the point.

        THE CORONER:      I quite agree.

     MR. PAYNE:   Perhaps I might say that we would, of
course, be quite prepared now to exchange written
submissions on the basis of reciprocity with anybody
else, but otherwise what we intend to do is to
circulate copies when we make our oral submissions.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, the only thing is, Mr. Payne,
it is only fair that if for instance you had been
submitting this orally, Mr. King would have had the
opportunity to hear it, wouldn't he?

        MR. PAYNE:      Certainly.
                                                        115
                                               T. BICHARD


      THE CORONER:   So it is not entirely fair to hand
 it to him at the same point in time as you stand up.   I
 think that what should happen is that on Tuesday when
 we begin our submissions, that Mr. King and all the
 other lawyers who are in that position should be given
 these and should be allowed 20 minutes or half an hour
 or however long it would have taken for it to be said
 orally, to read them through before you begin, because
 otherwise they have gdt to take in two things at the
 same time. That seems to be entirely fair.

       MR. PAYNE:    Quite.  Sir, the only point that I
  was making was that'I am quite willing now, never mind
  about next Monday, Tuesday or whenever it is, now to
  exchange my written submissions now with Mr. King, in
  exchange for his.   I am perfectly happy to do that and
  likewise on Monday or Tuesday I am perfectly happy at
  any .time to exchange my written submissions with
- anybody, who will exchange theirs with me, that is all I
  am saying.

       THE CORONER:   I think Mr. King had made it plain
- to me on the previous occasion"that he preferred to do
  his submissions orally and therefore I deduce that he
  has not got any written submissions to exchange.  He
  may have notes.

      MR. PAYNE:   Yes, he has got some notes so perhaps
 we might have those instead.  Sir, I am slightly
 surprised by your indication that we should circulate
 our submissions without receiving anything in exchange,
 that is all.

      THE CORONER:   No, Mr. Payne, I think you have
 misunderstood me.  I entirely agree that it would be
 inappropriate, if I can use that word, for you to hand
 over your submissions to Mr. King now without
 reciprocity. There I am with you, but it is equally
 unfair, I think, that if you merely were, for example,
 to stand up on Tuesday and say, "I have nothing more to
 add other than what I have written down and here, Mr.
 King, are five pages of submissions", and you sat down
 and I then turned to Mr. King and said, "Well, let's
 hear yours", he hasn't had a chance to look at them.
 He would have to ask for an adjournment, and that is
 all I am saying.




                        /MR. PAYNE:   I am sorry ....



                          353
     MR. PAYNE:  I am sorry to have to disappoint
everybody, but unfortunately I will actually orally go
through my submissions.

     THE CORONER: In that case, it may solve the
problem, but obviously it would be of some benefit to
me to have a chance to absorb some of the law.

     MR. KING:  If, when I have completed my notes,
they are in a coherent fashion, I would be more than
happy to give a copy to ray learned friend if he can
understand my writing.

     THE CORONER: Hopefully, you see, these are
supposed to be legal points, are they not?

        MR. KING:   Absolutely.
                            >
     THE CORONER: If the law is plain at the end of
the day ws should all be saying the same thing on the
law.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, one final point.  Is it your
intention to sit at 9.30 on Tuesday, or at 10 o'clock,
just in case I drive up from London, so that I know
when to arrive?

     THE CORONER: Judging from what you said about the
length of time that you were going to take, it is
probably sufficient if we start at 10.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   I am very grateful for that.

     THE CORONER: Are we still of the mind that we
will finish by Wednesday with legal submissions at the
very latest, if we start on the Tuesday that is?

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes.

        MR. PAYNE: There is just one further point in my
mind.     I am sorry, I realise I am holding you up.

        THE CORONER: No, you are not holding me up.

     MR. PAYNE:  You will remember that I have been
signalling for quite some time now my anxiety to avoid
any breach of Rule AO. You will see in the
submissions which we have put in that I have made
reference to schedules, about 18 schedules in fact,
and I have quite deliberately not put the schedules
into you now, and I have restricted it only to our
submissions so far as we think they are relevant and
are related to our submissions of law.  But you will
see in fact that we do have available, and this point
                                                    117




will come up when we take them, 18 schedules which, in
fact, comprise an analysis of the case under topics
and identified by causation.  I do not know to what
extent it is going to be contentious that that may
stray into a submission on fact, but you will see at
the moment that we have not put those in deliberately
in order not to breach Rule 40.

     THE CORONER: I am glad you have done that because
it is obviously easier to sort it out viva voce.

     MR. KING: We have prepared schedules under
certain topic headings of evidence on certain points
which are similar.  I am very happy at any stage to
allow my learned friend to see it, or yourself" to see
it, when it becomes relevant because obviously-yW
have to intertwine a legal submission with any
arguments about is there evidence to support that
point of view. I agree with my learned friend that
one should do it carefully step by step.

     THE CORONER: I think that is right.  It is
exceedingly difficult to distinguish where an address
on law strays into an address on facts, and I will do
my best. We will see how we go, I will not say too
much. Have you any views, Mr. Maxwell, on that?

     MR. MAXWELL:  I would urge you to stay within the
strict limits of Rule 40 because if you allow any of
these an inch .... I need not complete that, sir.

     THE CORONER: Anybody else any views or comments?

     MR. MANNING:  Not on that, but on something as to
time-table for this Monday coming.  Not having an
instructing solicitor, it falls to me to consider
anything that might be vaguely within my ambit of the
knowledge of the law.  I had hoped to do some of that
at least this afternoon, anticipating or hoping that
this would have been an ordinary time-table. As I
understand it, you have this witness to complete as to
those who still have to examine, and you have no more
than the statement of the Officer whose statement is
to be read, the two, three, four other bits of pieces
of statements that are to be read, or the formal part,
plus one very short witness who you describe as being
5 or 10 minutes.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Slater, yes.

     MR. MANNING:  There is nothing else, sir, up your
sleeve, or anywhere else, that may surprise us for
Monday.

                          355
                                                       118




     THE CORONER: I will ask Mr. Beechey if he can
think of anything else, because that is what happens,
I walk out and then remember something, but no.  It is
this witness, however long that may be, Dr. Slater,
who I am confident will be minutes, and then Mr.
Smith, who will be 20 minutes, I would have thought,
to read the bits.  It is not a very long statement,
and then the rest is really formality, and the video.

     MR. MANNING:    The length of which is about 10
minutes?

     THE CORONER: No, it is longer than that.   It is
about at least 30 minutes, because it starts at about
20-to, I think, and we are taking it until about
quarter-past, something "of that order, but you have
seen most of it, af course, already.-
                               »


     MR. MANNING:     Thank you very much, sir.

     THE CORONER: On this witness, can we estimate how
long we are going to take on Monday? Mrs. McBrien, do
you know how many questions you are likely to have?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I am not at all sure at this
moment.  I have started making nates.

     THE CORONER: You have got the weekend to think
about it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I should not be very long.

     MR. RUSSELL:     Three questions.

     MR. PAYNE:     Probably none.

     THE CORONER: In other words, not overly long.   I
think we should be all right on Monday barring
accidents.  Ladies and gentlemen, I think that is it
for tonight. Have a good weekend.    I am sorry ithas
been a longer day, but I think it has been worth it in
the end.

        (The Inquests were adjourned until
      Monday, 18th March 1991 at 10.30 a.m.)




                            356
                r\t^ v T C             * F v in G r r ts if TV / a / I V & r .

                                                                             7

                                                                 DR. SLATER


     No, I am afraid not.   If somebody has passed away and
     the body is moved or there is then pressure on the tummy
     the contents could be regurgitated.

Q. After they had died? - A. Yes.

Q. That was a query I was particularly interested in because
   I thought in the case of John that the cause of death
   could be...

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, most of your questions
     are totally irrelevant and unanswerable, but we are not
     getting into speeches.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:       All right, I will leave it at that.
     Thank you.

          THE CORONER:   Nobody else wants to ask anything.
     Dr. Slater, thank you, and thank you for your time.    We
     now turn back to Mr. Bichard.

                       TREVOR BICHARD Recalled

          THE CORONER:       Mrs. McBrien, it is your turn.

                 Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

Q. Officer, you were the video operator in the Control Room
   that day, weren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. So you were concerned with cameras and pictures? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. What.ryou see on a picture or a screen firstly depends on
   how good your eyesight is, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Would you say your eyesight was very good? - A. Yes.

Q. Now pictures or photographs can mean different things to
   different people? - A. Yes.

Q.    If you were shown a photograph and I was shown a
     photograph I could see different things on it to what you
     may pick out? - A. That's true.    Different
     interpretation of what people see, yes.

Q. It would depend on what you were looking for? - A. Yes.

Q. Now you were not looking for over crowding in the pens,
   were you? - A. No.

Q.    Why was that?   Had you been      given no instructions or why
     weren't you to do that? - A.       It is not a question of not




                                 357
                                                               8

                                                      T. BICHARD


      to do that, it is that other things were being done at
      the time.

 Q. What were you looking for on the screens? - A. The things
    that were taking place outside on Leppings Lane and
    eventually when things did move inside obviously there
    were pictures being taken then.

 Q. Yes, when you move your cameras around what are you
    specifically looking for?   Why do you have those
    pictures there in the Control Room?   What is the purpose
    of them? - A. It is additional eyes for the people in
    command, to give them a view from the Control Box of what
    is taking place in various parts of the ground.

 Q. Do you find when you are doing that job that you do
    convey information to the Commander? - A. Yes, I do.

 Q. Could you give me some examples of the type of thing .you
    would convey to him? - A. delating to this specific
    incident or on a general basis?

Q. No, on a general basis. - A. It goes across the board.
   I can think of occasions relating to traffic problems
   that occur on Herries Road, incidents that take place
   within the crowd, even deployment of Officers around the
   ground, access to the South Stand car park.    It is
   really across the board, the facilities.    It depends
   what the Commander wants or what I want to do with the
   system and it is usually dictated by what is taking place
   outside, either the messages coming in, requests being
   made, or just a general overview of what is happening on
   the day.

Q. You mentioned incidents taking place, could you give any
   examples of incidents that take place within the ground
   that you need to draw someone's attention to? - A. I
   think probably the two best examples was an incident of
   fighting that was taking place on the Kop on the specific
   day.

Q. On the Kop? - A. Yes, and a collapse that occurred in the
   uncovered seating areas on another occasion.

Q. So you were able to see that quite clearly from the
   Control Room? - A. Both incidents, or are you referring
   to a specific incident?

Q. No, both incidents. - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you have to use the zoom facility to get acloser
     view of these people? - A. Yes, that is right.



                             358
                                                T. BICHARD


Once you spot something you then enlarge that picture to
get more information, is that correct? - A. Yes, if that
is what is needed.

So you are able to spot that.   Now if somebody - this is
on any normal match day - broke their ankle or something
like that, would you be able to detect that sort of thing
on the terrace? - A. No. Perhaps I did not make that
particular incident very clear.   The collapse had
occurred and it was indicated where it was and we were
able to oversee the situation when directing first aiders
to it.   It wasn't the actual man collapsing that I saw,
but oversaw what took place when it occurred.

Yes, if you saw someone who appeared to need attention
you would draw that to the attention of the Commander? -
A. Yes.

So you are looking out for danger or trouble in the pens
then?   Is that right? - A; Yes, across the board,"
really, yes.

On the 15th April, 198.9, did you not spot any trouble or
danger of any sort? - A. None whatsoever.




          THE CORONER:    You had better say
                                             T. BICHARD


     THE CORONER:  You had better say at what time,
Mrs. McBrien. You had better ask at what time, rather.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Were you looking at the screens
from 2.54, from about that time, when the players came
onto the field? That would be an important point to go
from; did you see the screens from that time? - A. I
would be watching a screen but I believe at that time
it would be, in fact, the screen that was appertaining
to Leppings Lane.  I believe that things were still
occurring outside on Leppings Lane.

What time did you look at the Leppings Lane Terrace? -
A. It probably would be after 3 o clock, once the
situation in Leppings Lane had alleviated itself.

I know you weren't looking out for disparity and that
may not mean very much to you, but would you be looking
at the direction in which the fans were facing? When
the players are on the field’ people normally watch them
playing, don't they? - A. As a spectator, yes, but
obviously we are there as a job in connection with ....

Yes, spectators are there to watch the match so once
they appear on the field you would expect their heads
to be facing in that direction.  Did you look at Fen 2
at 3 o'clock and see which direction those heads were
turned in? - A. I can't really answer that question but
perhaps --- I didn't see anything on Leppings Lane
Terrace that was untoward until the time when people
appeared to be taking part in what I thought in my own
mind was a pitch invasion.

You didn't see the difference in Pen 2, not in numbers
but the fact that in Pen 2 people would be looking
towards the pitch; in Pen 3 a lot of them were looking
behind them wondering what was happening behind them,
and some of them were actually facing the wrong way
round?

     THE CORONER:   I think he has answered the
question but I will ask it again for you:

Did you notice any difference in the way people were
looking in Pen 2 and Pen 3 at around 3 o'clock? - A.
No, sir.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you use the zoom facility at
that time to get a better close up, a better picture? -
A. Again, I have got to be careful what I say about
which camera I was looking at. Obviously, it is one
pair of eyes, and generally speaking I can only manage
to look at one screen. If my attention was into what
          A                                                            11

                                                                T. BICHARD


                   was taking place in Leppings Lane then in relation to
                   that, yes, I was using the zoom facility.

              Q. Yes, once you spotted something after 3 o'clock did you
          B      then use the zoom facility? - A. Yes, I did. I believe
                 that there was a Policewoman near to gate number 1 and
                 it had been mentioned that she had left the gate open
                 unattended, and an Officer was sent down there, and 1
                 think that is, in fact, recorded on one of the tapes
                 and the zoom facility was used.

              Q. But it was focussed on Pen 1, you say, at that time? -
                 A. It was really the gate and what the Policewoman was
          C      doing.

              Q. You concentrated on Leppings Lane, you said, because
                 that was where the problems were. Now, were you
                 looking at Leppings.Lane turnstiles at 2.45 or
      I          thereabouts? - A. Yes, I would be.
v /                                          i
              Q. The numbers that you saw there outside at that time,
                 did you think they could possibly get in by 3 o'clock?
O         D      - A. At the time I did not address that thought.

              Q.        THE CORONER:   You have got to answer it at the
                   time. I am not interested in what you think now. What
                   Mrs. McBrien is wanting to know is, at 2.35 on 15th
                   April, 1989, did you think they could get in, or, your
                   answer seems to say that you didn't think about it, but
                   just answer, whatever your answer is. - A. Not at that
                   specific time, but the question had been raised a
          E        little bit earlier than that and I was quite happy at
                   that time that the people would get into the Ground.

              Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I think you said at 2.30 that
                   question was raised, wasn't it, and at that time it was
                   considered that the people would get in, but things
                   changed dramatically between 2.30 and 2.45, didn't
                   they? - A. Yes, they did.

              Q. I was thinking, was a further consideration given at
                 2.45 because of the slowing down? - A. I think the fact
                 of the matter was that people were concerned about
                 people being injured outside at that time, rather than
                 being concerned with the mass getting in to see the
                 football match. The problem was the number of people
                 outside and the necessity to alleviate their suffering.

              Q. As you understood it did it appear that the kick-off
                 would only be delayed if there had been fog on the
          G      Pennines or a bad motorway accident? If it was late
                 arrivals, that it would not be considered? - A. As I
                 think I explained to Mr. King, the general feeling was
                 that it had to be an intervening factor outside just


                                              361
          H
 o
                                                               12
                                                       T. BICHARD


     late arrivals. As I think has been explained before,
     people do come late to football matches, for whatever
     reason.

Q. So as it was such a sunny day and there were large
   numbers outside, the kick-off was still going to take
   place at 3 o'clock, it seemed, that day?

          THE CORONER:   It is not this Officer's duty to
     postpone the kick-off. He has given you an answer on
     that, Mrs. McBrien.

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   When Mr. Kelly was in the Control
   Room you heard Mr. Duckenfield say that the cause of
   the disaster was that a gate had been forced, is that
   right? - A. I don't think the cause of the disaster.
   It was part of a conversation and the fact that the
   gate had been forced was something that took place
   within that conversation.
                                »
Q. And there was a sudden in rush? - A. Yes, that is
   right.

Q. You would not doubt that a sudden in rush would cause a
   disaster, would you? - A. Not necessarily, no.

Q. Would you think there would be a risk if there was a
   sudden in rush?

          THE CORONER:   No, I don't think we need to
     enquire of this Officer's opinion as to the quality of
     the risk. That is the Jury s job.

Q.        MSS*   McBRIEN:      Right, thank you very much.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Q.    Officer, can you think   back and try and recall the
     parameter of time that    you were in the Control Box for
     that day? When didyou     first go there and how long
     were you there for? -     A. It would be fairly early in
     the morning, maybe 10,    10.30.

Q.    And when did you leave the Control Box?      - A. I can't be
     sure of that.

Q. Well, perhaps I can short circuit this. Were you in
   the Control Box between half-past-2 and 3 o'clock? - A.
   Yes, certainly.

Q. Did you leave the Control Box during that half hour
   period? - A. No.




                                    362
    A                                                             13

                                                          T. BICHARD


        Q. In the black file in front of you there is a document
           that is given the caption C532. Could you look.it up,
           please? - A. Yes, I have that.

    B   Q. That shows the layout of the Control Box, does it not?
           - A. It is, yes.

        Q. The bottom diagram is a plan of the Control Box and in
           it there is a square with your name on it? - A. Yes,
           sir, that is my position in the Control Box.

        Q. To your left in the left hand wall of the Control Box,
           looking at it from your position, is the door which
    C      affords entry to the Control Box? - A. Yes, sir, that
           is correct.

        Q. There are no other ways into that Control Box, are
           there? - A. No, sir.

        Q. Can you confirm that the plan is right, namely that the
           door opens outwards? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct.

    D   Q. And is hinged on the side of the door furthest away
           from your position? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

        Q. So is it right that it is not possible for someone to
           come into the Control Box or even look into the Control
           Box in such a way chat they are hidden by the opening
           of the door? - A. No, sir, if anybody comes to the door
           usually I do notice who it is.

    E


i




    G

                                          Q. Yes.   Do you know

                                    363
                                                                             14
                                                                     T. BTCHARD


              Q. Do you know Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes, sir.
i 1
          B   Q. Can I just ask you to confirm this; can you confirm
                 that between 2.30 and three o'clock that afternoon
                 Superintendent Greenwood did not come to the Control
                 Box? - A. Yes, I can confirm that.

              Q. Are you sure about that? - A. Yes, sir.

                        MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you.
              Q.        THE CORONER:   Do you know what your call sign was
                   on the day? - A. Hillsborough Ground Control.

              Q. That is how you were described, so to speak? - A. Yes.

                                 Cross-Examine^ bv MR. PAYNE

              Q. Mr. Bichard, on Friday, the very last subject you were
                 being asked about, related to the   gap of   time between
G         D      the opening of Gate C and the opening of     Gate A? -A.
                 Yes, sir.

              Q. You were asked questions about that by Mr. King and the
                 Coroner said he would make a few enquiries about times.
                 Mr. Bichard, are you in a position to help the Jury now
                 about the interval or time between the opening of those
                 two gates? - A. Yes, sir.

              Q. Off you go? - A. I knew the video was available and
                 what I have done is I have taken the timing at 1 minute
                 40 seconds.  I am quite happy that that is the time gap
                 between C and Gate A, the request   for Gate A to be
                 opened. I think that is the best    way to    put it.
      f
                        THE CORONER:    Say that again.
              Q.        MR. PAYNE: Take it in stages. Do you mean to say
                   you have re-examined the video yourself over the
o F                weekend? - A. Yes, sir.

              Q. You have noted the time at which Gate C was opened? -
                 A. That is the time that is shown on the video.

              Q.        THE CORONER:   Which video are we talking about?
                   The Police video do you mean? - A. Yes.

              Q.        MR. PAYNE: Then you have actually timed the
                   interval between that incident and the time at which
                   the instruction was given to open Gate A? - A. I
                   realised that when the instruction came in I moved
                   across to there. Obviously there is no sound or


                                                364

          H
 o
                                                              15
                                                       T. BICHAPn


   anything but I know that is why I did it and it is 1
   minute 40 seconds.
Q. Before you did what? - A. From Gate C being opened to
   me moving across to Gate A to see why the request had
   come in for Gate A to be opened because I believe
   again, looking at the video, there was a lapse from me
   going across there, the actual request being made to
   the actual gate being opened.
Q. What is the time interval between the opening of the
   two gates as recorded on the video? - A. That I didn't
   monitor. I have took thetime of me actually. The
   time from Gate C opening to the time I am sure that the
   request came in for Gate A to be opened.
Q. How is it you-are sure about that? - A. Because of my
   actions on the camera.
Q. Because the film, the scene shown on the screen, can be
   seen tojchange? - A. That is right, sir. I moved the
   position of the camera to look at Gate A.
Q. The time interval which you have measured is from the
   view of the opening of Gate C as shown on the
   picture? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. To the time at which the camera can be seen to swing
   round, is that right? - A. That is right and, in fact,
   I zoom into the area around Gate A.
Q. You caused the camera to swing round as a result of
   receiving an instruction, did you? - A. It was as a
   result of the radio request from Sergeant Higgins.
Q- The time interval between those two events is what? -
   A. It is 1 minute 40 seconds. Perhaps I can just clear
   up something else? You have made reference to the
   opening of Gate A. Something took place then. The
   opening of the gate wasn't immediate. It was within a
   period then.
Q. Is that something which can be seen on the film? - A.
   No.
Q. Just expand on what you are saying, something took
   place? - A- I don't know if I can speak about the
   matter but I believe that Sergeant Higgins had some
   difficulty convincing a steward that he was__
       THE CORONER:     You have no need to speak of that.
       MR. PAYNE:     Sir, is that helpful.

                                 365
                                                              16
                                                      T. BICHARD



       THE CORONER:     Partially.
Q. Do you know the tape reference for the video that you
   reviewed? - A. No, sir.
Q. Is it right that the only shot of Gate A that you saw
   is the shot where one sees a number of Officers lined
   up at the back of Gate A, and you cannot actually see
   the gate as such, is that right? - A. The angle of the
   camera does not allow you to see the gate.
Q. Isthat the shot we are talking about? - A. The initial
   shot, yes. There were Officers behind the gate but I
   believe that I moved away from that scene again and
   looked at a general scene and in fact went back to it
   when the gate had been opened and saw people moving
   through a line of Officers.                      ~
       THE CORONER: I want to have a look at this myself
  because I thought I was reasonably clear in my mind.
  What we will do is adjourn for a few minutes aiid find
  it. It is all on the compilation tape. We will have a
  look to find it on the compilation tape. If we can
  find it we might show it. If need be we will put the
  segment of the tape up that deals with it. I want to
  be clear about this. I think that is the only way to
  do it.
       MR. PAYNE:     I have no other questions.
       THE CORONER: I might have one or two more but we
  will deal with this aspectof the tapes first. We will
  rise for a few minutes and see whether we can sort this
  out once and for all.
                       (Short Adjournment)
       THE CORONER: We are going to have a little look
  at a small snippet of the compilation tape and I want
  you to watch it and I want you to tell us whether this
  is the video that you saw the scenes which you saw and
  whether this is the basis on which you are giving your
  evidence so that we can understand what you are saying.
  We are not looking at the whole of the compilation
  tape, the two hours job, we have wound it forward to
  14.52 when Gate C opens and then we will watch for a
  few minutes. It is only short but I want to be sure
  that we have understood the evidence.
                    (The video film was shown)
       THE CORONER:    Can you stop the video for a moment?

                                366
                                                 T. BICHARD


Is that the pan you are talking about? - A. Yes, sir.
Are you saying you panned across at that point when you
heard the request? - A. That is right, sir.
               (The video film continued-)
Is it right you then left Gate A and moved back towards
Gate C area, the roof of the turnstiles? - A. If my
memory serves me right I came back for a general view,
yes.
               (The video film continued)




                            /Q.   THE CORONER.


                           367
                                                             18


                                          T. BICHARD



Q.         THE CORONER: What is that showing us? - A. That
     is the reference I made to how I saw two lines of
     Officers behind 'A' gates with people passing through
     them to the rear of the North Stand.
Q. What made you go back to Gate 'A', can you remember?
   You may not be able to remember it is two years' on
   because there is gap, isn't there? - A. Yes.
Q. There is almost a four minute gap between the first
   one and this one? - A. I am not sure about the reason
   for that. I am quite confident about the first look
   at that gate. Looking at the tape it is something in
   my mind, I can make reference to incidents or messages
   that were passed or things that were said in relation
   to what I did on that tape. It is like a pocket book
   to me.
           THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, do youwant to ask
     anything else arising from the video.It is more or
     less clear to me now?
           MR. PAYNE: No, I don't think there is any
     question. I am grateful sir.
           One thing which is quite clear in looking at
     the segment that we have just seen, in looking at that
     short section we have just seen, when the camera or the
     machinery was allowed to run at its normal speed one
     got quite a different impression from what was happening
     as to when we were going one frame at a time.
           THE CORONER:   I don't think we need deal with
     that. ’
           Mr. Fraser, I know you weren't here on Friday
     but do you want to ask any questions. You may have
     seen the transcript but the point we were discussing
     at length was the time interval between the opening
     of Gate C and the opening of Gate A and the time
     interval between the request for that to be opened as
     opposed to its effectiveness.
           MR. FRASER: No I understand that sir and that
     position has obviously been clarified this morning.
     Thank you.
Q.         THE CORONER:   I just want to ask you one other
     question.
           The recordings which you mentioned, the VHF
     recordings, those of course would not have been done
     in the Hillsborough Control Room, they would be done
     somewhere else? - A. No, the machinery is held at Force
     Control at Snig Hill.
                                 368
                                                          19


                                       T. BICHARD



Q. So they would do their transcriptions from there? - A.
   I am not sure about who would actually do the
   transcriptions.
Q. It follows therefore there is absolutely no point in
   showing you transcripts of the tapes because you would
   not recognise them because you weren't in those
   locations. That is correct, isn't it? - A. The only
   transcripts of those tapes I recognise is the messages
   I passed to Force Control.
Q. Do you know which channel you were speaking on? - A.
   Normally it would be a dedicated channel, Channel 2.
   There was some speculation it might have been Channel 1.
   Had you asked me that two days ago I would have been
   sure it was Channel 2. I believe there is only four
   actual channels to choose from.
Q. In fact we have not got a transcript of either 1 or 2.
   - A. And telephone conversations are also taped as well
   sir.
         THE CORONER: I see. I think we will leave it.
   We have got enough. Thank you very much indeed.
         Now the next matter we are going to deal with
   this morning is I am going to read most of, not all,
   but most of the statement froia Peter Edward Smith.
   This is what is known as a Track Officer, and for
   reasons which I don't need to go into it is not
   practical for me to call him, so I am going to read
   his statement.
        ■I- am also satisfied in the light of the evidence
  which we have already heard the statement falls within
  the ambit of Rule 37 which is the rule which deals
  with the admission of documentary evidence.
         It is the statement of Peter Edward Smith,
   Police Constable 1285 in the South Yorkshire Police
   and the date appears to be 29.4.89. It is not
   strictly a statement, it is a recollection as opposed
   to a statement but I think we won't worry about the
   technicality at this stage.
         "SEMI FINAL HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND -
         15 APRIL 1989.
        On Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty
        at 0945 am at the Hillsborough Football
        Ground. At this time I was in company with
        Police Constable 417 ILLINGWORTH and we
        went straight to the North Stand for the
        1000 am briefing. The briefing was taken

                              3S9
