                                                    IXjf
                             r\r r\
                                               HOME OFFICE
                                        Queen A nne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                Direct line: 01-273
                                              Switchboard: 01-273 300c>


Our reference:
Your reference:




  A V Astling Esq
  Clerk
   est Midlands Police Authority
  L'ouncil House
  Dudley
  DY1 1HG                                     5 May 1989




   PUBLIC INQUIRY - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY
  The Home Secretary has asked me to thankyou for yourletters of             25
  April and 4 May and to reply to them on his behalf.
  To take first your letter of 25 April, the Home Secretary has
  already accepted, in a letter to Mr Anthony Beaumont-Dark MP, that
  the additional costs of the police inquiries being undertaken in
  relation to the Hillsborough disaster by West Midlands police
  officers should not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority.
  The precise arrangements for reimbursing the West Midlands Police
  Authority will, however, need further discussion.       I shall  be
  asking for an urgent meeting with the       Clerk to South      Yorkshire
  Police Authority, since it was at the request of the Chief
  Constable of South Yorkshire that the West Midlands police
  inquiries were set in hand and their inquiries seem related in
  large part to questions connected with policing in South Yorkshire.
  It is true, as you point out, that the results of Mr Dear's
  inquiries are to be made available to Lord Justice Taylor.    But
  that does not mean that the work of the West Midlands Police has
  ceased to have any connection with police issues in South
  Yorkshire.  For this reason it is necessary to start with a close
  examination of that authority's position.
  These matters will clearly take some effort to resolve. I think it
  must be right for me to take them up with the Clerk to the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority initially, as the force in whose area
  the tragedy occurred and whose Chief Constable invited the West
E.R

      Midlands police in. ^But I will be in touch with you again as soon
      as I can after my initial discussions with South Yorkshire.
  As for the request in your letter of 4 May for a meeting of a
  deputation from your Authority with the Home Secretary, the Home
  Secretary has asked Lord Ferrers, the Minister of State at the Home
  Office with responsibility for police matters, to receive the
  deputation on his behalf.    I should be grateful therefore if you
  would get in touch direct with Lord Ferrers' Private secretary on
  01-213-2769 to arrange a date for this.




                                                A-v ,   •


                                               M J ADDISON




                                                                           J
