                                                    Q U E E N ANNE'S GATE    L O N D O N SW1H <5AT


                                                                  /S        October 1990
                               m r - G IK S ~ /)S



                              mr*'~ ^
                                    £o<jJ}S.ty£j&
                                     y&do-^i
                              /nr- /rtC’O.'p&U
                              m-coal,///_J

   ik     fVnCu*
                          /rf~ Sc>*rtqiJ&Vcl
                          t**-^ ojoISt'
Thank you for your letter of 21 September in response to mine
of 20 August about Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations for
new criminal offences.
You asked for an estimate of the costs which would fall to
local authorities. For the police the level of activity
generated by the proposed new touting offence is expected to
be absorbed within thei'r existing and planned resources. The
police are already actively engaged in the control of touts at
football grounds: what Taylor has proposed is a specific
offence of touting which will make the law more adequate to
deal with this mischief rather than impose any significant
additional burden on the police or the courts.
As for the other three proposed new offences, the number of 3
prosecutions will not be high since the new offences will only
apply at football matches. It is estimated that the three
offences together are unlikely to produce more than 1,000
cases a year - there were only 2,734 arrests for all offences
in grounds in the 1989/90 season - and, working on the basis
that each case will cost the police an average of £180 to
process, it is unlikely to cost in excess of £180,000. There
is also some prospect of unquantifiable off-setting savings in
that enabling the police to deal more quickly and easily with
offenders will reduce the damage and disorder which they might
otherwise have gone on to cause.
It is expected that these cases will be dealt with summarily.
The cost to magistrates' courts is therefore unlikely to
exceed £64,000 per annum, based on the estimate that such a
case in a magistrates' court would cost £64.




The Rt Hon Norman Lamont MP
Chief Secretary
Treasury Chambers
Parliament Street
LONDON SW1                                                                            /over
It is inevitable that the workload figures are somewhat
speculative but our best estimates indicate that the total
cost implications for local authorities will be rather less
than £250,000 a year, of which something over £140,000 would
be met from specific grants. When the additional costs would
begin to be incurred would depend on when Parliamentary time
could be found for the legislation, but the full year effect
would not be felt before 1992/93 at the earliest.
Chris Patten's officials have now been informed of these
proposals under the new burdens procedure. They are content
that the additional duties for local government have been
properly identified and that as much as possible has been done
to estimate the costs. We will of course keep them informed
of any further developments.
Turning to your point that new proposals of this kind should
be accompanied by an equivalent saving in a central government
programme, I do not think that we and colleagues are agreed
that proposals which cannot be accompanied by an equivalent
saving should automatically attract a low priority. I fully
accept that testing proposals against this criterion is a
valuable discipline, but I think we must accept that there
will be some which remain a high priority even though no
immediate offsetting saving can be made. I would put Taylor's
recommendations for new offences in this category. The
projected costs are modest and the new offences are, I am
sure, justified in public order terms. Taylor's proposals
have been widely supported across the political spectrum and
we should incur needless criticism if we failed to legislate
on them.
I am copying this letter to members of QL and H Committees,
First Parliamentary Counsel and Sir Robin Butler.
