                                                                                         J MAY 89


                                                    fa G*^r~                  .?    Mr Moriarty
                                                               ji K oM** **     ’   (w/o encs)

                           Mr Sandiford
                          ^ Ar Naqler
                           Miss Stewart


                            CONTINGENCY FUNDS


                           You will be interested to read the attached minute, which I have
                           received from Mr Moriarty.


                           2.    He has put his finger on a real difficulty, as we are
                           discovering in our attempts to find provision for the costs of
                           the Hillsborough enquiry. We considered last year the
                           possibility of withholding some kind of contingency reserve in
                           the centre, but abandoned the attempt partly because of the
                           difficulty of making provision within Vote Estimates for
                           contingencies. Money has to be voted for a specific purpose. We
                           now find that in order to seek Parliamentary provision for the
                           unbudgeted costs of the Hillsborough enquiry, we have to seek a
                           Supplementary Estimate for a realistic sum and to do so, we need
                           to adjust at very short notice other elements of the Vote in
                           order to keep within the cash limit. We shall, no doubt, reach
                           satisfactory agreement about adjustments with the Treasury at
                           some later stage in the year, but at the cost of a lot of
                           pointless hassle.


3               ^W*        3.   My recollection is that the Belwyn Rules were developed
                           following the October storms in 1987 to deal with problems of
                           this nature, so far as local authority expenditure is concerned.
                           I would be grateful if Mr Nagler could let me have a brief.        But
                           the Belwyn Rules are not of any assistance so far as central
fe .-fc A JU ^ C V -O ^

f-Tvv AriiV                government expenditure is concerned. It may be a good time to
V/ S A                     start raising the issue as a matter of general principle (rather
\*   '7 -   '
                           than particular to the Hillsborough enquiry) with the Treasury.
 cXoLAxtc. VX \
                           I could do so through the PFO meeting mechanism, provided that I
knew I would get the support of one or two PFO colleagues
beforehand. Before taking any further steps, I would be grateful
for advice. Prison Department must have considerable experience
in this territory from the problems of the aftermath of prison
riots.



                                                 M C MALONE-LEE


Finance & Manpower Department
4 May, 1989
From:   M J Moriarty                      cc:   Mr Yates
        2 May 1989                              Mr Chilcot



Mr Malone-Lee


CONTINGENCY FUNDS

With Hillsborough much in my mind I have just been reading the
minutes of last week's meeting of Permanent Secretaries which
^record the move to repayment for Treasury Solicitor's services
next year. Is there, I wonder, a case for seeking to promote some
general debate about the arrangements for meeting costs,
especially legal costs, generated by unforeseen events such as
major disasters. As I understand it, though the Treasury may in
the end concede some contingency funding, their initial position
is that Departments should find these costs from within their
normal budgets. But the budgets themselves are not constructed so
as to allow any margin for contingencies, and in addition the
pressures on them grow ever tighter, making it more difficult to
carve out sums needed to respond to emergencies, even if they look
small in comparison with a total Departmental budget. Devolved
budgeting is an additional complication.   The forthcoming
addition of legal costs to these demands will make the picture a
good deal worse. It is hard to believe that any other
organisation or individual has no recourse to special funds for
special needs - even if it is only a friendly bank manager.




                           M J Moriarty
