                                                                                                                                          C §)
  4                                                                                                                             m - s £ P 1991
                                                                                             _,                                               -   —



                              t h v iiihiciai. S C R U T I N Y 1M I 0 . V                                         *+ *—
                        T U t Hll I SBOW ftV^n STADIUM PISAStE B




            1MTFRIM WRITTEN                                                                                  ^
                 HU I SFfflRf F ™                          f a m il y            S U P P Q R liiB Q iix




      IN T R O D U C T IO N
                                  Supnort GrouD. These submissions arc made o n behalf of the
                                  iiuyvvu,                     . - ,u       n f most ot trie
      Hillsborough Family Support Group ("the
      ^ H ie s w h o lo s tre la tiv c s irU fc ^                            resu.ted ,n * .

                                                                                                  «     * —             •fw —
      which appear in the course o f this document.



      c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s fo r p e r v e r tin g t   e c o u ■— —        -r            , u„   f ,„ iw   m v c stiu a u o n .

       c u l ^ b U U T ^ ^                        »                                                                brought others
       While some believe that proceedings for mans a u t     ■                                              w    w have a s u a g c d
       argue that an acceptance by pol.ce         ot fault at the tnquc
                                                               o f f i c e r s                                                       js
       grtef and anger, Mid                                                                                                  ......
       more serious. A ll seek from this Scrutiny       __—                                  f I ,m i i oVlor in 1 W , nor to the
       , he basis Of evidence no. made avaikble t o , h e ,                                    ^ J ^ o ,m ' *                . ^
       inquest in 1990-91. 1, is accepted. e . g h a n d                                               ^
        impracticable, and may be undesirable,             ■    n the issucs considered by the
        argued that a judge should be appointed ,o rcex a m ne all     ^
        Taylor Inquiry. It is submitted that the matter                                by ™ so „
        a determination whether the verdicts o f acci cn  ii j pn,,,nst(a[C that there arc issues
        o f the fresh evidence. However, t          h      e            s           <           »
        o f fact which can only be resolved by the presentation
        proceeding. The most appropriate course would be

                    (a) an invitation by the scrutinising tribunal to tf* A B o r ^ ^ l w                                        i^ « h «

                    &a*ssas«sssis»;
                     (b) the grant o f leave to move for Judicial Review o f the inquests verdicts, or a
                     recommendation that leave be granted.



          •The submissions have                been    prepared by Alunitones Q C and Julian
3 Raymond Buildings, Gray's Inn, London WC1R 5BH, instructed ey
to the Group.
B :3 5       FROM      3   RAYMOND     B U IL D IN G S            ID:   0 1 7 1   24 2   4 2 7 0            PAGE




         Section 13 o f the Coroners Act reads


         ( I)       This: section applies where, on an application by or under the authority ol the o f
                    the Attorney - General, the High Court is satisfied as respects a coroner ("the
                    coroner concerned”) e ith e r ...

         (b)    where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether by reason o f fraud
                rejection of evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry the
                discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or desirable in the
                interests of justice that another inquest should be held.

       (2)      1he High Court may -

       (a)      o r d e r ... another inquest to be held into the death ...

       (e)      where an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on that inquest.



    In J k Rapier [1988] 1 Q.B. 26 the Court stated (at p28C) that it was desirable tor
    applications under section 13 o f the Act to be combined with an application for Judicial
    Review in order for the Court to have the broadest range o f remedies at its disposal.



   Ik s advantages Of ft Divisional Court hearing. Such a hearing                 would have a number o f
   advantages over a “first instance” type o f enquiry .

                                Divisional Court could inform itself o f                 background   and
                           uncontroversia! evidence by affidavit evidence;

   (            l           ^e Divisional Court could, at an inter partes hearing, decide how much
                           evidence need be called live to determine whether verdicts should be
                           quashed.

                           the very flexible Judicial Review procedures available would obviate the
                           need for expensive and cumbersome re-litigation.

   I h g motives,,,o f the QrffUP- Most, but not ail, o f the members o f the Group arc from
  Liverpool. Otherwise they have little in common beyond the fact that all o f them lost
  cherished relatives. They come from a variety o f backgrounds, circumstances and
  occupations. The Group is not political, and has no interest except in promoting the
  legitimate legal interests o f its members in relation to the disaster. A number o f letters
  arc attached from members o f the Group who wish to express their own reasons for
  wanting a fresh enquiry. (Appendix 11)

  C ommon to all the members o f the group is a deep-seated conviction that the legal system
  tailed them, at a vulnerable time in their lives, when they most needed its protections,
  Hostility is not directed towards the Taylor Inquiry. Many recognise that the disaster
0 4 - S E P - 9 7   IB   36      FROM s   3   RAYMOND   B U IL D IN G S         ID.   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0        PAGE   3




                            lead, through Lord Justice Taylor s recommendations, to great and lasting improvements
                            m safety at football grounds. However, the Group's attitudes to the inquest are very
                           different. Repeatedly, members have told their lawyers, and wish to express u> l ord
                           Justice Stuart-Smith, that they attended the inquest full of trust in the police and coroner’s
                           court, which subsequent events have proved to have been misplaced. The feeling of
                           betrayal is profound and has led to deep bitterness and. in some, a sense o f alienation
                           from the courts and law enforcement authorities. Many feel that they have failed their
                           dead relatives by failing to assert themselves effectively ut the inquest.

                           1he new evidence demonstrates that the inquest proceedings, culminating in verdicts o f
                          accidental death, were deeply flawed. The inquest verdicts w-ere procured by the
                          presentation o f false and misleading evidence, and by the concealment and rejection o f
                          material evidence. Responsibility for this lies with the South Yorkshire Police, mid with
                          the West Midlands Police, who investigated the disaster.

                           The inquest verdicts were the culmination o f the attempts o f the South Yorkshire Police
                           attempts to shift the blame for the disaster from themselves to others, in particular to the
                          supporters. This evasion o f responsibility began as the disaster unfolded, when the
                          officer in charge lied to the Secretary o f the FA about what was happening, and continued
                          through to the inquests, despite Lord Justice Taylor's condemnation ( a s Report
                          (Appendix 1) para. 285). The fact that the Taylor Inquiry is not criticised by most o f the
                          Group enhances rather than diminishes the need for a further Inquiry The Taylor Report
                          was directed to other issues than the Inquest, and was. from the point o f view o f the
                          families o f the deceased, impersonal and general. Each bereaved person looked to the
                          Inquest to discover the individual circumstances o f his or her relative’s dcath;:instead of
                          this, it became apparent to them, eventually, that the Inquest did not direct itself to the
                          questions of the facts of each individual’s death, but was another general inquiry into the
                          overall circumstances o f the disaster, which succeeded in the minds o f certain sections
                          of the public in undermining and even reversing the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor. It
                          is submitted that a useful starting point in understanding the background is to contrast the
                          Interim Report o f Lord Taylor o f August 1989 with the summing-up o f the Coroner to the
                         jury.

                         In these Submissions the Group will:

                         (i)        Present and analyse the new evidence, none o f which was considered by Lord
                                    Justice Taylor or the inquests;

                         (ii)       Analyse the false evidence which was given;

                         (iii)      Demonstrate how the new evidence might have affected the course o f the
                                    inquests.




                                                                          3
04 - S E P - 9 7    2 \ ’ 3G    FROM      3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S         ID :   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0     PAGE




                                              CHRONOLOGY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

                   !()         The most important dates arc as follows;

                           1m

                               April 15              2.52pm: Gate C opened

                                                     3.06pm: Match stopped

                                                     3.15pm: Mr Duckcnlield tells the Secretary of the FA that
                                                     Liverpool fans have burst in through the gates. Later, other
                                                     officers tell the press that excessive drinking by f.iverpool fans
                                                     was the cause o f the disaster.

                                                     Two video tapes go missing from the locked and alarmed club
                                                     control room room at Hillsborough.

                           April 17                  Lord Justice Taylor appointed

                           April 18                  Inquests opened and adjourned

                           April 19                  The Sun article "The Truth". False police allegations that drunken
                                                     fans were to blame and that they had looted the bodies o f the dead
                                                     presented as established fact.

                           April 24                     West Midlands Police begin their investigation

                           May 15                       Taylor Inquiry begins (174 witnesses give evidence)

                           June 29                   Taylor Inquiry finishes

                           August 4                  Interim Taylor Report published

                           August 5                  Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire (Peter Wright) offers to
                                                     resign in the light o f the Taylor Report. Me expresses surprise at
                                                     the extent his force's failings.

                               1990

                               February              Decision taken to hold 'mini - inquests' dealing with the statutory
                                                     questions of'w ho, where and when', hut not with 'how'


                                                                           4
0 4 - S E P - 3 7   1 6 ^ 3 7     FROM;     3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S          ID.   0 1 7 1    2 4 2   4 2 7 0                 PAGE   S




                                April 18                  'Mini - inquests' resume. On average, 20 minutes spent on each
                                                          case.

                                October 30                The DPP announces his decision that no police officers will be
                                                          prosecuted because o f "insufficient evidence"

                                November 19               Main inquests begin in Sheffield.

                                m i

                                VIarch 28              The jury return verdicts o f accidental death by a majority o f y - 2.

                                July I I              Police Complaints Authority (PCA) direct that charges o f neglect
                                                      o f duty be preferred against Mr Duekeniield and Mr Murray

                            November 10               Mr Duckenfield announces his retirement on medical grounds.

                            1^2

                            January 13                The PCA drop the charges against Mr Murray.

                            April                     Memorial presented to the Attorney - General, for the purposes of
                                                      section 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988, asking for new inquests on
                                                      in the case of six families the basis of evidence which has come
                                                      to light since the original inquest.

                            August 20                 Attorney - General says that there is insufficient basis for the
                                                      exercise o f his fiat

                           um

                           April 6                    Leave to move for judicial review granted

                           November 5                 Judicial review refused by the Divisional Court (McCowan i.J and
                                                      Turner J) (Appendix 2).




                           December 5                Granada Television          broadcasts         drama              documentary
                                                     'Hillsborough'

                           m i

                           March                     Roger Houldsworth's evidence, the footage from Camera 5 before
                                                     15.02 pm, which the Coroner at the Inquest stated had gone
                                                     missing, and the evidence o f Dr Kdward Walker presented to the
                                                     Home Secretary and the DPP.

                                                                             5
                                                                                  ID    0 17 1   24 2   4 2 7 0          PAGE   S
04 - SEP - 9 7   IS   37    FROM          3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S




                           June 30                      Home Secretary announces a judicui) scrutiny o f the fresh
                                                        evidence.




                           EVIDENCE NOT PR ESENTED TO THE INQUESTS OH TO LORD JD,STICK
                           TAYLOR'S INQUIRY; I W Q GENERAL J&I1BJECIS



                           There were two serious areas o f human failing at Hillsborough, applicable to all the
                           deaths

                                   (i)        The failures of control in the police control box, highlighted in the Taylor
                                              Report, caused the crushing in the pens.

                                   (ii)       The slow and inadequate response to the developing disaster delayed the
                                              arrival o f the emergency services, and prevented the injured trom
                                              receiving medical attention. It is remurkablc and shocking that only
                                              fourteen o f the deceased were taken to hospital. The remainder were left
                                              for dead in the gymnasium at the football ground, or at various locations
                                              at the back o f the I.eppings Lane terraces.

                           Kvidence relevant to both o f these limbs o f failure was withheld from the Inquest jury.
                           To the first o f these, the evidence of Roger Houldsworth is directly relevant, lo ihe
                           second, the evidence o f Dr Edward Walker and the ambulanceman Tony Edwards is
                           directly relevant. None o f these was made available to the C oroner's court nor to the
                            1aylor Inquiry.

                               The poliee control box: the importance of the Yidc& tape cvidm gf,

                           The recently-discovered evidence o f Roger Houldsworth is ol central importance In
                           order to understand its significance, it is necessary to consider the very different evidence
                           advanced between 1989 and 1991. Lord Justice Taylor found that the primary’ cause ol
                           the disaster was the failure of control which occurred in the police control box at
                           Hillsborough. He said that the decision to open gate C at 2.52pm should have been
                           accompanied by measures to divert the fans away from the tunnel into pens 3 and 4
                           which, he found, were overfull at 2.50pm (Para. 184). Although he acccpted the police
                           evidence that they were unable to see the terraces because of a faulty camera, he found
                           that it was foreseeable that opening the gate would cause injuries in the pens. He
                           described the police's failure to take these measures as "a blunder ol the first magnitude"
                           (See paras 229 -232) He singled out Chief Superintendent Duckeufield, the officer in
                           charge, for particular criticism. "Mr Duekenficld's capacity to lake decisions and give
                           orders seemed to collapse ... He froze." (Paras. 282 - 284). Mr Duckenfield and his
                           deputy, Superintendent Murray, were charged with neglect of duty by the Police
                           Complaints Authority, although the eases were discontinued when Mr Duckenfield
                           retired on medical grounds.

                                                                           6
0 4 - S E P - 9 7        16   3 0   FR O M :   3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S          I D :   0 1 7 1   24 2   4 2 7 0         PAGE   7




                     ^          l hfi. false allocation o f blame to Liverpool supporters. The police, aided by 'The Sun'
                                newspaper, had sought to blame the disaster on drunken Liverpool fans (&& Chronology.
                                supra)- The Tnylor Report repudiated this completely. I.ord Justice Taylor both
                                exonerated the fans and criticised the policc, not just for their mistakes, but for telling
                                lies and refusing to face up to their responsibilities (paru. 285). The ( 'hiel Constable ol
                                South Yorkshire. Peter Wright, offered to resign after publication o f the Report,
                                expressing .surprise at the extent to which his forcc had been criticised.

                    14          By the time the main inquests resumed in November 1990, therefore, it was clear that the
                                locus o f the evidence should be upon the actions o f the police rather than the behaviour
                               ol the tans. It was apparent that a centra! question would be whether the police's 'blunder'
                               was o f sufficient gravity so as permit the jury to return verdicts of unlawful killing. This
                               made it extremely important that all the evidence relevant to the issue o f the police’s
                               culpability was put before the inquest jury. The two police forces would have been aware
                               that the more the jury heard that it was obvious that the pens were full when gate C was
                               opened, the more likely it was that verdicts o f unlawful killing would be returned

                    15         I h e basic legal issue at the inquest. At the inquests the Coroner left two verdicts to the
                               jury, namely accidental death and unlawful killing. (S&? Appendix 3, 25/3/91, Day 77,
                               p3 etxeq.). In relation to unlawful killing, he directed the jury in accordance with
                               Watkins IJ's formulation in R. y, West London Coroner ex parte Gray f I988| Q H. 467.
                               namely;


                                                    Was the failure to act for the benefit o f the health and welfare o f the
                                                   deceased reckless ? An act o f recklessness means that he did or failed to
                                                   do something where there was an obvious and serious risk to the health
                                                   and welfare of the deceased, to which that person whose conduct you are
                                                   considering having regard to his duty was indifferent or that recognising
                                                   the risk to be present he deliberately chose to run the risk by doing
                                                   nothing about it.



                    ()        I&UgS Of httCt- There were two main general factual questions lor the jury to consider in
                               connection with the vcrdict of unlawful killing.

                              0)        Should the police be blamed for opening gate C, given the crush which had
                                        developed outside the turnstiles and. if so, to what extent ought they to be
                                        blamed?

                              (n)       Should the police be blamed for failing to take measures to divert fans away from
                                        the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 when gate C was opened and, if so, to what extent
                                        ought they to be blamed ?

                    7         In his summary of the evidence, the Coroner first considered the events outside the
                              ground and the crush which developed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles prior to 2.52pm
                              (Day 77, 25/3/91, p7 at seq. ). Having considered this evidence, the Coroner told the iurv
                              (p25):


                                                                                7
0 4 - S E P - 9 7        1 6 : 3 8     FRO M =   3   RAYMOND        B U IL D IN G S          I D .   0 1 7 1   24 2   4 2 7 0            PAGE   8




                                                          All the evidence would seem - not all but virtually all the evidence would
                                                          seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open the gate was
                                                          reasonable in the circumstances.

                                     Therefore the Coroner effectively directed the jury that the answer to (i> was \ \ o \ -

                     IX           I he Coroner then went on to consider the events in the police control box On no fewer
                                 than four occasions he directed the jury that the most crucial issue in the case was the
                                 knowledge and actions o f the officers in the control box. In particular, he directed the
                                 jury to consider very carefully what the officers knew about the overcrowding in pens
                                 and 4 before 3.00pm, and whether they were aware that the pens were already full when
                                 the orders were given to open gate C. which led to the influx o f supporters and the fatal
                                 crushing on the terraces.

                    i           At pp54 - 55 the Coroner described the following question as one o f the "root questions"

                                                         [A]t what point could - assuming somebody had looked ai the terrace -
                                                         could anybody have realistically noted that there was serious
                                                         overcrowding with the terrace (sic) ...

                    20          Having directed the jury on Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C the Coroner said
                                at p p 1 2 5 - 1 2 8 :


                                                         Now, what about the assessment o f the terraces, lx-cau.se this is may be
                                                         the single most important factor which you have to weigh.

                                                     The sum total of the evidence from the Control Room, from Mr
                                                     Duckenfield, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard, was that none o f
                                                     them had noticed any problems with the pens until people camc over or
                                                     the gates were opened. In other words, shall we say in round terms, three
                                                     o'clock.

                                                     This was partly because their attention was focussed on what was
                                                     happening outside Leppings Lane, though I think Mr Goddard certainly
                                                     said he did glance around and he had noticed nothing u n u su al... [hej also
                                                     said that in fact the front o f the pens is quite difficult to see becausc of the
                                                     a n g le s ...

                                                     So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have noted at



                        There are a number of members of the Group who believe that the decision to open gate
               ( was. by itself, an understandable reaction to what was happening outside the ground I lowover
               a number of families believe that this decision cannot be looked at in isolation, and that because
               the police were to blame for having allowed the crush at the turnstiles to have built up, the
               decision to open the gate was o f itself a culpable act for which they ought to be held responsible:
               an alternative remedy was available, to delay the kick-off

                                                                                      8
                                                                                            ID =   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0      PAGE       9
0 4 - S E P - 9 7          1 6 = 3 9     FRO M :   3   RAYMOND     B U IL D IN G S




                                                         the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens were so full
                                                         or so over full that diversion was something which had to be taken, and
                                                         secondly, o f course, would the connection, would a reasonably prudent,
                                                         skilled police officer in the shoes, if you like, of Mr Duckenfiekl or
                                                         indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the opening o f the gate,
                                                         diversion o f the tunnel, and conditions on the pen?
                    r- j




                           1           The following day the Coroner returned to this question. He directed the jury (26/3/l>I .

                                       Day 7X, P22):

                                                         [I]n the final analysis you may feci the real apex o f the problem is the
                                                         issue o f whether or not there was such a failure in not diverting ihe fans
                                                         from the tunnel that you can classify that as creating an obvious and
                                                         serious risk o f injury.

                           2           At p24 he said:

                                                         It all hinges, as I said to you yesterday, on whether or not; what the
                                                         assessment, if any. o f the pens were becausc if the pens were either not
                                                         observed or were observed and not noted to be abnormal then that might
                                                         help you in deciding whether or not there was an obvious and serious risk
                                                         to the people involved.

                                                         One o f the big problems, of course, is that whenever you think about this,
                                                         and when everybody thinks about it, one has to ask the question,
                                                         "Obvious and serious to who ?". You have heard the officers say, "It
                                                         wasn't obvious to us" and if you believe them you might say that is the
                                                         end o f the m a tte r. ..

                           1           The evidence o f the police about Camera.S. The officers blamed their failure to sec the
                                       overcrowding on the terraces on what they said was a defective camera. Camera 5.
                                       pointing at pens 3 and 4. The issue for the jury was whether the police had ignored an
                                       obvious and serious risk when they opened gate C without taking measures to stop fans
                                       from entering the tunnel to pens 3 and 4. Because o f the evidence of the officers (which
                                       was unchallenged) the jury must have based their consideration ol this question on a              ^
                                       finding that the police, through no fault o f their own, did not know about the
                                       overcrowded condition o f pens 3 and 4 until it was too late. It was therefore almost
                                       inevitable that vcrdicts o f accidental death would be returned

                    24                  The appropriateness o f the jury's verdicts therefore depends upon the reliability of their
                                       findings about what the police knew about the terraces. The Croup submits that the new
                                       evidence goes directly to the obviousness and seriousness o f the risk that was ignored by
                                       the police, and undermines the reliability o f this finding, and thus also undermines the
                                       jury's verdicts. As the Coroner said, this question was the question upon which the jury's
                                        verdict hinged.



                                                                                     9
0 4 - S E P - 9 7     IS   39     FROM     3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S          ID    0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0            PAGE   10




                                I he'evidence o f the police officers is contained at Appendix 4. The following is a
                                summary of the most pertinent pans.



                    “6          £ 1 Irey p rfiichard was in charge o f the video cameras in the police control room. These
                                cameras had the ability to pan and till, and to zoom in and out. PC Bichard was forthright
                                in his evidence to the tribunals that the picture from Camera 5 had been distorted, and
                                that was the reason that the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 had not been noticed by any o f
                                the officers in the control box.

                    21       1 he video tape ol the pictures taken from camera 5 which was shown to the jury began
                            at 3.02pm, and was a time lapse video o f poor quality. PC Bichard was asked by the
                            ( oroner why the video began at 3.02pm. and whether there .should ha ve been film o f
                            events prior to 3 02pm. PC Bichard's response was inconclusive Me replied that there
                            should have been, but that (p80):

                                               I have no idea at all where it could have gone to. It was part of the tape
                                               and the tapes were all sealed up at the end o f the day.

                    28          At p80 PC Bichard said;

                                               My recollections arc that the particular camera had been faulty and in fact
                                               you saw some o f the problerm that occurred. You were getting what is
                                               called flare. It is reflection of light coloured objects and you lose the
                                               picture. The camera was not really being used as much as it would
                                               normally be because o f the sub - standard picture. It was just left in
                                               position. That is why the picture never really moved at all because it was
                                               just left in position.

                    - ()PC Bichard was then asked by the Coroner about              when he had first noticed something
                            wrong on the terraces (p82):

                                               Q.    At what point, either visually or by monitor, anything that
                                                      warranted comment, if that is the right word 7 - A. I saw some
                                                      people climbing over the fence and a situation similar to that,
                                                     people climbing to the stand, had occurred the year earlier ...

                                               Q.    That is the first time your attention was drawn to that part o f the
                                                      ground in a significant son o f way 7 - A. Yes

                                               Q.    Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a m o n i t o r •
                                                     A. It is very difficult to rem em b er... 1 am not sure

                            At pl)2 he was asked:

                                               Q.    What do you say, officer, so far as the ability o f a camera, trained
                                                     from the South Stand, to give you an idea in your terms of


                                                                            10
0 4 - S E P - 9 7   16   4 0    FROM     3   RAYMOND      B U IL D IN G S           ID *   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0        PAGE   X I




                                                        overcrowding within that area ? - A. It would nol give you a view
                                                        of overcrowding.

                                                 Q.     Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment to make
                                                        any decision about overcrowding from the monitor that you would
                                                        have in front of you ? - A. I don't think it would he a sound
                                                        judgment

                                                 Q.     In fact, part o f the problem is that the position and angle o f the
                                                        camera in the South Stand, instead o f ideally, if you like, being on
                                                        the centre o f the pitch gives you a difficulty beeau.se o f the angle
                                                        itself ? - A. That combined with the inadequacy of the camera,
                                                        yes.

                    30         At p96 he was cross - examined by Counsel for the families on his evidence that it was
                               not possible to pick out facial features;

                                                 Q.    ... Do you maintain the view that the zoom facility is such that it
                                                        is not possible to zoom in so that one can clearly identify a given
                                                         individual if one wishes to do so ? - A. I am quite happy with that
                                                        comment, yes ... when there is a group, a large crowd there, to
                                                        pick out an individual would be difficull.

                                                 Q.    But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial features,
                                                       can you not ? - A. I don’t think so, sir.5

                               At p97 he said:

                                                 If I had seen (overcrowding) I would have done something about it.




                               In his evidence to Lord Justice Taylor on June 12 1989, PC Bichard said

                                       The camera was not up the mark ... we were getting pictures, that is the best way



                             ' {‘his evidence should be compared with the evidence given to Lord Justice 1ay lor on 25
                    May 198‘) at pp 1 2 8 - 9 where the camera systems at Hillsborough were described as ‘the finest
                    in the country’. The following extract from an article in 'Policc Review' by Mr Locke, the club's
                    head o f security, was read to Lord Justice Taylor:

                               Today at Hillsborough       a senior officer can follow crowd movement outside the
                               stadium by using the closed - circuit cameras as his eyes He is able to anticipate
                               problems, see incidents as they build and employ necessary resources to abate them.
                               Inside the ground he can watch crowd behaviour and identify offenders through the zoom
                               facility.

                                                                            11
04 - SEP - 9 7    16   4 0     FROM:    3   RAYMOND      B U IL D IN G S        I D :   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0              PAGE   12




                                    o f describing it.




                             Sergeant Goddard gave similar evidence. His evidence to Lord Justice Taylor was as
                             follows (June 11 1989, p87):

                                             Q      What did you see inside the ground that put you on notice that
                                                    something was wrong in pens 3 and 4 0 - A. People were climbing
                                                    over the fences.

                                             Q.     When did you see that ? - A. About three o'clock time.

                                             Q.     What did you do about it ? - A. My fust thought was. "We have
                                                    got a pitch invasion" and it was a matter o f deploy ing as many
                                                    men as possible down to the Leppings Lane end o f the perimeter
                                                    track.

                 33          At p94 he was cross - examined by Mr I lytner QC on behalf o f the families:

                                             Q,     ... Were you aware that there was a spccial problem on the
                                                     Leppings Lane terraces or not 7 - A. No, sir. 1 was not

                                             Q.     ... Did you at any stage before you saw people climbing over the
                                                     pens notice any overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. No. sir.

                                             Q      Apart from noticing there was crowd trouble in that people wore
                                                    climbing over did you ever say to yourself pens 3 and 4 are
                                                    beginning to look overcrowded. They have reached capacity -
                                                    A. No, sir. 3 and 4 were getting full, were full I’rom my vantage
                                                    point they were not overcrowded.

                                             Q.     Did no Officer in the control box, anybody, comment at any stage
                                                    that pens 3 and 4 looked full ? - A. No, sir. They did look full but
                                                    not overfull.

                 34           At p96 Sergeant Goddard was cross-examined by Mr Muller QC (lor the South Yorkshire
                             Fire and Civil Defence Authority). He said that there was a 'blind spot' at the front ot the
                             terraces, which meant that Camera 5 could not focus on what was happening on the
                             bottom steps o f pens 3 and 4. He said

                                             You would not be able to pick out [funs] individually                  You could see
                                             figures.




                 35          At the Inquest his evidence was (14 March 1991, p92):

                                                                           12
04 - S E P - 9 7   1 6 : 4 0     FROM:    3   RAYMOND     B U IL D IN G S          ID :   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0          PAGE   13




                                                  Q     On this day ... at what point did you yourself first notice anything
                                                        unusual about the pens 7 - A. The first point I noticed, the unusual
                                                        part, was when I saw people start climbing over the fences onto
                                                        the perimeter track and then I saw a gate open ...




                               [ .ater he said ( 15 March 1991, p6):




                                               Q       Your evidence to the Inquest is very simple; >ou never saw
                                                       anything unusual in that Leppings Lane terrace in the pens there
                                                       until you saw the people climbing over around three o'clock 7 - A.
                                                       That is correct, yes, sir




                           t*L Ryan had worked in the control box at Hillsborough for live years, lie gave evidence
                           to Lord Justice Taylor as follows (June 11 1989, p52):

                                              Q.      There was a problem with one o f [the cameras | is that correct 7 -
                                                      A. That is correct, yes. There was an apparent fault with on the
                                                      camera to the West Stand, West terraces ...

                                              Q.      Where is it mounted ? - A. I think that is the one that is mounted
                                                      on the electronic scoreboard.

                                              Q.      ... What was the problem with that camera as you can recall 7 - A.
                                                       The picture was very distorted,

                                              Q.      (Lord Justice Taylor) Very what ? - A. Distorted, sir.

                                              Q.      Was the fault mended ? - A. I contacted the engineer myself.

                                              Q       I hat is Mr Houldsworth 7 - A. Roger Houldsworth. yes. He
                                                      attended and came out and worked on that camera for some time.
                                                      Quite how long he was there I do not know. He was certainly
                                                      there working on it for some considerable time. The picture was
                                                      never satisfactory as far as I can recall that day although that was
                                                      not my specific duty to look at that.

                                              Q-      ... When you say the picture as far as you can see was not
                                                       satisfactory what was wrong with it ? - A. It was not as clear as
                                                       you would hope the picture to be.

                                              Q.      Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way

                                                                            13
04 - S E P - 9 7    1 6 =4 1     FROM;    3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S           ID=   0 1 7 1   24 2   4 2 7 0           PAGE   14




                                                       inoperative or less adequate than normal o r ... - A. As tar as I can
                                                       recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality of the picture
                                                       that was the problem.

                   17      PC' Ryan did not give evidence at the inquests.

                   .'8     C hief Superintendent Duckenfield began his evidence, to I ord Justice Taylor on 24 May
                           1989. He did not refer to any faults with the camera system. On 25 May 198l> at p 12l>
                           lie said that lie did not use the zoom facility at all, but mainly looked out o f the window.
                           On 26 May (pi 5) he referred to the surveillance system as "an excellent system".

                               Chief Inspector McRobbie gave evidence at the Taylor Inquiry, he was not called to give
                               evidence at the inquests. This is o f great significance. because his evidence u> the I aylor
                               Inquiry flatly contradicted that o f his colleagues, especially PC Bicliard.

                   40          Mr McRobbie gave evidence on 13 June 1989. At p20 he was asked, with reference to
                               the statement he made shortly after the disaster;

                                               Q.      At the bottom of p5 you refer to an incident which drew the
                                                       attention o f the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) ... - A.
                                                       That is correct sir, yes.

                                               Q.     You say;

                                                               "Police Constable Bichard operated the camera and I
                                                               watched him to be able to zoom onto him (sic\ which 1
                                                               thought was a super facility for spotting trouble makers in
                                                               the crowd."

                                                       A. That is correct, sir.

                                               Q.     No difficulty with the picture at all ? - A. Welt when you say "no
                                                      difficulty" it certainly brought this person closer to us than I think
                                                      it would have been possible for a Police Officer to select the
                                                      correct person that Control were identifying without any problem.

                                               Q.     That is the whole purpose o f it, isn't it 7 - A. I would think so sir.
                                                      yes.

                   41          At p22 he was cross - examined by Mr Glasgow QC (for Sheffield Wednesday football
                               Club):

                                               Q.     Chief Inspector, the camera zoom which impressed you was that
                                                      which was showing the scene on the terraces, was it 7 - A. It was
                                                      able to pick out someone directly under the control box. yes. but
                                                      I do not know where the camera is sited. 1 am sorry.



                                                                           14
0 4 - S E P - 9 7   1 6 :4 1     FROM:    3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S               0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0        PAGE   15




                                               Q.       You arc quite sure that was the camera that was being used, the
                                                        one that shows the scenc on the tcmiccs ? - A. 1 cannot speak
                                                        about a camera. All I cun say is on the monitor a person was able
                                                        to be enlarged.

                                               Q.     You might be able to help us it' you can remember by chance
                                                      whether it was black and white or colour. - A. Ft was black and
                                                      white.




                                I his exchange shows that it was Camera 5 to which Mr McRobbie was referring. The
                               other camera trained on Leppings Lane, situated in the centre o f the South Stand, was a
                               colour camera.

                               At p26 he was again asked whether it was Camera 5 which had been zoomed in by PC
                               Richard:

                                              A      I would have thought so from the definition, but. a.s I say. I would
                                                     n o t ...

                                              Q.     (Lord Justice Taylor) When you say "the definition" was it good
                                                     definition ? - A. It was quite reasonable, sir, yes.

                           Despite Mr McRobbie's evidence. Lord Justice Taylor accepted the police’s evidence that
                           they did not notice anything amiss until fans began to climb out o f the pens (para. 78).
                           Nonetheless, because o f the layout o f the ground, and the crushes which had developed
                           at previous matches in 1981 and 1988, he said it was foreseeable that disaster would
                           result from opening gate C if preventative measures were not taken

                           I M ^ y id e n c e o f Roger Houldsworth. Roger Houldsworth installed and repaired the
                           C C 1V ("Closed Circuit”) system operating at Hillsborough on the day o f the disaster, and
                           was present in the club's video room during the disaster. Mr Houidsworth made a
                          statement to officers from the West Midlands Police on 16 May 1989, and expected to
                          be called as a witness at the Inquiry and the inquests. However he gave evidence at
                          neither tribunal. Although Mr Houldsworth was well known to the investigating officers,
                          he was variously described on the Coroner's witness list as a 'sound engineer' and as
                          ’ground staff.

                          Mr I louldsworth’s evidence, together with the missing footage, are contained in Appendix
                          5. it is believed that the significance o f his evidence was not made known to the Coroner.
                           Mr Houldsworth watched the disaster on the video monitors in the CCTV room, one o f
                          which showed what was being recorded on the police system                lie was the only
                          independent civilian witness who watched what was being .shown on the monitors I lis
                          evidence shows the police evidence analysed above to be deliberately false and
                          misleading. In particular, his evidence shows the following:



                                                                           15
0<j - S E P - 9 7   1 6 =4 2     FROM.      3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S           ID=   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0         PAGE   16




                               (i)       That the video camera trained on pens 3 and 4 o f the U p p in g s I .ane terraces was
                                         functioning normally, having been repaired by him on the morning of the disaster.

                               (ii)      That the pictures from this camera were being received normally in the police
                                         control box before 3,02pm (the time the video shown to the jury began) and were
                                         being recorded continuously (rather than in time - lapse mode) on video;

                               (iii)     That the camera was panning and zooming in on the terraces, and was therefore
                                         being operated by an officer in the control box,

                               (iv)      That at the time Mr Duckenfield gave the order to open Gate C, the screens would
                                         have been clearly showing that the terraces were lull and that some people were
                                         obviously in distress, with many more clearly uncomfortable It would thereJore
                                         have been apparent to the officers in the control box that death and injury would
                                         result if more people were permitted to enter the pens;

                               (v)        I hat the officers stationed in the box, in particular Mr Duckenfield. were
                                         therefore able to see the overcrowding develop in these pens prior to 2.52pm.

                               (vi >     That those in overall control o f the policing operation at Hillsborough would have
                                         been aware o f the overcrowding on the terraces as it developed, and there was
                                         therefore an obvious and serious risk o f injury if gate I were opened and the fans
                                         not prevented from entering the tunnels;

                               (vii)     That on the night o f the disaster, 2 tapes went missing from the locked and
                                         alarmed club control room

                               (\ in )   [ hat the evidence given by the relevant police officers, namely that they could not
                                         see the overcrowding on the terraces because the camera was defective, was
                                         knowingly false.

                    46          Because of the disappearance of footage from Camera 5 tape and the poor quality ot the
                                footage from 15.02 (which was in time lapse mode), counsel for the families was
                                prevented from cross - examining the police officers in the control box effectively, l-or
                                example, in his cross - examination o f PC Bichard, when PC Bichard had denied seeing
                                any overcrowding (at p97) he said; "1 cannot take that any further with you, officer.” Had
                                the tapes been available at the inquests, Mr King could have positively contradicted the
                                evidence given by the officers. As it was, he was able only to suggest that the officers
                                were mistaken in their protestations o f ignorance,

                    47           The jury therefore assessed the culpability of the police on the basis of evidence which
                                was false and misleading, It is almost certain that they must have concluded that because
                                the cameras were not working properly it would not have been obvious that the ici races
                                were overcrowded, and that the police were therefore not to blame for not recognising the
                                danger on the terraces when they opened gate C.




                                                                             16
0 4 - S E P - 3 7        1 6 : 4 2     FROM:   3    RAYMOND     B U IL D IN G S                 0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0                   PAGE   17




                    48
                                               an in w m p lt f r vifteo »htm n to       The tape played u» the inquest jury
                                     wasi produced by Sergeant Killoch o f the West Midlands Pol.cc as police exhibit TB1';
                                              i<?91 a‘ the conclusion o f Sergeant Goddard’s evidence (15 March 1991
                                    I   1 became       Coroner's exhibit C.539. On 13'” March 1991 the Coroner had
                                 acknowledged that this footage was o f very p00r quality. It showed only events after
                                 3.02pm in others words, after gate C had been opened. The pictures were rccordcTm
                                  time - apse mode, and the tape did not clearly show what was happening The same

                                 M a n ^ T p {129),PPearS t0 haVC bee" Sh° Wn 10 L° rd JUStiCC Tayl° r ^                    TranscriP‘- 2S

                    49
                                 Shortly after the disaster Yorkshire Television began work on a ’First Tuesday'
                                documentary about the disaster. They were given a set oftapcs winch contained footage
                                  om the cameras tn the police control room. Sections o f these tapes were used in the
                                programme. The tapes contained high quality footage o f events before 3.02pm The
                                tapes lay undiscovered in Yorkshire Television’s archives until they were found in a
                                search requested by Trevor Hicks i„ February 1997. The statement o f T revor Hicks
                                outlines the circumstances. (Appendix 6).

                50
                                I he G roup b e e v e s the suppression o f (his evidence to be sinister, and.          prim, fmk.      „
                               iZ Z m         °h ^ ° Ur“                  11 Was f’ottn,iall>   mosl ta .p o n a « evidence in the
                                T „,       I          ' n° ,Cd ' hat W 0 “ *** also " « * missi"8 f c n i the locked CCTV room
                                I only after the d.saster. The Coroner failed to pursue the question o f where the m iss,,,,
                               to o u s c ta d gone, desptte PC Bichard's response "I have no idea a. all where it could have
                               M       .1        part       tape and the tepes       a11 sealed “ P al Ihe end o f the dav "
                               I le ought to have summoned the West M idlands officers responsible for gathering this
                               evulence to gtve at, explanation for its disappearance The West Midlands Police should
                              c T o n iv             h0WI ,his; viden“ :                  I* suppressed. I bis is an issue which
                              can only be resolved by oral evidence.

               51
                                                   to m th e yhIssl The jury were fully aware o f the significance o f
                              the video evidence. On 13 March 1991 the Coroner addressed the legal representatives



                                                    ... there is just one thing which the jury have mentioned to me. In fact
                                                   they have mentioned it twice, and that is what about the video evidence
                                                   of the terraces. I have had the videos looked at and there is actually next
                                                   to nothing on the videos because, o f course, not everything was recorded,
                                                      hat does not mean to say they weren't possibly scenes (,v/V), hut there is.
                                                      understand, a little tiny bit which is actually on the compilation which
                                                   you have seen. 1here is another little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes
                                                   on for a few minutes.


                                                   What we have done is that we have clipped it, if that is the right word, and



                       1he C r o ^ Prosecution service have suggested by letter o f I0,h April 1997 that this was
             in fact L'xhibit 113/2.

                                                                            17
0 4 - S E P - 9 7    16   4 3     FROM -   3   RAYMOND   B U IL D IN G S           I D ;   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0      PACE   19




                                                we will show it to you, hut il is of very poor quality and I do not think it
                                                is going to help us very much. As far as ! cun tell there isn’t much
                                                recorded. Does that help ?

                    52          J'he jury were therefore led to believe that the tiny clip o f film they were shown was alt
                                that existed by way o f video evidence. The poor quality of this clip would undoubtedly
                                have persuaded the jury that the missing footage o f events before 15.0pm would have
                                been equally poor and would not have assisted them significantly.

                    53       l'he only acceptable explanation for the contradiction between what is shown on the tapes
                            and what was said in evidence at the inquests is that the officers lied in their evidence
                            The officers in the control box were fully aware o f the situation on the terraces and had
                            been monitoring the fans in pens 3 and 4 during the build up to the kick • off. I lowevei
                            they failed to consider the effect that the opening o f gate C would have on the terraces.
                            Thus it w'as that the ’blunder o f the first magnitude’ was made. The officers' explanation
                            that the camera equipment was not working was an excuse invented ex post fiu-to in an
                            attempt to shift the blame elsewhere. It should be noted that the explanation given by the
                            South Yorkshire police has changed since the disaster. At the time the officers said that
                            Camera 5 was defective. After the television programme ’Hillsborough’ was shown last
                            year, the police initially said, in January 1997, that they had found the missing tape, and
                            that it supported their claim that the camera had been faulty. After it was learned that the
                            Group had received tapes from Yorkshire television, they changed their explanation and
                            claimed that there had been interference from television outside broadcast equipment.
                            This second explanation is also contained in a Press Release from South Yorkshire Police
                            of P' April 1997

                    54     Summary. The police evidence to the tribunals was intended to give the impression that
                            they were not to blame for failing to see the overcrowding on the terraces before opening
                            gate (: because of faulty camera equipment. In fact, the video tapes show camera 5 was
                            working properly prior to 3.02pm. Incomplete video evidence o f very poor qualiiy was
                            shown to the jury; in particular, the pictures from Camera 5 prior to 3.02pm were never
                            shown, l his evidence was deliberately suppressed. The video shows that Camera 5 was
                            operating correctly and that the overcrowding w'as clear and visible to those watching the
                            screen. The jury therefore considered the most important issue in the case on a false and
                            misleading evidential basis.



                          The m edical evidence at the Inquests and the evidence o f l)r Edward Walker



                    55      I .ord Justice Taylor found that there was delay and confusion in evacuating the casualties
                            from pens 3 and 4 and in responding to the magnitude o f the disaster. The police were
                            obsessed by the idea that a pitch invasion was in progress, even though U was clear to
                            those in the television commentary box (who were further away} that the problem was
                            overcrowding and not hooliganism (Para 250). In particular he made the following
                            findings:



                                                                           18
                                                                                       0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0        PAGE   19
0 4 - S E P - 9 7   16   44      FROM-   3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S




                              (a)    No officer took effective charge o f the evacuation o f the injured from the pens
                                     (Para. 251);

                              (b)    Organised evacuation o f the injured from the pitch did not begin until 3.12pm



                              (c)    There was delay in activating the Major Accident Plan (although Ik*
                                     underestimated the extent of the delay - see below),

                              (d)    No request was made for cutting gear from the fire brigade until 3.13pm,

                              (c)    There was no co - ordination o f rescuc efforts, and no call for the assistance ol
                                     doctors or nurses until 3.29pm;

                              ( f)   There were cases where the earlier provision of medical treatment might have
                                     made a difference, in that more lives might have been saved (Paras. 251 and 252).

                    56        In contrast, the medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that all the deceased
                              had died quick and painless deaths, that they were all dead by 3 . 15pm, and accordingly
                              that I ord Justice Taylor had been incorrect in deciding that the secondary lailures ot the
                              police had resulted in further loss o f life. For this reason, the Coroner ruled that no
                              evidence after 3 .15pm would be considered. The 3.15pm cut off was predicated on a
                              number of unrealistic assumptions about the time it took for the deceased to be
                              asphyxiated, such as that all the deceased were subjected to continuous pressure so that
                              they were unconscious within a short period and dead within minutes.

                    57        I'.vidence which has emerged since the inquests shows this conclusion and the
                              assumptions upon which it was based to be false Sonic ot this evidence was presented
                              to the Divisional Court in 1993, and some has been uncovered in the period since 1993.

                    5X        D r W a lk e r 's ev idence. The evidence o f Dr Walker is contained at Appendix 7 It
                              consists of his contemporaneous account ot his work on the day ol the disaster, and a
                              copy o f a police statement dated 20th July 1989

                    59        Dr Walker, who was not at work, responded to televised pictures of the disaster and
                              assisted a large number o f patients at the Northern General Hospital, lie was praised by
                              the consultant in charge, Mr Wardrope, for his efforts, and received a letter indicating that
                              it was likely that he would be required to give a statement to the investigating police
                              force. In due course. Dr Walker gave a statement to the West Midlands police. Dr
                              Walker was not called as a witness at the Inquiry or at the inquests, and was repeatedly
                              referred to in evidence as an 'unidentified doctor’.

                    60        Dr W'alker’s evidence, in summary, is that when he arrived at the Northern General
                               Hospital the staff were aware only of a ’disturbance’ at Hillsborough. He was told that
                               there was a paediatric cardiac arrest on its way to the hospital, but no connection was
                               made between this casualty and Hillsborough. 1 here was no sign that the Major Accident
                               Plan had been activated and no awareness that the hospital was shortly to receive a large


                                                                          19
44   FROM:    3   RAYMOND   B U IL D IN G S           ID;   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0           PACE




   number ot critically ill patients. The first patient to arrive was Lee Nicol. and the second
  patient was Philip Hammond. Both boys were young teenagers. When they arrived at
  the hospital their hearts were not beating. Dr Walker and others worked on them and
  succeeded in restarting their heart and breathing. Lee Nicol survived until the following
  Monday. Philip Hammond survived for a time but later died, however. Dr Walker then
  treated a number o f patients, some o f whom died but some o f whom .survived.

 Dr Walker's contemporaneous evidence is significant in that it clearly demonstrates that
 there were a number o f patients who were extremely ill when they reached hospital who
 were successfully treated. It is also significant because it shows that the treatment o f the
 injured was hampered by a shortage o f drugs and equipment of the type necessary to treat
 cardiac arrests. Dr Walker lists eight deficiencies which hampered the treatment ot
 patients at the height o f the crisis.

 When the evidence given at the mini - inquest into the death o f Philip Hammond
(Appendix 7) is compared with Dr Walker's evidence numerous deficiencies and
inaccuracies can be discerned. The evidence at the mini - inquest would have left the jury
with the totally false impression that Philip was dead before 3.15pm. Dr Slater, the
pathologist who carried out Philip's post - mortem, testified that the policeman who said
that he tclt Philip’s pulse probably felt his own pulse. He said that the only signs of
treatment were BCG electrodes attached to his chest and that "essentially only lay people
saw him." Dr Slater said that Philip was 'brain dead at Hillsborough’ (Transcript, p5).
1he evidence o f Dr Walker shows that this opinion was wholly wrong, and that Philip
was alive far beyond 3.15pm. Dr Walker's evidence accordingly raises the possibility that
Dr .Slater's other diagnoses were wrong and that patients were alive well beyond the times
given at the mini - inquests and well beyond the 3.15pm cut - off

I t e significan ce of Dr Walker's w h Im m . and the M e m o ria l to the Attorney -
          in 1993 T'here is evidence that four o f the deceased. Paul Curlilc. Ian (Hover,
Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams' were alive after 3.15pm. This evidence is contained
in the Memorial presented to the Attorney - General in 1993. (Appendix 8).

Although the Attorney - General did not consider this evidence by itself to be sufficient
to justify him exercising his powers under section 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988. it is
submitted that this evidence together with the evidence o f Dr Walker constitutes
incontrovertible evidence that some of the conclusions reached at the mini - inquests were
erroneous, and that many o f the deceased were alive after 3 .15pm and that an inquiry into
the precise circumstances of their deaths was warranted, including an inquiry into the
matters referred to above.

It is significant that the Divisional Court acceptcd the validity o f some o f this evidence,
but declined to grant relief on the basis that the Coroner was not at fault (Judgment of 5
November 1993, p p l8 * 29, p30, p34). It can therefore be inferred that the Court
considered that this evidence warranted detailed consideration, but because o f the nature



Separate submissions have also been made in relation to Kevin Williams by his mother
0 4 - S E P - 9 7   1 6 : 4 5   FROM:   3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S            ID =   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0        PAGE   21




                            of the court's function on an application lor judicial review, insufficient to warrant relief.
                             I he Court specifically said that at p30 that had the hearing been a reference pursuant to
                            a reference by the Attorney General under section 13 the position might have been
                            different. It is respectfully submitted that the functions o f this Scrutiny are not so limited.
                             I he issue is whether this evidence might have altered the outcome o f the proceedings if
                            it had been heard by the jury at the inquest For the reasons set out above it is submitted
                            that it is more than likely that this evidence would have affected the outcome o f the
                            inquests.


                            Ii is plain from Dr Walker's evidence that there was evidence available to the Coroner of
                            a slow response by the police and the emergency services to the plight o f the injured,
                            evidence that some people might have been saved by a more timely response, and general
                            evidence o f a lack o f equipment. These were all matters which, it is submitted, required
                            investigation in order to determine properly "how" the deceased came by their death, and
                            they make the Coroner’s decision not to go beyond 3.15pm unjustifiable

                            l hc justification for the 3.15pm cuf - off point. Prior to the resumption o f the Inquests
                            in November 1990 the Coroner decided, in spite o f objection, that he would call no
                           evidence on events after 3.15pm. His reason was that the medical evidence which had
                           been given by the pathologists at the mini - inquests, in particular Dr Slater and Professor
                           I sher, was to the effect that death from traumatic/crush asphyxia occurred four to six
                           minutes after the chest became fixed so as to prevent breathing, and on the assumption
                           that the deceased's chests had become fixed at the latest by 3 06pm, the time the match
                           was abandoned, it could be further assumed that all the deceased were dead or dying by
                           3.15pm, and accordingly that nothing further could be done for them. He also chose this
                           time because it coincided (approximately) with the arrival o f the first ambulance
                           Transcript. 30 October 1990, pp8, 14.).

                           Thy; British Medical Journal Article  The Divisional Court observed in the six families
                           Judicial Review in 1993 that the Coroner imposed the 3.15 pm cut-off

                                   “because he took the view that on the overwhelming pathological evidence
                                   available to him permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by
                                   all the deceased” (Appendix 2. page 6C, MeCowan IJ).

                          In November 1991, a very different account appeared in the British Medical Journal,
                          written by, among others Dr Wardrope (Appendix 9) Many injured people taken to
                          hospital survived and recovered. (See Table 3) They suffered from a variety o f injuries,
                          serious and minor. Some unconscious victims were revived. The following questions are
                          inevitably posed by this evidence. How many other injured supporters died o f injuries,
                          untended, at the football ground of injuries other than asphyxia, or o f asphyxia at the
                          ground which could have been treated if they had been taken to hospital.? ( Only 14 of
                          the 95 victims (as opposed to the injured) were taken to hospital) Why was this evidence
                          not made known to the Inquest?

                           I he Divisional Court held that although there was evidence tending to show that some
                          o f the deceased were alive after 3.15pm (ggc e.g. p34), there was no basis for interfering

                                                                     21
0 4 - S E P - 9 7    1 6 4 5        FROM:   3   RAYMOND   B U IL D IN G S           ID:   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0        PAGE   22




                               with the Coroner's exercise of discretion in imposing this cut-off point. It is submitted
                               that the new evidence, now available, presents a completely di fferent account o f events.

                    70         I he ruling had a number o f consequences:

                               (0      1he main consequenec was to prevent any further inquiry into the individual
                                       circumstances of the 95 deaths. At the mini - inquests the Coroner hud assured
                                       the families that the question o f'h o w ' would be dealt with later. The Inquest
                                       therefore becamc simply a general inquiry into the circumstances o f the disaster.
                                       A number o f the deceased were not mentioned at alt during the 96 days o f
                                       evidence, save when their names were read out during the initial roll - call and
                                       when the verdicts were announced. Accordingly, their families never discovered
                                       how they died. An example is the family o f Peter Tootle (see Memorial section
                                       of Appendices), His parents travelled nearly every day o f the Inquest by car from
                                       Liverpool to Sheffield . His name was mentioned only in the list o f victims and
                                       when the verdicts were announced.

                           (ii)        I he jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f the deceased
                                       were alive for a considerable period after 3.15pm;

                           (iii)       The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f fans who were
                                       left for dead at the ground in fact survived. Therefore, they never considered the
                                       possibility that a number o f those who died might have been saved had they
                                       received prompt and efficient medical attention;

                           {iv )       1hey never heard evidence about the failure o f the Northern General Hospital to
                                       activate its Major Accident Plan until well after the onset o f the disaster, and the
                                       detrimental effect this had on patient care. Dr Wardrope’s article referred to the
                                       failure to activate the Major Accident Plan and stated (at pi 381):

                                                Failure to implement the major incident alert earlier meant that only a few
                                                staff hud to cope with a large clinical workload in addition to
                                                implementing the major incident plan.

                    71    The Coroner's ruling prevented any inquiry into the secondary failures of the police and
                           the emergency services to provide prompt and efficient medical attention to the injured.
                           The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for the 3. 15 pm cut-off.

                    72    The evidence of Anthony Edwards. Anthony Edwards was an ambulance driver who
                          attended Hillsborough at around 3.32pm Me made a statement in June 1989 hut did not
                          give evidence at either the inquiry or the inquests, because his evidence dealt with events
                          after 3.1 5pm. His evidence consists o f a note o f an interview wiih a television researcher
                           in December 1995, and his statement o f June 1989

                    73    Mr Hd wards arrived at the ground in his ambulance to find a cordon of police across the
                          entrance to the pitch. Two ambulances were already parked outside the ground, and had
                          not gone in. There was a discussion between the ambulance men and the police officers.


                                                                            22
04 - S E P - 9 7        16   46   FROM-   3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S           ID :   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0          PAGE   2 3




                               They were told by the police that it was not possible for him to go on to the pitch because
                               'they are still fighting in there." Eventually he and others were permitted to go onto the
                              pitch. Mr Edwards saw a number of dead bodies being taken out and so it was obvious
                              that the incident was a disaster and not crowd trouble. Rventually they were allowed onto
                              the pitch, where they commenced attempting to resuscitate the injured.

                   74         Mr hdwards1evidence is significant because it shows that the police were not just slow
                              in requesting the ambulance service to attend but that they positively interfered with the
                              ambulances' efforts to get on the pitch. For whatever reason, some o f the police did not
                              appreciate that there was a disaster in progress. Although Lord Justice Taylor made some
                              findings on these aspects o f the disaster, they were not discussed at the inquest This has
                              left the families with the .sense that the inquest was therefore deficient. I lad ihe ( oroner
                              heard that the police had intentionally or negligently hampered rescue efforts then there
                              is a possibility that he would have concluded that it required further investigation.

                   75         Further evidence on this point is awaited by the Group. It will be submitted as soon as
                              it i.s received.

                                                               Individual C a m

                   76         In recent weeks, much new material has been disclosed to individual families, and to the
                              Group. Numerous examples are coming to light, and have already come to light,
                              indicating that deaths occurred in a variety o f circumstances and times, contrary to the
                              evidence presented to the jury*. Other examples are o f persons left Ibr dead, who survived,
                              and who were recovered, at hospital or at the ground, from unconsciousness.) The
                              evidence in those eases (Including that o f Roger Ball, Appendix 10) will be summarised
                              and presented to the Scrutiny, it is hoped by 15th September. Evidence presented by the
                              six families to the court in 1993 is in the Memorial section o f the Appendices.

                   77        The work o f those representing the Group is hampered by the fact that disclosure of
                              documents is a laboured and painfully slow process. It is submitted that it is unjust and
                              unsatisfactory that the papers, formerly in the possession o f the West Midlands Police,
                              are now controlled by the South Yorkshire Policc. Statements o f police ollicers have been
                              disclosed recently providing names o f officers who were apparently concerned with
                              individual cases, but whose existence has never before been made known to the families.
                              Critical ambulance records are now being disclosed. A wholly different picture is
                             emerging from that provided to the families and the Coroner’s court in 1990-91.

                                                     liie importance vf fall disclosure
                   78        It is submitted that the facts o f the Hillsborough Inquest need to be examined in full. The
                              oftiee of the Scrutinising Judge is requested to take possession o f all the materia! in the
                              case and to ensure that it is made available to all parties. Statements o f witnesses were
                              not disclosed to the bereaved families at the time o f the inquest, and disclosure has been
                              refused since




                                                                           ?.i
* 0 4 - S E P - 9 7    1 6 - 4 7     FROM:    3   RAYMOND    B U IL D IN G S            ID :   0 1 7 1   2 4 2   4 2 7 0         PAGE   24




                                                              The Purple of an inquest


                      79       In R, v. U.M. Coroner for North Humberside & Scunthorpe ex_oaflg.J.amicsQn 11995) I
                                Q.R. 1 Sir Thomas Binghuxn M.R. considered the nature and purpose o f an inquest in the
                                context o f the death o f a prisoner in custody. He said:

                                                   An inquest is a fact finding inquiry conducted by a coroner, with or
                                                   without a jury, to establish reliable answers to four important but limited
                                                   factual questions ... It is the duty o f the coroner as the public official
                                                   responsible for the conduct o f inquests, whether he is sitting with a jury
                                                   or without, to ensure that the relevant facts are fullv. thirty and fearlessly
                                                   investigated. He is bound to recognise the acute public concern rightly
                                                   aroused where deaths occur in custody. He must ensure that the relevant
                                                   facts are exposed to,p u b lic scrutiny, particularly if        is evidsna:..flf
                                                   foul plav. abuse or inhumanity. He fails itih is duly if his invgstittattoin s
                                                   superficial- slipshod or perfanctorv (Emphasis added)



                                   In R. v. South London Coroner ex parte Ihompsun 126 S.J. i 25 1.ord 1.ane (.1 said

                                                   The function of an inquest is to seek out and record as many ol the tacts
                                                   concerning the death as the public interest requires.

                      80       The Group acknowledges the difficulties inherent in holding inquests into the deaths o(
                                95 people in a single disaster. Nonetheless, the circumstances in which the inquest was
                                held, in Sheffield, before a Sheffield Coroner, and the way it was handled give rise by
                                themselves to feelings o f profound unease. A reading of the transcripts oi the evidence,
                                particularly relatives of victims, repays study The disproportionate time given to
                                questions as to whether drink had been consumed was absurd and offensive. Meaningless
                                detail was adduced about the circumstances in which supporters travelled to and arrived
                                at the ground Condescension was shown to relatives in questioning. Relatives were
                                never given copies o f their own witness statements, but shown them perfunctorily outside
                                court before they were called in. In contrast, all police officers visibly had copies which
                                they studied, and retained, outside court. The legal representation was wholly
                                disproportionate. One junior barrister sought to represent over 40 families, while every
                                South Yorkshire institution with an interest to protect was represented.

                      81           These features o f the Inquest intensify the belief o f the Group that justice was perverted
                                   and the truth hidden in order to protect the South Yorkshire authorities and services,
                                   further information will be provided as soon as it is available.

                      82           I ord Justice Stuart-Smith has posed certain questions to the Group by letter. U is hoped
                                    that these representations have answered them. It is submitted that the fresh evidence oi
                                    Houldsworth, Walker and Pdwards (and in relation to individual cases, others) would
                                    have affected the terms in which Lord Taylor wrote his report and expressed his
                                    criticisms. The new evidence of Houldsworth would have made verdicts ot unlawlul


                                                                               24
t
. 04 - S E P - 9 7     I S >47   FR O M =   3   RAYMOND   B U IL D IN G S         ID .   0 171   24 2   4 2 70            PAGE   2 5




                             killing much more likely because the question of what was visible was, as the Coroner
                             repeatedly suggested, at the heart o f the issue (see paragraphs 18 and 19. a b o v e ) . It is
                             known that the evidence was not submitted to the jury, and it appears lhat its significance
                             could not have been explained to the Coroner. The evidence o f Walker. Fdwards, and
                             the account given in the British Journal o f Medicine by Wardrope should and would have
                             lead to a different type o f inquest in which manslaughter on the additional basis o f
                             criminal neglect o f injured people would have been open to the jury in individual cases
                             as the evidence o f events after 3 .15 pm demanded. This aspect will become clearer when
                             the analysis o f individual cases is submitted. The address o f Tony Hdwards is being
                             sought.



                     4"' September 1997.




                                                                            25
