                   S o u t h Yorkshire
                   POLICE
                   JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




         Mr C Bone
         Hillsborough Scrutiny
         Room 1106                                          Our Ref:      D&C/AMH/NJT
         Home Office
         50 Queen Anne's Gate
         LONDON
         SW 1H9AT                                           Date:         14 November 1997




*■   f
         RE: PREPARATIONS OF STATEMENTS FOLLOWING THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

         Thank you for copying to me the letter from Lord Justice Stuart Smith to Peter Metcalfe of
         Hammond Suddards Solicitors relating to the above.

         I believe that my letter of 5 November 1997 with its attached schedule and documents, read in
         conjunction with the schedule and documents I provided to you on the 24 September 1997
         covers the majority of the points you raise at paragraphs 2,3 and 4 in the above letter.

         There are just two further points I would wish to add, one for clarification regarding the actual
         amending of statements referred to in paragraph 3 of the letter and the second in relation to
         Police Officers refusing to sign amended statements referred to in paragraph 4.

         Amendments to statements/recollection were not carried out by Peter Metcalfe nor anyone
         working at Hammond Suddards, copies of Officers self prepared recollections were forwarded to
         Peter Metcalfe and his comments were returned by fax. Amended recollections were prepared by
         a small South Yorkshire Police team, headed by Detective Chief Inspector Alan Foster and
         Detective Inspector Phillip Jones. (Both officers are now Superintendents and are still serving).
         These recollections were not in Criminal Justice Act form. They were then taken to their original
         author and agreed with them before they signed them. They were passed to West Midlands
         Police in this format.

         South Yorkshire Police entered the officers recollections onto the HOLMES computer system as
         reports and the computer gave them R            reference numbers. The West Midlands Police
         entered these same recollections onto their HOLMES computer system as statements and the
         computer gave them S         reference numbers. Thereafter when West Midlands Police printed
         them out they automatically appeared as if they were a statement on CJA forms.


                    Discipline and Complaints Department
                    Windsor Road
                    Sheffield S8 8UB                        The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                    Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3855   Superintendent Hepworth
                    Direct Dial No:
                                                            Tel (0114)296 3084     Fax (0114)2963113
Page 2

Whilst searching the files to try and identify whether any officers had refused to sign their
amended recollections I came across a note which indicated that a small minority of officers had
initially objected to their recollections being forwarded to West Midlands Police. Five such officers
were named in the files and they were:

PC   2076 Cerrone             19   05   1989
PC   1285 Smith               05   06   1989
PC   446 Groome               06   06   1989
PC   1842 Brookes             15   06   1989
PC   1834 Scholey             05   06   1989

However the officers all withdrew their objections and the date alongside their name indicates
when their recollections were forwarded to West Midlands Police. I would however ask you to
note that officers were informed that their reports would not be released unless the officer
concerned gave their consent. (Memo DD2 of Chief Superintendent Denton dated 12 05 1989 -
forwarded to you with my letter of 5 November 1997 refers.)

Moving now to paragraph 4 of your letter it is quite dear that some officers expressed concern
about alterations and editing of their original recollection prior to submission to West Midlands
Police. This resulted in a letter being sent to Hammond Suddards and the circulation of a note to
all commanders in South Yorkshire Police on 23 May 1989 explaining why editing was taking
place and requesting that the note be brought to the attention of all officers. ( A copy of this letter
and note were provided to you on 24 September 1997 reference D62).

I am unable to trace from our files details of any officer who actually refused to          sign their
amended recollections. It is not surprising though that in an organisation as large         as South
Yorkshire Police, where individual officers gather and present their own evidence in        statement
form and subsequently at court, that some individuals would express concern or even         challenge
tha right of a third party to amend their recollections.

If I can be of any further assistance in this matter please contact me.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent




                                                   The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                   Superintendent Hepworth
                                                    Tel (0114)296 3084       Fax (0114)2963113
                             HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

      AUDIT TRAIL OF POLICE OFFICERS SELF TAKEN STATEMENTS OR
          "OFFICERS RECOLLECTIONS" AND THEIR AMENDMENT

      AN EXAMINATION OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE DOCUMENT FILES
                       BY SUPT ALAN HEPWORTH

REF     DATE      DESCRIPTION                                    COMMENT

D2      25.4.89   Telephone conversation DCC/ Hammond
                  Suddard re self taken statements all
                  senior officers & officers in Leppings Lane
                  area.

D10     25.4.89   DCC telephone conversation to ACC              Shown West Midlands Police
                  Mervyn Jones re D2 above.                      Aware

D18     26.4.89   Ch Supt Wain briefing to officers
                  co-ordinating the collation of self prepared
                  statements

*                 Copy of proforma sheet referred to at Item
                  3 of D18

D28     26.4.89   Note of meeting with Mr Woodward &             Shown Mr Woodward QC
                  others, where "Self service" statements        counsel for SYPOL
                  discussed                                      Aware

D46     7.5.89    Letter ACC West Midlands to CC SYPOL           Show counsel for LJT
                  Request from counsel for U T for selected      Aware of written recollections
                  officers recollections in writing

D48     10.5.89   Note from Terry Wain (Cti Supt)
                  Attached to copy of D46

D51     11.5.89   Letter ACC West Midlands to CC's Notts,        Counsel for U T
                  Merseyside & West Yorks requesting on          Aware of SYPOL criteria for
                  behalf of U T written recollections from       written recollections
                  their officers on duty at Hillsborough.
                  In line with SYPOL criteria.

D62     23.5.89   Letter ACC (SS) to Hammond Suddard &
                  circulation to Force re amending
                  statements.

D90     7.6.89    Letter from ACC West Mids to CC SYPOL          Together D90 & 91 show that
                  enclosing letter to treasury solicitor         Treasury Solicitors acting for
                  D Brummel referring to police officers         LJT were aware of
                  initial submissions & signed final versions.   amendments to police officers
                                                                 statements
D91     8.6.89    Response from D Brummel to D90.
                  Above also refers to initial and final
                  versions of statements.
                             HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

  AUDIT TRAIL OF POLICE OFFICERS SELF TAKEN STATEMENTS OR "OFFICERS
                 RECOLLECTIONS" AND THEIR AMENDMENT

      A FURTHER EXAMINATION OF NON-INDEXED DOCUMENT FILES WITHIN THE
                          HILLSBOROUGH ARCHIVE

REF      DATE       DESCRIPTION                        COMMENT
NB1      17.04.89   Extract from notes of a meeting    Chief Constable Mr Wright
                    held at South Yorkshire Police     directs that all officers at the
                    HQ on Monday, 17 April 1989        game make records of their
                                                       recollection
NB2      26.04.89   Extract of minutes of meeting      Discussion on what officers’
                    with Counsel on 26 April 1989      accounts should contain and
                                                       which officers should provide
                                                       accounts
DD1      09.05.89   Letter from Chief Superintendent   Re provision of officers’
                    Donald Denton to Peter Metcalf     statements to West Midlands
                    of Hammond Suddards                Police and vetting of them by
                                                       Peter Metcalf
DD2      15.05.89   Internal memorandum of Chief       Vetting of statements by
                    Superintendent Denton              solicitors prior to their submission
                    requesting statements from         to West Midlands Police is made
                    named officers of mounted          clear in the memorandum
                    branch

DD3      15.05.89   Handwritten letter by Chief        Forwarding statements of
                    Superintendent Denton to Peter     Superintendents Brougham and
                    Metcalf                            Marsh for vetting. Also mentions
                                                       previously forwarded statement
                                                       of Chief Superintendent Mole

DD4      16.05.89   Response from Peter Metcalf an     Comments on statements of
                    officers’ statements               Chief Superintendent Mole (DD3
                                                       above) and 13 mounted officers
                                                       (DD2 above refers)

DD5      17.05.89   Internal memorandum by Chief       Handwritten note on bottom
                    Superintendent Denton              clearly indicates all statements
                    requesting action to obtain        will be forwarded to solicitor for
                    statements                         vetting

DD6      17.05.89   Handwritten note by Chief          Verbal request from West
                    Superintendent Denton              Midlands Police for statements
                                                       from named officers and
                                                       forwarding to Peter Metcalf for
                                                       vetting

DD7      23.05.89   Response on officers’              Comment on statements of
                    statements from Peter Metcalf      officers named in Chief
                                                       Superintendent Denton’s
                                                       handwritten note of 17.05.89
                                                       (DD6 refers)

DD8      02.06.89   Internal memorandum from Chief     Shows that guidance on
                    Superintendent Denton              statement content was now being
                    requesting statements from         given
                    officers named in schedules
                                                                            w.-     ■"    ^       — -«r           «        v,               .
                                                            0 < r fw c r /9 m                 M    & m            z                m        t

                                                  - 7 -
                                                                Mwyty rr /,W c /?m.
through Che problems.

Mole - Significant to know when the perimeter gazes were closed.

Z Z Z - 2.^3 pm Roger asking for the gazes co be opened.

CC - Understand the business abouC the log buc it is a factor that                                          somebody is
going to make something of. Not .criticising (Murray}.

CC - For Leppings Lane we have a series of photographs which in themselves are
good enough for the log as to what is happening.   Whilst the north stand
problem was recognised, the problem associated with gate C and the opening of
gate C and the control of movement of people once they were goinz throuzh gars
u, cnere was no action tarcen or
g ntingencies to deal'with..;tt


Marshall - Inspector White was believed in difficulties through the
turnstiles.   Inspector Bennett cliabed over the top of the parapit. Insoector
Bennett- asked for additional serials because he could see the problem.

Eight serials deployed at 2.50 pm.                                                                  '

CC - It does not mean that we should not be seeking to find the evidence and
direct the enquiry tea.- to it. Cifficulties seert tc be the Club - saving the
gateaen - people without tickets trying to get into the ground etc..

CC - How do we proceed from here? .

McKay - Have concentrated on securing evidence and setting up the machinery
ready t* g: .   Although we have interviewsi one'or twe .people 'we haver/.t taker,
statenents.    So far as the enquiry team is concerned - set down your
recollections over the next few days. We should be doing that with officers
at the game.    Prepared a proforma to all officers.

CC - Very good point -           ail officers at the game to make records of their
recollections.

McKay - Any other area I should be taking action?

CC - Paint the picture of what was taking place i n .the first ■I n s t a n c e ' v "
identify those officers in the area - ask the officers to. pull .together., their
recollections not only in terms of whatt they
                                         t h e v did bbut
                                                       u t' w h a t tttiey.
                                                            what      h w r saw;
                                                                            s s tr '-;c
                                                                                      - ' '^? ' ■.. ■ •; :
                                                                                                        ■v ■■■■
Mole -'Value cf stewards being seen.

McKay - Need to be doing house-to-house enquiries', pubs». ambulance men e-tci"
Should get early contact with whoever is running the enquiry.

CC - Identify the persons who were on that turnstile and ask the question w h a t .                                                V
were your perceptions of it, capture that, and: direct the at.teat ion., of.: the>'-:':'                                        yv ...«./
enquiry team.
                                                                                                                                   :
                                                                                                                                  >.
                                                                                                                                   f.:,:
                                                                                                        ~ v;:\
McKay - Should we be circulating Merseyside,asking for officers who'were at
the club?
                                                        .       . . . . .       .    ..

                                      ... .        ..       .               :        ■              .....        ..    .

CC - The enquiry team will clearly do that (see the injured:persons>.                                                 Rather
lac the enquiry team see Che injured people.                           Need to pull out the eviden
                                  '
Dated 24. 4. 89 headed 'Re: Hillsborough Stadium Disaster'.

Resume of points covered in telephone conversation between Miss
Norcliffe (of Hammond Suddards) and DCC.

1.   Albeit, SYP have asked for copies of statements taken
      from SYP officers by West Mids. team, we should get self-taken
      statements from relevant officers.  Relevant = officers in
      Leppings Lane area and all senior officers on duty.
      May be 50 - 100 officers.
2.   No statements required from lay individuals about the
      events of 15. 4. 89.  But, stats are required from officers
      who can provide history of Hillsborough and the policing
      of matches there.
      Suggest C.S. Duckenfield, Supts. Marshall and Murray and
      C/I Beal may be best placed.  The latter 3 are in best position
      to review history.
      Plus Mr. Mole can provide useful information on history
      and ticket allocation etc.
      Self-taken statements can and should be obtained from these
      officers.  Should relate to F.A. semi last year and another
      previous F.A. semi and one or two league games.   Statements
      should also set out their function at these games, thereby
      providing a general and specific guide to policing and
      senior officer involvement in football matches at
      Hillsborough.
c-cf1

1/viMP
tshrfbJf'
All relevant documentation - i.e. operational orders etc
etc should be collated and 'flagged' re. most important
regulations and sections to be considered by counsel.   Also
require to know, at this stage, whether there are any
regulations not actually complied with on the day.
Counsel cannot, technically, see the individual senior
officers until they make formal request.  Solicitor will
see them in first instance on Wednesday 26. 4. 89.
Outline suggested by Mr. Hayes in earlier tel. conversation
with Miss Norcliffe will suffice for the actual events
of the tragedy.
Counsel will attend Police HQ for meeting on Wednesday
26. 4. 89 at 2.00 p.m.
Counsel require list of all names and ranks of senior
officers on duty at match (prior to Wednesday).  Also
require ranks and full names of 4 officers to be seen by
Mr. Metcalf on Wednesday.
                                         CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


  24.4.89 cont.                                                                         /
                                                                                    /

  s'.ddardfthTh»1^'-S“P
  Ouauaras.             t -Wf n are:-
             Ihe main points     Sp°ke "ith MiSS                              /                  Hammonds


  a.    Mr Peter Metcalf to attend Police Headquartepf/at 11.00 am on Wednesday
        next to consult with and advise Jackson/Ductfenfield/Marshall/Murray.

  b.    Counsel, Mr Woodward   assisted by Mr Liptf, to a t t e n d .Police Headquarters
        at £i.uu pm the same day for case con f ^ e n c e .


  C'                        Cr ered s e e "ethod» ; » 6S' ° f o b t a in in g p o l i c e e v id e n c e , copy
       of West Midlands statements - self serving statements.

 d.    Previous mention in l e t t e r s ^ e g a r d i n g solicitors obtaining evidence from
       licensees etc. by questionnaire now cancelled.

 e.    Statements required frpfn senior officers                    ’F ’ Division regarding football
       match arrangements. /'
                           /
 f.    Operation m a n u a l s ^ o be highlighted re. important issues.

 ^       ajove c o n f i n e d by fax received at 6 . 2 5 pm - copied immediately to
 Chief Supt Wain.. /                                                            J
                        /
                    /
 At 6.30 pm in presence of Chief Constable, spoke with Miss Norcliffe     re
 principal o f f e r s involved having sight of photographs, videos, transcription
 of videos a m f information available from de-briefings involving themselves and
 other officers to help prepare their own evidence.

 Explained how above information now available on Anacapa and asked that
 officer's see this also.

  M i s / Norcliffe agreed it eminently sensible for them to have all that
  informatio^made__^ai.lable t»-fchcin-and if Cuuiwrir-^epferogg-cone'Sm over this
--^terctr-SirrdSubts, we will be notified immediately and given new instructions.’


 25-4.89                                                                                                          V

                                                                                                                  n
 11.15 am DCC had discussion with Chief Supt Wain concerning production of
 wr0? fM°I1eV^deo C?' ^hi6f SUpt Wain ask6d DCC to contact Mervyn Jones (ACC(O)
 West Midlands Police) re. the following points:-

       a.   to inform Mr Jones that SYP completing self-serving statements
            covering officers down to inspectors per se and also all
            officers at the Leppings Lane end of the ground;

       b.   ask if we could have sight again of our:-

               i)   videos
              ii)   photographs
             111)   any logs, notes or briefing reports West Midlands have seized
              iv)   completed location questionnaires
               v)   copy of the Force Control RACAL 15 tape
                                         -   5



                               CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS



         c.   Suggest to Mr Jones the benefit of him appointing a liaison
              officer with regard to Chief Supt Wain's task thereby-
              avoiding the need to contact Mr Jones unnecessarily.


    12.45 pm - DCC spoke with Mr Jones re. the above.

    He said that Mr Dear is currently with the Judge considering our request which
    will include everything in which the South Yorkshire Police have property and
    certainly include all the items referred to above at (b - 25.4.89) which I
    read out in detail.

    Concerning the intention to obtain self-serving statements down to the rank of
    inspector and from all officers involved at the Leppings Lane end of the
    ground, he saw no problem with that whatsoever, understands that we need to be



•
     getting on with this quickly, has no worries over this’ but thanked us for
    informing him of our intended action.

    Forgot to mention liaison officer arrangement - Chief Supt Wain to arrange
    this himself.
    —           ^ FOR O F FICERS C O-ORDINATING THE COLLATION OF S E LF-PREPARFD STATEMENTS
                        FROM POLICE OFFICERS ON DU IY AT FA CUP SEMI-FINAI "- - - - - - - - - -
                                  A 1 HILLSBUKUUGH - 1b' APftlL 1 ? 8 9 - - "- - - -
9.00 am Wednesday 26 April 1989

Briefing Officer:                 Chief Superintendent Wain

Officers in Attendance:           Detective     Inspector Ensor - HQ Special Branch
                                   Detective     Inspector Cleverly - HQ Commercial branch
                                   Detective    Sergeant
                                  Detective     Sergeant
                                  Detective     Sergeant
                                  Detective     Sergeant
                                  Detective     Sergeant
1        Read Broad Summary of Incident (attached)

2        Clarify the nature of the South Yorkshire Police enquiry, viz
         1)                     ConsT^ ablTe w -1'.11 give evidence to the fo rthcoming Committees
                  1 May 1989 '                  ^          ^    ^    ^      JUStl’C Tayl0r Wil1 ° pen ° n

         ii)      It is necessary to submit a formal                proof of evidence 7 - 14 davs
                  before the enquiry opens.

         iii)    That formal proof of evidence will be under the following headings:

                 1   Yorkshire P o ^ T c e ^ 1031   a r 8 a ’ manning     and   o r 9 a n isation   of South

                 2   Policing of sporting events: legal background.

                 3   Approach of South Yorkshire Police to policing major sportinq
                      events.    History of such operations and current standinq of
                      operational orders.

                 4   Specific background to policing of match on 15 April 1989.
                 5   Details of manpower and organisation of match.

        These 5 areas were all pulled together by a team over the last 24 hours
        I am meeting with counsel this afternoon when I will be able to present this
        evident.      However     l a s t but c e r t a i n l y not l e a s t i s heading n u m b e ° T - Events
        which occurred on the day and that's where you fellows come in.                                - --- "
        iv)      It is necessary to obtain accounts from as many as possible of the
                 officers w h o ^ w e r e deployed in the vicinity of the Leppings Lane end
                 of the ground that day. That includes not just those in the ground
                 but also those in the terraces, at the turnstiles and outside the
                 ground at Leppings Lane.
        v)
                taken u n d T w A “ruV es!16 S e , f - Wr1tten on P, a 1 " P»P«-               will    not be

        vi)     Our task is not to examine the policing arrangements on that day or
                 o investigate actions or to establish blame in any way.           Our job
                is m ere ly to collate what evidence South Yorkshire Police officer
                can provide to their Chief Constable in order that we can present
                a suitable case, on behalf of the force, to the subsequent i n q u i r e s
!
i
j

I
vii)    Please note that we shall only obtain these accounts from South
        Yorkshire Police officers at this stage.      Not from members of the
        public or from officer from other forces attending on mutual aid.
        Also, at this stage, I repeat that the scope of our enquiry is limited
        to those officers who wer e on duty at ti.e Leppings Lane end of the
        ground, and to senior officers involved in the overall control of
        policing at the game.

viii)   You should be under no m i s a p prehen si on that the m ajor e n quir y is that
        being conducted, presently, by Mr Dear and his West Midlands team.
        Ours should be looked upon as internal, narrow in scope, as e v i d ence,
        gathering not investigation and, finally, as secondary to the West I
        Midlands enquiry.
Your task

Various documents have been scrutinised to extract details of officers on
duty at Leppings Lane end of the ground.  Other officers who have relevant
information have also been included.

The present list runs to some 120 - 140 names.      These are all entered on
a Holmes computer which is supporting this enquiry.     You will be issued -
after this enquiry - with a list of officers who you are to see.

Chief Inspector Betti son will hand each of you a proforma sheet.

I want you to give a copy of this proforma to each officer you see.      It
sets out the information that is required from each of these officers.  You
should go through the proforma with each officer and ensure that he/she has
no queries or difficulties.

I would like you to stress to each of these officers that our enquiry is
concerned only with the incident itself and not with the actions taken in
respect of the aftermath.    Note:   This enquiry is to consider the events
leading up to the decision to stop the game and nothing thereafter.

You should then make a contract with the officer to supply you with their
handwritten account (make sure they are legible).     I want these document
as soon as possible and you should therefore arrange to receive them, in
person preferably, the same day that you instruct .them or the day after at
the latest.

You should advise them to make a copy of the document for their own retention.
If they are subsequently seen by West Midlands officers then their account
will need to be consistent with that already given.

The written accounts should be passed to the Holmes Incident Room team -
they are situated in a room called "The War Office" on 1st floor - or leave
the documents in the Holmes in-tray situated:- the Conference Room at
Headquarters.

If any officer has any queries that you are unable to answer then ring me
or Chief Inspector Bettison on HQ 3457. If any officer declines to provide
an account then please make a note of that for the Holmes team - however
you should endeavour to settle the minds of every officer that this: is not
a witch-hunt, far from it, we seek only objective facts for the benefit of
the force as a whole.                                          .
?
There m a y be some officers who have already made statements to the West
Midlands team or for some other reason. We are negotiating with West Midlands
for copies of any statements - In the m e a n t i m e the officers should be required
to provide the self-written account that is sought. They should aim to be
accurate, and consistent with any previous statements with the proviso that
our cut-off point is the game being brought to a halt.

(On this point either Inspector Ensor or Clev erly will be allocated Inspector
Woodward F2 - Chief Inspector Bettison has a copy of a previous self-prepared
statement of Woodwards submitted in a de-briefing exercise - whichever of
you is allocated Woodward please see Chief Inspector Bettison).

A further    document which you should    hand to each officer is a copy of the
map being    circulated now.   In order    to assist the officers to be accurate
in their    accounts - and to achieve     some consistency in description - they
should be   encouraged to refer to this   map.

It clearly shows some important features, namely the three gates at the
Leppings Lane turnstiles - A, B and C. We believe that Gate C is the gate
that was opened to relieve the crush outside.

The map also denotes the various enclosures, so that we know which enclosure
the officers are referring to.
                                                                                                                                 'Q


     FR0' !:                               Chief      Superintendent          Wain

     TO:



                                      INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND
                                         SHEFFIELD ON SATURDAY 16 APRIL 1989


                          t hG C h l 6 f C o n s t a b l e * >I r - W- g h t , I am g a t h e r i n g i n f o r m a t i o n t o
                    •                      " e t0 p r e s e n t ev id en ce to the fo rth co m in g Committees of                      I
 : ; S „ ? ‘ l ‘ 5e             n0 c o n n e c r i o n w i t h t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o t h e p o l i c i n g c f '
 ^              c u p s e m i - f i n a l w h i c h i s b e i n g c o n d u c t e d b y a t e a m h e a d e d b v Mr. D e a r ,
 C h i e : c o n s t a b l e o f We s t M i d l a n d s .                                                            '             ’


 2    V    ^\ l t T i r l / T 0 " y0U      i S , a S e l J - W r ± t t * n a c c o u n t o f y o u r a c t i o n s on t h e 1 5 t h
          -        .       e a s e n o t e t h a t t h a . s i s n o t a CJA s t a t e m e n t a n d i t s h o u l d be
 w r i t t e n on p l a i n p a p e r .     I t w o u l d be h e l p f u l i f y o u r a c c o u n t c o u l d i n c l u d e t h e
 following inform ation.

 1-             What      t i m e d i d y o u come o n d u t v ?

 2-             i o whom w e r e y o u r e s p o n s i b l e ?

 3,
                 Wh e r e w e r e y o u d e p l o y e d ,   and d i d you g e t       deviated      to any o t h * r
                 location?                                            .       .

 A.              What d i d    you s e e       that    is   i n a n y way r e l e v a n t   tothe   incident?

 5.              Unat d i d    you do?

P l e a s e b e g i n t h e a c c o u n t w i t h y o u r f u l l name i n b l o c k l e t t e r s , y o u r r a n k a n d
number and y o u r s u b - d i v i s i o n / d e p a r t m e n t .  P le a s e conclude the account w ith
your s ig n a tu r e .


Th e o f f i c e r h a n d i n g y o u t h i s d o c u m e n t w i l l i n f o r m y o u how a n d w h e n t o r e t u r n
l..      * . Lease r e t u r n i t p r o m p t l y a n d p r o v i d e a s a c c u r a t e an a c c o u n t a s you     are
able.                                                                                                            J



P l e a s e c o n t a c t a n y o f my s t a f f i f y o u h a v e a n y q u e r i e s o r c o n c e r n s i n
com pleting the account.               F o r c e H e a d q u a r t e r s t e l e p h o n i s t s w i l l c o n n e c t you w i t h
someone vno c a n h e l p .

Thank you           for     your a s s is ta n c e .




Chief          Superintendent          Wai r
t
MINUTES OF MEETING WITH COUNSEL                       2 05 pm

                                                      26 April 1989

                                                      Mr Hayes Office




PERSONS PRESENT :




Deputy Chief Constable       Mr Hayes

ACC (Staff Services)         Mr Anderson

Chief Superintendent Wain

Chief Superintendent Mole

Mr Bill Woodward QC

Mr Patrick Limb

Mr Peter Metcalfe

Miss Belinda Nortcliffe
                                                                              • '>•




Mr Metcalfe


                                                                          *


I assume we will get the video and the other documents back.    Any

briefs, accounts etc will remain privilege.   You ought to note that
                                                                                      ,'fv


 pocket notebook entries can be called for and must be produced.      I

 suggest at this stage that we don't call this present investigation an

 inquiry as such but that we look upon it as a gathering of evidence.

 You should be careful not to use the word inquiry.
MR. WOODWARD   It may help if we look upon ourselves as        'the

               accused', we need new to gather as much information

               as we can, in the time that is available,       there­

               fore I ask you gentlemen to continue from the

               point that you have already reached, which is no'

               mean feat in the time that was available to you,

               I ask you to cast your net as widely as you can,

               gather what you think myself or Mr. Metcalfe,           in

               our most perverse mood may require of you, and get

               it together for whenever you can.

DCC
               As to the scope of the enquiry, we f o c usse d on a

               time up to about 3.15 or 3 -3 0 , do we nee d at this

               stage to focus on co nsequences?
MR. WOODWARD
               Yes, I think so, why did somebody not do something

               might be a question?   Why did someone die when

               they needn't have done?    It's those sorts of

               questions that we need to be aware of.

DCC
               As an example then, Ch. S u p t . Duckenfield would

               need to-relate his account from the time of coming

               on duty up to the time that he eventually left

               duty, is that right?   (From Ch. Supt. Wain -

               reinforce this point at briefings)

MR. WOODWARD   Yes.
                                                                                :w
DCC            So we need all of .this that has already been pre-
                                                      *•" •'
                                                               ■      x-.\
                                                                               v-'--
                                                                             -\fr .

               pared, plus a summary of what happened thereafter?

MR. WOODWARD   Because there are these writs expected, we

               have the information that is available

               answer those in the lor.g term.
CH. SUPT. MOLE   But when does the incident finish?

MR. WOODWARD     I would suggest that your account,     for example,

                 should be the tine you attended the ground to the

                 time you actually go home.      That would act as a

                 core for us to work from.      We would choose what we

                 want to leave in and what we want to leave o u t , and

                 where the emphasis should lie.

CH. SUPT. MOLE   But time scales go out of the window, I was there

                 all that tine and can't remember what I was doing

                 at any given tine.

DCC              You can only really do what you can do.

MR. WOODWARD     Yes, that      doesn't matter, do the best you can.

                 Identification,    for example, may not be relevant,

                 but put it- in, and get one or two others who may

                 want to put all their thoughts and experiences of

                 that day down on paper, as a sort of catharsis; to

                 do the s a m e .
                                         ■-ai
DCC              So who should be interview?     For example, there are

                 Special’
                        s, there were thousands of officers on duty

                 in total.     What we have done so far is ask for

                 accounts from all Inspectors and above who were on

                 duty that day, ana also those officers of those

                 ranks who attended in response to Operations

                 Support (Action this)    Then for the PC's and

                 Sergeants, we have only actioned those who were at

                 the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

 MR. WOODWARD    Yes, that's fine, we have to be sensible.
The main players in this are doing their own accounts is that O.K. or

would you rather someone take their




Mr Woodward




It couldn't be better.    They can put all the things in that they want

and we will sort them out.




DCC




So as far as the    aftermath is concerned   a few of the major players

involved if they    provided full accounts   that would   suffice?




Mr Metcalfe




Yes.   That would   be fine.




There then followed a discussion about the trading of minutes    with

Miss Nortcliffe.    This was agreed.




Mr Woodward




What are the terms of reference for the tribunal?




Mr Metcalfe




I know but I haven't got them with me.
Chief Supt Wain




What about a deadline for this inquiry?




Mr Woodward




Your heading in the right direction. , Don't let up now.




Mr Metcalfe




We could be asked to submit papers by the 5 May.


Mr Woodward




Lets see what happens on Friday.   If I said the 10 May what would you

say?




Chief Supt Wain




We would have to work to the 10 May.




Mr Woodward




Right lets go for the 10 May, dependant on what happens on Friday.   I

would rather have the matter conducted properly rather than quickly, and

this will be stressed at the preliminary hearing on Friday.
Mr Metcalfe




Even if a couple of officers could give an account of afterwards that

would be something to work on.




Chief Supt Wain




Is there any special format for presenting the information?




Mr Woodward




As is this is more than acceptable.




DCC




What about indexing?




Mr Woodward




Don't worry about indexing yet.   It would help however, if this was

transposed onto a word processor so that the thing could be moved

around.                '                              '           ’
                                                                       ;•   ^


Chief Supt Wain




It will be going onto the computer from tomorrow so we can do anything

we want with it then.
            As a   f fn - i
                                     X „ o u i(J U k e    Jt


            any°ne ° an ^           »* M etcalfe in c              -.   '               ^                         th a t
           observations on „            or „ hy ^                                           ^      —              *ny
            nformatlon 1 „ . s eaIeJ                           ^             --»«■•         They c a „ p 2 a c e ^

          Ehr° “t o           «   ‘^ o n e    fc                      "     “ *°                       «      sent l t
          b rie fin g s^                                 “ “       * a"d t e I 1 him.       (R aise a t



         DCC




       'And is this
                           Privileged information?



       jjfo* WpOdwar.^




      yes, I wouldn't want fn . .          ■
                           t 0 i n h i b i t officers from *

      Question of how and why the event occurred s   6611115 ^  ^                                                  ^
      ^ngredieHt.                                ^ ^ e n t i ality is a ^




  Mr Metcalf**




  We must start- t-t,
           cart then with self                      ^

                                                                                                ow up on
 3ny qU'Sti°nS tha* I, have that                                            30(1 ' *** ^
                                                         as a result of those.                        ,■
                                                                                                       .           "-> .
                                                                                                       ' ‘’/o:'

  ^    meetlng closed with exchanged co                   7•
Appendices 1 - 21                              ‘     *P lments at 6 3 0 po>
                   6XCept ^  Appendlx 16 were th
Miss Nortcliffe tA                            then handed to
                'A second set arirf +-k
be copied on the 2 7 A                              & ° U t S t & n d i n S Append* ces are to
             oue     April 198q anj
                                                   Passed to S o l i c i t
                                                                                                      0 &     -
                                                                                                            w/v.,4

                                                              f                                        tf^Xo^/V’y

                                                            - 6 -                          yv
                                                                                        /4/ 1 ' v^»
                                            CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


 12   ; ‘i?- pm -— BC€- o p o k o w i t h Mr J o n c a   !■&■.—fcfrc a b o v e .

He said that Mr Dear is currently with the Judge considering our reauest whig*
will include everything in which the South Yorkshire Police have property vK&
certainly include all the items referred to above at (b - 25.4.89) which
read out in detail.

Concerning the intention to obtain self-serving statements down to tjfe rank of
inspector and from all officers involved at the Leppings Lane end     the
ground, he saw no problem with that whatsoever, understands thaty<*e need to be
getting on with this quickly, has no worries over this but thag^ed us for
informing him of our intended action.

Forgot to mention liaison officer arrangement - Chief Supt/Wain to arrange
this himself.                                            '



1.30 pm - Ch Supt Wain discussed with DCC the extend of the investigation
Advised that Chief Supt Nesbit had been asked t o / W i e w the major incident      t
procedures and that there was no need for Chief/Supt Wain's investigation to J
go beyond the point when the game was s t o p p e d / Chief Supt Wain to submit his
report in that form and await any further representation made by Counsel.        It
was hoped that Chief Supt Nesbit's de-briar into major incident procedures
would perhaps serve the post-disaster events.



2.00 pm - ACC(SS), having spoken wL£n Supts Greenwood and Chapman who were
both on duty at Hillsborough at tjtfe time of the tragedy, advised DCC that both
of these officers feel vulnerable in terms of culpability and would like leeal
advise.                       '                                              6

Mr Greenwood is          conscious art the fact that already press comment is suggesting
that the rescue          operatiop/could have been handled more effectively and the
overcrowding in          the pen/should have been dealt with perhaps even before the
match started.           He watfground commander responsible for this area of activity.

Mr Chapman was on/futy at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground - far end
away from Leppiijgs Lane - and stopped police resources being deployed to
Leppings Lane Because he was concerned about a problem of serious potential
disorder at bis end of the ground.



5.10 pm/- DCC spoke with Miss Norcliffe.           She agreed Mr Metcalf would see both
these/bfficers on 26.4.89.         She will arrange for Mr Metcalf to attend at
Police Headquarters at 10.15 am when it may be appropriate for him to see both
of/icers before seeing the original four at 11.00 am. ACC(SS) making
gfe&aftg-em en tc ------------------------- .---------- ----------------------- --------------



26.4.89                                                                            "f

Proof of Evidence - meeting this date with Counsel.  Persons present - ;
Mr Woodward QC, Mr Limb (barrister), Mr Metcalf (solicitor), Miss Norcliffe - * £ ' ■
(solicitor), Deputy Chief Constable, ACC(SS), Chief Supts Wain and Mole and
Chief Inspector Bettison (took notes).  Meeting lasted between 2 00/7 00pm  ^
                               CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


    Chief Supts Wain and Mole outlined in reasonable detail the work completed so
    far in compiling background information on which the eventual proof of
    evidence will be based.

    Mr Woodward expressed his thanks for that done and said we had achieved more
    in two days than some organisations in similar circumstances had achieved in a
    month.

    Nevertheless there is much more to do and Mr Woodward outlined what further
    enquiries he needed and also what points of clarification and expansion on the
    information already to hand is required.

    Briefly, the evidence gathering mechanism previously agreed is still relevant
    namely the collection and urgent collation of self-service statements from all
    ranks down^_to_inspector involved at Hillsborough whether initially on duty in
    relation to the match, summoned there by Operation Support or achieved by
    voluntary attendance.

    Similar statements to be obtained from all ranks known to have been involved
    at the Leppings Lane end who attended in any or all of the three categories
    above.

    Statements to include all relevant information up to the time those officers
    eventually retired their duty on this first day.

    In relation to the after-math (recovery phase) statements to be obtained from


X   circa a dozen people so involved and Mr Woodward will then advise if anything
    'further in this connection is needed.

    The aim is to complete all actions currently outstanding together with
    additional further instructions likely to be received after the lawyers have
    had time to consider the information supplied to them by Wednesday 10 May.

    Chief Supts Wain and Mole _to continue with this and because of the priority to
    use - through DCC or in his absence ACC(SS) - whatever resources they require.

    It was agreed that the notes of the meetings taken by Chief Insp Bettison and
    those taken by Miss Norcliffe would be exchanged between the parties as soon
    as possible.
   W e s t M id la n d s P o lio s
                                                                      PCL'CS hEA:;o<.-Af»rrps
                                                                      Ro BOX :: llovc
                                                                                   C;PC'j£ SL-S«\5.’.'AY
                                                                      6»*MI\3hAM £4 nt'iO
                                                                      TE cS PH O N E   £2 i r*,n *• V,C
                                                                      ‘ilfX 33?321
                                                                      -It COUVUViCATIZHSSMLO "
                                                                      YCV* »EP£FCNCE
  ? Wright Esq. CBE
  Chief Constable
                                                                      OuP ncrcncNce
  South Yorkshire Poiice
  Police Headquarters
  SHEFFIELD
                                                                      c»a a             7 May l9S9




 Dear Mr Wrigbi.


 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY INTO THE H I f . f ^ 0UGH d i s a s t e r

 I have now been asked by Counsel apoointsd by Lo-j J u - M r o                                                ,
 from a selected number of your offi-er's ‘h.il          ^                                                     to request
 what t a w * * * , ' * H i l l s b o r o ^ o n « h M                 L " 110*! *t ■ " * » « * . of
 selection is M            on an examination 0^ -               o ± a J " f " i ter’?n for
 those police officers who we^e l i k ^ v                      --*7           t        ora^r w m c n               identifies        ,
 inside and         u . ground                                «*. ■ » *                                                          )
 cross-section of accounts «11 before l5 th Hay ,989 ift^ u,e Hearing., besIn.


                   z s z g x v z & s ? 1                                  offlcer to " * • * • «
 to see yours pcr.on.Ily, a,t£ ou g" a prci 'o                  £ *£ £                  " g         f°r "
 but I „»u,a ,ope this could    easily

I am also aware that so.r.e of your o f f i c e r are       m    n*f ^ *
might present p r a U c a l difficulties.       I would likr tn                   Wh1° h
Counsel's request through me is net intended to ^               n L %
some may be suffering.       Consequently 't iea.,e it tr            >• 's '*ress that
manage this aspect as you see f i ? ^                         7° 7 dlscretion to
an interest and *ay be c o n t e m p l a t e * obtaining                          ^
or collective basis, or both         To          m-a   m-   r acUlc* cn an individual
liberty of copying this letter to the,                                              ^



% m SSS                                                                                                                     -
requests to which the officer will be *Yee t0 daci-*®                                                              jL,3t'

keep°; copy?UPPlying *"y                                      thTofScJ i n                        E       S e l f 6*



n e c d ^ to ^ k n o w ' p le a s ^ d o ^ n o^ h e s l t a t ®* ntact ll T " " ?             fUr" ~            ^
and in anticipation of your support, I have aLed'':-,y                                                                          . -
*t rurmva.l House to contact Chief S u p ^ m i n d e n t n L n L                                                   Taylor
morning of Monday 8th May .1989 to d i s c u s s ^                                          °             **



                                                                                                      Cent'd


                                                                       £*'r£h$(Ofy.
   2.




   inii::kj ng you ones again In o n t1cips'ion
   might add has been excellent to date.


   Yours siriccr^ 1 y



/ i '                   d-C



  ASSISTANT CHILT CONSTABf,F.
  (Operations - Hillsborough Inquiry]




  Fax to C.C.
  Copy Fax to Chair/Sec. S.Y.P. Federation
  Copy Fax to Supt. Taylor, Furnlval House
                                                                                                              )•)!

      South Yorkshire Police
                                                                           POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                           SNIG HILL
                                                                           SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
                                                                           TELEPHONE (0742) 763522
                                                                           TELEX 547996



         ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD 8E ADDRESSED TO
         "THE CHIEF CONSTABLE"
r                                                       1
                                                                           VOUR REFERENCE
               P Metcalf Esq
               Hammond Suddards                                            OUR REFERENCE         DD/AT
               Solicitors
                                                                           DATE                  9 May 1989
               Empire House
               10 Piccadilly
           BRADFORD                                    j
L




               We discussed earlier today the provision, to the West Midlands
               Inquiry Team, of copies of the statements prepared by officers
               involved at the Leppings Lane end of the football ground on
               15 April. You agreed to vet the initial batch of those
               statements.

               I enclose firstly a copy of the letter received from the West
               Midlands Police giving reasons for the request; a copy of a list
               of officers from whom statements are required; and a bundle of
               statements for Serials 13, 14, 15, 17, 18 and 19 as ticked on                         .< e
               the list, for your perusal.

               No doubt you will advise me on the. propriety of supplying these
               internal statements to the West Midlands Police.




                                                                                                                     v;




               THE OFFICER DEALING WITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE IS   J.SZi,
                                                                 ^ ^ ^ . . E X T E N S , O N .
    A D M /1
        ^%CS)                     *1€d(z«       ^ Z <^ 4 ^ » e iC;/                           — ^UXiv

d c r      /KTirg                 s Z T     ^,/'-l£r            " / L f i & . f c , ■'_   ^




,            i/e^/        U       SuJ     / ^    /
                *-=—                 ^      ^        ox                     <2/^-
        i2f/2jj/%€>-   <?Ziyu^r                                              ^/T£es~?

                   ^> L       y fe
From: J M JONES MSc                                                WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
      ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                   HEADQUARTERS
      (Operations)
                                                                   PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                   Colmo.-e Circus Queensway
                                                                   Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                   Telephone: 021-236 5000


                                                                  Our Ref: JMJ/VSC
     Chief Constable Nottinghamshire
                                                                  Date:        11 May 1989
     Chief Constable Merseyside
     Chief Constable West Yorkshire
                                                                          Soutn fci            Pjiic* I
                                                                                   M l               I
                                                                              I 2 m       I3S3       |
                                                                                    Ccn.?#3b>i»      I

                                  Dear Mr Wright, for your information only
                                                                               •                c(i



    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR *S INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

   I have now been asked by Counsel appointed by Lord Justice Taylor to request
   from a selected number of police officers their recollections, in writing
   of what happened at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. The reason for my
   request is that I understand that a number of your officers performed duty
   on a mutual aid basis. Counsel are keen to obtain a cross section of
   accounts as soon as possible.

   I would like to make     arrangements as soon as convenient, through a Liaison
   Officer whom you may     care to appoint, to receive these written submissions
   as soon as possible.      There will be no need for ray officers to see yours
   personally, although     a proof of continuity will be necessary, but I would
   hope that this could     easily be achieved through your Liaison Officer.

   The invitation to submit written recollections is based on criteria that I
   have already adopted with South Yorkshire Police officers. That is,
   there will be no interviews Just simple requests to which the officer w i n
                                                                      1

                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                          REF:
 Chief Superintendent Denton
                                          STATION/DEPT.:      HQ (MS)
 Chief Superintendent Nesbit
    Operations & Traffic                  DATE:    12   May    1989

  SUBJECT:
             IIIliLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY - STATEMENTS REQUIRED.
A request has been received today from the West Midlands
Enquiry Team for signed statements from the undermentioned
members of the Mounted Branch. All these officers have
previously submitted reports for the information of the
Chief Constable regarding their actions at Hillsborough.
It is the intention to submit those reports for vetting by
the Solicitors acting for the Chief Constable prior to release
to the West Midlands Enquiry Team but they will not be so
released unless the afficer concerned gives his consent. It
may be that after vetting the Solicitors will recommend
cs^’tain clarifications and the removal of matters of opinion
which are not strictly evidence for the purpose of the Public
Inquiry. If the officers consent to release it is intended to
produce the statements in typed*form for scrutiny and
signature by the officer concerned.
Would you please, as soon as possible, ensure that each officer
is seen individually and consent or otherwise to release
obtained, if possible before 9am Monday 15 May, 1989.
Sergeants 1764    Thomas        ^
            399   Sorsby
Constables
           2613 - Lindsay
           2550   Gillott '2* /
           3186   Wilson
           1498   Swain
            387   Henwood
           2316   Scott
           2472 . Wheatcrof t K*'*"
           1105 N Hurman
           2183   Kaye      ^
            748   Blades
            357   Woodward
Repiy please to Det. Chief Inspector Poster on Headquarters
Extension No. 3 3 2 3 .




Chief Superintendent
                                                                                                                               /)'
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                       POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                       SNIG H ILL
                                                                                       SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
                                                                                       TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                                       TELEX 547996



         ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
         "THE CHIEF CONSTABLE”

                                                                                       YOUR REFERENCE

                                                                                       OUR REFERENCE
                                                       UcJhrva.
                                                                                       DATE         /S’ k ^ c u j      iq$*j
     ?       C                (   <X*~
         n                    ^
1
_                                   •                          J




                     f


      \<Letsa-c                                                    //■#->.   t'-flle               faw ~ ScdC-e— —^


                                          0---- e ^ - c . f j-n>                              C&j^ao-^ej    -OVsJr*^ *■UV.II


                      c       h*j                                            l^~u-




                 i   e-if^U                                                                                 'is.               /,
    | L u ~ £ U v^ ~                               <>---A -                   JV.      ^
                                                                                                                          f
    CL, / Q ^-jf — '^C^--p4 .                            iC^                                      -£               • e A y p £ !y


     fe-


                                                                                                                                     ' .v^^v


                                                                                                                                        ' V ^is
                                                                                                            1 *' ?s->=«^,V .?'■' >V J
                                                                                                                          (          Mf
                                    ^    — --
                 THE OFFICER DEALING WITH THISCC
                                               CORRESPONDENCE IS                                 E X T E N Sl0N
                                                                                                             IO N ^......

     A D M /1
  jl   l a i v i i u u i i J L / u w t / A / m u / v i                                                                     %.

                                                                                            C      r   .       '' ^
                           S O L         I C/i T O R S
                                                                                                    'A c,' > X 4 y a f L '^
  / ’ AN I eOTTOMJET
  o TnfvoniXwis
  MICHAEL   e GREGSON
                                   %8huraiwoRW
                                PETE IC.M CTCAI/
                                CHRISTOPHER W. JONES
                                                              MARKW HLTON
                                                              PAUL A MANSER
                                                              JONATHAN H WRIGHT
                                                                                           CONSULTANT*:
                                                                                           ROGER Ml
                                                                                                OESMOND HEAP
                                                                                                                      r

                                                                                                                      -j
                                                                                                                                , IMPIM HOUftK
                                                                                                                      ill'll *•»CC kDIU Y
                                                                                                                                1 BRADFld R b B 0 1 SLR
                                                                                                                                                          W
  JOHN 0 . O f MAIN             ANDffEW R JORDAN              S lm A T A VERITY            IAN W. WHITSON
  MKXA£L L SHEPHERD             SMO JR e S T E a              ROMAIC S. WUK£                                                     TElim>lNI (0274)7*4700
  PETER N. W1BRAHAM             &M0 iR NMAN                   RICHARD BURNS                                                      tU E X b |7 3 0 t
  J. RCHARD ARCHER              MCHAO W WAOE SMfTH            DAVAO W. 1C ARMTTAOC
                                                                                                                                 M.OJC. •Ol 11790
  BARBARA W. rRANCE             JOHK Q. BECKETT               J. PATRICK MITCHELL
  C . NOEL HUTTON               a n ANGREENRaO                & M S T O A C R MARKS                                              FAX < 0 7 * ;1)737547
  JOHN H. 0 . HELLER            SltPW ENGALE                  Mic h a e l s ,   h em ey


 OUMREK               PCM/PAB                     YOUR REF.                                                      15th May
                                                                                                       bate                                     1989


                                                                                                                 FOURTH FAX
  Doar Mr. Denton,

  Hi 3Isborough-

        have the foil cjwing further comments on statements requested by
*        West Midlands inquiry.

  As before, the me ntion of a name without comment indicates that the
  statement has bet n read and that we have no suggestions fo review
  or alteration;


  9.          Serial No. 21

  9.1         P.S. Eddisc
                                     -       I*   ^           «&?&}•
 Good statement, t ut he may wish to reconsider some of! the Comment
 on pages 3/4, as to his views prior to realising the seriou sness of
 the situation.             \


              P.C; Heale                 ■V o      K w u h * )         &                  iTM KjVf             Mejtt

  9.3                                    ^    > 7 5 - ''        /       i7         f
♦ h i s is a personal, and graphic account, which we wou3d suglest is
  not necessarily Suitable in its present form for submission as a
  factual statement to the West Midlands inquiry.




                                                                                                                                      /     .. contd.



 D . Denton Esq.,
 Management Servic es

 FAX 0742 523409

 LEEDS O W C F S       BRITANNIA CHAMOtRS 4 /s OXFORD P l a c e LEEDS LSI SAX TELEPHONE (0832) 444921 TELEX 567202                         AX 444704/471160
                       JO SEPHS WELL HANOVEHVMLK LEEDS L S I 1A8 TFLEFHONF (Q S32)4S0645 TELEX 883B8 FAX 426868

                                                                    •\ tv-r*
                                                                                                                                              004



H am m ond Su d d a r d s
                           S O L I           T O R S

ALAN I BO'TOMLEY             JOHN H. 6 SELLER            S.N. IAN6REENHELD         CONSULTANTS:            EMPIRE MOUSE
D ti?LVOR LEW'S              »ANl?.Sr<UT|riLEWORTH ■     STEPmEn 6AU5 _ t,--'”     ROGER W. SUDDARDS <      10 WCCAOILit .
MOlAELE.SREGSON              (•ETERC.MI•STCALF           MAfrKyv.MtTON-' ,,,       S'RDESMOND HEAP         BRADFORD 1 D 1 SLR
jOh n D.oc m a i n :..,:                 iRW;JONES"      PA&fc MANSER'*'' '■       IANW. WHITSON
M>Ci<AEtt SHEPHERD           ANDREW R. IORDAN              J0NA11.JANH,WRIGHT                              TELEPHONE (0274) 794700
PCTERN. WiLBRAMAM' ■■                    STELL il;        rSTUARTA.VEWTY/' ■
J RICHARD ARCHER             SIMON R.iM'Um                                                                  ftttxm'x>s
                                                           RONALD S. DRAKE
BARBARA W. FRANCE            RICHARD W. WAOE-SWH                                                           M .D X NO. 117VO
C NOELHtiTION                JOHN S .BE<:tK E n -’ . / ’• ..:OAmW!K.ARMTA®p;..     \..:    ' : . V '/
                                                                                                           ;*A X (0774) 737547 ''       ,


OUftftf-.        PCM/PAD                     YOUR REF.       '.-ADM/DD/JEL                 oate         16th May, 1989



 Dear Don,

 Hi 3.1sborough ;/

Here are -furthertec laments on
                                                                                   requested by West Midlands


 11.                   Superintendent:-'Mole'
                Chief ... .nr j,M_JU!l»jjjLU^^                                                                      -jtv            'it**«-« *&-
                                                                                                                                Ar .fKt' 4 1
12.             Mounted Officers

1 2 -1                                             ^        r       ' y    t

1         ~                                h J i S ^ s /‘1&                    ^

Comments are made about the lack of foot Officers on page                                                         4 and'oaoe
8* which the. Officer might like to review.                                                                                na page

1 2 ”3        . £«g-       Swain            KhS~^.                             ^   .

12. 4           P.C. Henwooc                 y.fsife?. \                                     ^                                                     -




numbering^5                              90 into a brief statement form, without

12.5            P.C.       Scott           Uis 1

12.6            P.'C. Whcatcriof t U 1S C                       ^         1b t /
12.7            P.C. Herman i                    Aj 1^"■■ d%S(Jr S



                                                                                                             ./:»■..vf./coritd

H. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services)

FAX 0742 523409                    :J
  HAMMONDSUDDARJ>;



   12.8         P.C.     Kaye               - J      i m                                                                                                    ;.
                                                                                                                                               *' " ' "• ■ ■■ ! .
   12.9         p.c. Blades                                                                                                                  "■      ■ .:. ■ :■•

                                                                                                                                              v. :-h




                                                                                                     £o? t ° M i c e c s °» P « ^ i.                                             The
   wi Lhj n this Of fice|*s k n o w l e d g e ^                                                      U    Probably t r u ^ L n o t                                               be

   1 2 .1 1     p . s » Thom as
                                                                                             l /          :       ;   '     ■

   Suggest remova] of
                                                final section headed "Police Deployment".
^^12,12        P.S. Sorsby
                 ......""'■nwilM                           N ^ {                        ^isTV       t/'       •   .



  12.13        P;S.Sorsby
                                                ill                       .                                   .
  12.14        P.S. Sorsby
                                                m       ' •        ::
                                                                    —           € . ) S S h                                      v- ■                       -
      "2.5     P.C. Lindsav                         Ikj|<f2
                                                                                                                                                    •;
                                                                                                                                                     =-'-                       ■•.■;•:■
  Suggest review of L m m e n t s on page 2, re manpower.



  Yours sincerely,                 ':                                           ... .   •"

      ' ' ") -

                                                                   ■ ?                                    (r



^ftcte'r      C.: Motcal                            '                     :/*                 -X.                                                                                                    :

                                                                                                                                                                - -         ;


                                                              ■■     ".
                                            '
                                        .




                                                                                                                                     .   /     ■■                     ■■   ■■         ■    .■   ■'       ■ ■
                                                                                             -.v




                                                                                                                          V-; -.




                .
                                                                                                                                ,rtr:-r«
                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                           REF:
        FROM:           Ch/Supt. Denton
        T0:         Chief Inap. FOGTER                                     STATION/DEPT.:
                    i n s p e c t o r GUNIV                                DATE:

                         SUBJECT:
                                       requests for staternen-             west Midlands Enquiry


                    t          .T°day received a request from Chief Inspector Ross,
                    «esv Hi a lana s inquiry Team, for statements from the
                    l o i i o w m g oificers : '

         <A )       Sgt. G o d dar d'' )
                    P C ’s ftyan    - )           Police Control Box at the Ground*
                           Bichard     )


        (d )            °fficerf ln Serials 2 to 7 Inclusive as detailed on
                    the attacned schedules aostracted from the Operational Order.

                    tfp° ^ C e r .from the Communications Department who can describe
                    tne communications arrangements in detail.                     De

                    Actions
                    Can Inspector Gunn please obtain a copy of the statements
                    at (a) for vetting by Mr. Metcalfe.

                Can inspector Gunn check through the officers listed in the
                scnedules and ascertain whether any statements have alreadv
                oeen submitted    -   then inform Ch/Insp. P?s?er Shd^hoSJd
                      noV oS1°nS concerned askinS for factual statements' on
                p_ain paper ana signed, from officers who have not previouslv
                reported, informing them that the statements are t o b e      7
                submitted to West Midlands for-consideration with regird to
                evidential submissions to the Public Inquiry,     "      .. ;
 r
                I will myseli deal with the Communications statements.

                                                                                                            fo
                                                                                                        /




                Chief Superintendent,



                                                                                                 :: :



                >         J            A      W   i              "vjt, '                    /-



                                                             *




GEN/2
                                                                           ■
           J f'€ ^ t-A **~4

                                                                                                               it.
            L k^4aA r               —■*                    }& +-** /      %
                                                                          j*                           h   -




                      ^ f                                              & i 5L!
                                           Jv£                    KL?i5


                                                                 ^ ^ '4-


                                                    Oa   £5L|.


                                                                  ill 7
                                                           ~ f K

                                                                  hi >30
                                                                 S252

                                                                                 7/j
                                               ! U ~ - t     ^3>7      < n

                                                f <* - * - ^ . & 2 ’/ H
                                                                                  £>%*
                                           )\^~th{nrt^ t - i u O K


                                                                  i^. (2.9




    S O U T H YORKS, PQtACt.



             f $ MAY 1989
    C H liF s U P E R I N T E N D E N T^




t   m   a n a g e m   e n t   S E R V IC E S




((Xm .                                    ^ A ^ J t o A        J**        C C r p*~+s£+a+.   —   Cp^


                                               M>      Pr h t K ^ S s i t * J . ^
R'-.y   by   :                                      ;1 3 - 5 -8 9                  39PM J.                 0 2 7 4 7 3 5 8 8 4 -j                                         ') / ) 'y
                                                                                                                                                  0 7 4 2 5 2 3 4 0 9 J tt 1
                               ’89 05/23 14:42                                       2 0274 733834               HfiMMOHD SUDDRRD                                    01




                                   SO L             CJ T
         A'_AN IBOTTOMUEV             JOHN H. I . rtg u .6 *•'            ^    G, V IANGREENFIELD       ' ' CONSULTANTS:'                  EMPIRE HOUSE :
         D.TREVOR LEWIS              <ANB,S'it-UTTtEwCfttH -''/"STEPHENGale                         ,     _RQSgPw.SUDDASDSs»i              10PICCADILLY
         MICHAEL E.GRE6S0N         . PETERC MEtCALF       -4 ;<■MARKW. HH-1QW                            -S®OESWON'DHEAP :V . ” '. BRADFORDBDiSlft
         JOHN D-.DE MAIN .           CHRiSTChPHER W.JONES - PAUL R.MANSER                                 iANW. WHITSON
         .MCNAEL t.SHEPHERD       :ANDREW R JORDAN          - JONATHAN H WRIGHT                            ,        1              TELEPHONE <0274) 734700
        .PETER N. WILaRAHAM '■' ‘ SfMON R 8.STELL'- , ^ ::Ai,:f.STU«IA'VERlTY .
         J.ft-C^AROAfCHtR        ’"SiMONft INMAN               RONALD S.DRAKE                                              ;        ' ^ ^,
         BARBARA W. FRANCE     ‘ ftCHARC w ,w A D e -s w )T rt;^« » a i^& e y R ^                                                     '■:~M .D :xvN O ,,ti?»r.>;
         CNCEL.ny.11pN     ■, ’ ;* iOHNG 3ECKETT.              DAVID W. K ARMHa GE;                                                  ‘ v?^A>T(ij374)757&S7




         FACSIMILETRANSMISS                                                                                                                               i■;
         OUR REF;                                                                                                                      A
KJ
                      PC!M/PAB'

                                                          TA.Q,'
         T0           I). Denton Kk q. ,
                      Chief S u p e r i ntendent (Management Services)
         FAX NO

                      0742'523409;

         DATE                                                                                TIMS: ■
                     ;23rdJV!f
                             iy,,'l9 89                                                                 . 2 . 30,' p.m.:'
                                                1---- ----------------------
         NUMBER OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS,SHcET<
                      4
         It IH.S TRANSMISSION ISNOT FUlIV On IfcoBLY RECEIVED, PLEASE TELEPHONE (0274) 734700




                     SOUTH YORKS. PQLIC*

                                                                                                                                           w        fe
                               2 3 MAY1989
                    C H IE F    SI PESlNTEWlOENT
                    M A N A G E M E N T   S E flv




                                                                                              ■     < v x          •
                                                             i!3      5-8 9 .           2 :40PM j                                        ..B274 735884-*
                                                                                                                                                                                       0742523409;U 2
                                                          *4 4v                                 s 0274 735884                                      HRMMOND SUDDflRD

                                                                                                                                                                                            '• r;
                                                                                                                                                                                                ,_.
                                                                                                                                               ■          ..




                                S O - t l |cvl;T O R s

      o J v m lm T                                                    ;      ani^sREE^                                 \           . CONSULTANTS:. . ■                 . EMPIRE HOUSE              ;
      L . c S ^ r « r tr t    :: • ; — R-                                    STEWNG aLE
                                                                                                                                 ^ i p ^ a c o A R p s a * . . : . - l o p i c a u u u r ' - - ■■■ ....•:
       ,JHN D. 0£ MAIN •■-.         ■ ■'’CMf«ST©Ft-JlRW
                                         wiresiycf     . J 0 N6S : y                                                          ,,,S«.pESM«OHeAP,.. ,              ..; BRADFORD.BOt 3L8
      MICHAEL L.SHfcPHgRO '", :? ANDREW R JORDAN                                                                                jan ^ w w t s o n j:.-y: o'.'^>r"                        '              .. '
                                                       JONATHAN M.WRIC3HT
      PETEft,M.wilqraha V . .- S’MON 8,B STELL                                                                              :                                V ; t e le p h o n e « m h * ? m to o
      j.rco iahu archer                                STUAftl A.VERITY
                                 SIMON ft,INklAN    :r;
                                                      ,RpNAli)S,pRAKE'                                                                                                     ..T aex5t75or   ■
      bAkmm w, prance           :«HAROW WADE-SyiTH^v. R^TOKJHNS         .                                                                                      '   . M.D.X. NQ. W 2 0
      C.NOEL HUTTON.      ;'    'JOHNS.'BE SKETI '   \DAVIDW.'K.ARMllAQfc
                                                                                                                                                                       ,   FAX (0274)V3'/b-*.7 :
                                                                                                                            :dSy' "e;,:-:                                           \      ;-.r ;
      OURRgfi •
              ; P C M / P A B ;,
                                                                  your ref          CCO/DD/JEL                                                     DATF
                                                                                                                                                     f.>
C
                                                                                                                                    '•                             .                           -




      Dear Don,               ...

      Hillsborough                        ~ :
              ' :^      ■ ■'          ■■■;■■ -•:/.■ . ' : ■                                                                        ^          r,,,t •.,,, ,                            r;. .
      Here are further c
                                                                                                   ’- ^ : : r etJu e s t e a : S Y W e s t M i d l a n d 3 :
                                         ..                  ;


     20*           S en io r. O f f io e r «                                                                   ■a&}:*&?<?/■/                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ■■.

                                                                                                                                                                                                       ■■■■
     2 0 .1        o r

          2       C - I . Edmunds on-
                                                                                                   '                   '             "                    ''   ’■ ■■

    .ihcre       is a referende*- to XS.                                     v                                                                                               "sC>v<'
                                                                                                        v»|iXiiJC                              cs                              *.                             ....    -
        ould              e x p l a i n c d - 0,3 :su’
                                                     c h »*                                                                                                                                                   ..     '.vv'

^■■20.3           C. I, -'.McRobbi
                                     ‘        •           ■ ,V;
                                                              .
     Page' 4 '-'line'"one,;^ a tiliru.
     number ■of. pages'l i s t i n g ^
    T wonder'if               these-'a re-s
                                         ' xn^%                              .w
    a t p a g e 17.
                      :        ■         ■■


                  C ; I ; Bet-tisc                                                                       :'."N -                         :

    i have
    think :t h is


                                                      ’               ■ ■,       : ' ■ -■   .   ■ . '         ..   '       ' ..:         '•
                                                                                                    ■   • \




        Denton         E a g .,
                                                  j
    Chief SupertntcridenSt
 i M a yemeu t Scr-vi ceis ) ■
 S outh Yorksh jr o Pollice' ; "
 H a m m o n d S u b d a r Ii s .
                                                                                       P A C ii-N Q   2




 20.5     C. I . Price -;                   v?-

 20.6     C . T.   W arin g


                                                 at p&gs 5            ao        at odds with
mo.,t other Officer as but, obviously f vthis should                  not be altered if it
       iv     rf c^ 1^ ctlon*''.;'-?-"-'won<Ser what other            .Off icers he-saw on
     walk down Leppangs Lane and perhaps details                      could be included.
20.7      € . 1. Sumner                                       '

I would suggest .substitution;-:of the ..words ."extreme urgency" for .
whofkL                   ^Personal-matter, .he may-:wish to consider
           wishes     include the comment made to M r L o c k on p a g e 6 .
Other Officers have commented unfavourably on fans who asked whether
the game was going to re-start,

20.8      C . I ; Greaser j    ^^                 '


r r ^ i i CVC>      I h a ',e flr®a^¥'--^en- through;'a 'statement.with-Mr.
trcaser, but _l do not know- whether, this, is- the.-original-or an -
D^'k'V         rSIOn’        a-13. events,. I feel that .the comment about the
P^c in9 of pens on page..4. should' either1 be .expanded.to include
It t       °A W?®n U ? F s e^perieiice): this ..had-been done,;-or the entire
-fiction deal j ng wit|i thls.should.be deleted. On page -?, there is a
IhiTtlT*r®9
                ? a requfst'to ^         the kick-off.---..;it-ia.lndicated: -that
                t was.no|::acted-.upon,, but can":ho:-'say/::.with:;,'certainty
i Ihiik           receivcf* , If„|hj s :is not within, h i s o w n :knbwleacfe,-then
               15          sh°uld 1x5-deletod. Comments •oft •p a g e ’: 8 / & * e i ::-M r .
Greenwood ^could either be expanded to indicate the 'nature'-"of-Vthcr■-
c ifciiculties or omx-:ted after the factual comment that P.C.' -Goodwill
was., deployed as Communications; Of.ficer-..to-Mr. ^'Greenwood
20.9      C ; I . Beal

This has been used'
on planning for”the
duplicated in the s
statement should ac                                   page.
"On 29th March ,»                                                                     he words

2€L1°     C -I» Boal

20.11     P.T.-Athorn-

                                        sr~ v ' ~        m y v n « v u .wien-.-tffle^sages- on
J f c f a i ? « f „ “ e i ^ rcate
                              e n t the- nature   5 t0
                                                     of- t hthe
                                                             ® ‘=” e c L L h a tshould either
                                                                 incident                   -o* be
expanded on or dele

20*12    P-l. Bennett

He may wish to reconsider the use of the word "1
                                               ’louts'* -'at'.p

                                           ; ;
                                     -
H am m ond Suddards                                                      m u n(.




                                <■*


Whilst, they probably were ..louts.,... some- of- them.may: claim, to .have been
trying to escape -serious i n j u r y = -av'-claiirwhich*'will be difficult to
disprove.     --



Yours



    VeJ     - ' 0


Peter -C* -Metealf"




                                                           (QVj®®»?»»•
     j   i n                                              rU L ic c
             *r '■ ....              — ....          "■            1  "-■■■■■


                                                                                       P0LIC2 HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                       SNIG HILL




A L L CCKMUNICATIOHS SHOULD 3E ADDRESSED TO
           ' THE CHIEF CONSTABLE '
                                                                                        TOD’S REFERENCE

                                                                                        OUR REFERENCE

                                                                                        DATS           2; ;




                                               F A C SIM IL E    TRAJ4S.MISSION



                                       Msi- 1GAO
dats                                 ...         ........

                                    Har.ncnd Suddards Solicitors




                                                  Peter C . Mete            ra
F OR T H E ATTENTION OF



  O M ME N T S                 .         .'iJ?.. . • • - . . . - . .            •'*. -.^v-.-vv* .-V.

                                    Police officers re editing of statements


                                   S ~u2 .t z \ n c s r1so '“i, ACC S “s.T ^ S 6 r*v ic 6 s
FROM                           .................... ................. ....

                                   07^2 768522
T E L E P H O N E NUMBER       ..........................................

                                                                                     2
N U M B E R O F PAGES      (    INCLUDING THIS PAGE               )                 t .....




IN   THE EVENT OF A POOR COPT PLE A SE CONTACT:



                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OPERATIONS ROOM

                           TELEPHONE           07^2       768522         ECTENSION J2**9
i
v.                                                    n c.
 ‘O u t h   Y o r k s h ir e                P o l i ?.V. V.




     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY STADIUM DISASTER




            A LING WITH T
                            HIS C O R R E S P O N D E N C E   IS
                                                                   EXTENSION
                                                1 HE H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUIRY - U P - DA TE II




        t a r t   o r   t h i s       c   o r =■ <= c   rnc.   - - ^       ^   ^   -
                                                                       ^                requestea   mac   all officer
                                            - ^   _-                     *     ~ £ r 3 c "cct u/i t o.e c r
                                      ‘n6 rcrni o!
          —               \       —u—^ . _ _""
                                            _ ___ _- a s:a:e:5en:» including -arrers of c o n e ^ r                      ^nr
                                      ■      nc: cnis a n o u m s G to evidence.

   -nese accounts                 are of                z e r . s e value to our Counsel.

  Subsequently,                the South Yor kshire Police were advised bv the We sc - e l a n d s
  ^ : r i r ^ ^ ; nf U1G be £ ° ^ rec.:ated if S ou" h Yorkshire Police officers, who
  --IV- - ‘- * - o r o u sn, couid erre ct ive ly prepare their own factual statements
       aaomibsion to tne inquiry.       This was agreed and the obvious w a v of
  ; " ' eeJin5          W2S       t0. J'ook at the statements which had been in itially preoared at
                           “          tr" . b“ 1S that lf “ « « •                      Of           and comment could be
  W « C ‘» i d l I ^ s e p o U c ‘e.                    Sultable as the fa< = ^ l           statements    requested by the


                    - ZVe expressed concern about alterations being made to their
  ■    =— 2i s ta Leaents prior to submission to the West Midlands Police.

  ’•>;42 V. must be kept in mind is that the statements for su bmission to our own
                         . .    .                           -------- *— —       wi :

       -•,P      „r:;SnGea_t0 ftave an entirely different                                       purpose    to those   submitted
       -•■e «esL .i_aianas r'once.

  -he initial
                          reports   suomitted contained- a   mixture ul   of fact, conjecture
                                                                                     o n i e c t u r e and
                                  fnAm        _ __ _ /- <_». uio..*wwui<c
                                                              ,              kill, c                   and
 opinion.           m     eaiting them for use as a factual statement bv the - n c u - v n has

 - S      ^ : : : : ro / ? a c " e S0liCit0rS t0 remCVe                                              and 'opinio *a^-t0-“le.ve

        ! ^ ! 6 m e n ” WhiCh are subraitted to the Inquiry may be taken into account                                          <n
               c un c : Jsions, wnetner or not the officer makin g the statement is
r "t 6 ,aS,a W l t n e s s -                    Ic follows that the statements must contain only direct
iac(_ual observations,                          as-opposed to matters of impression.

No amended statement will be submitted to the West Midlands Police until                                                 it
has been seen, approved and signed by the officer making it.




Assistant Chief Constable
(Staff 5«xiiir£es)

** D i s t r i b u t i o n :

      All Chief Superintendents
      Supt Parker                 -   HQ Co mmunications & Computers
      PC Middup                   -   Secretary, Police Federation
      Mr Stothard                 -   Special Con st abu lar y Commandant
      Mr Richar ds on             -   Civilian Personnel Officer
                                     THE   H ILLSBOROUGH   IN Q U IR Y   -   UPDATE   I




   You will no doubt be aware that the Incuiry into the events at
   Hillsborough is now un de r w a y at the She'ffield Town Hall. Lord
   Justice Taylor is sitting together with Brian Johnson, the Chief
   Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonar d Maunder, who is a
   proressor of civil e ng in ee rin g at Newcastle University.

       purpose cr tne Inquiry is net tc appc rt icn b l a m e f c r t h e
              b u t , rai_ner, tc di scover sc~s of the m u l t i o l i c i t v cf
       = ; enc u.axe r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s tc try to p r e v e n t soir.eth.inc s i m i l a r
   • ~     11r a c a i n .
          •• ~             Wnilst tne ca.< D a n e i l s c C h a m b e 1' a p c ^hg fo'r~al
   J: ^ ! - ° : , ? U : : ; i c n i -g .frcrn b £ r - s : ” s .? iv£s ths appear an ce cf Crcwn
   '
   --- r -'~*c   ~   ~   r-c   - c-         proceedings is verv different.           There is no
            ^v-._.nesses sit dcwn tc cive their evidence, future witnesses
   c~7 .s it ln '-r-e Cnamber wnilst ethers are giving evidence; hears av
  Ievicer.ee and opinion are p er fec tly admissible.

       inquiry is hearing evidence from wi tnesses in certain
   Categories.  The 'batting order' is as follows:

          Liverpool                supporters

         Local res ide nt s/ sh op keepers

         South Yorkshire Police

         Hills bor oug h Ground Staff

         Am bu lan ce/ Fir e Service personnel

         Football Ass oc ia ti on

         Technical Evi dence of the state of the ground

^^ Yo u should be aware that the evidence to date has been almost
   exc lu si ve ly from Li ve rp o ol supporters, some of w h o m have lost
   relatives in the disaster.          It is u n d e r s t a n da bl e th er efo re that a
   less than compreh ens ive picture of events has e m e r ge d. in the media.
   The newspapers and 'television have re po rt ed i nd iv id ua l and
   sometimes sensational accounts, whicn do not re pr es en t the whole
   evidence that has been given, not to m e n t i o n that which has yet to
   be a a a u c e d . Do not be di sh ea r t e n ed by the r e por ts w hi ch are       —
  emerging, they are m e r e l y a small part of the jigsaw.

  In very simpli st ic terms, the body of the ev id en ce to date has
  thrown up two ver y,g en e ra l questions w hi ch the pol ic e w i tn es ses
  will be expected to answer:
                                                                                             (2 )




              Did we do ev ery t hi ng we could to prevent the
              situation arisin g outside Leppings Lane t u r n ­
              stiles, that did arise between 2.30 and 2.55pm?

       (2 )   Did we react as qu ick ly as we could to the p r o b ­
              lems that occurred in the central pens shortly
              before kick off?

 We^must      always remember that it is easy, in hindsight, to suggest
 tnat we      could have done more, or done thincs more auickly but G I V E N
 ALL THE      CIRCUMSTANCES AT THAT TIME could we have done more, or
 cone it      mors cuicklv?

  curing the last three weeks evidence has been gathered, or. behalf
  cr^tne Chief ^ C o n s t a b l e , from members cf the So ut h Yorkshire Fclice
  c-:-— -rciu members cr tns Special Co nst abu lar v — manv cf you will
  nave already provided statements.             This evidence has been di stilled
  <=.nc a report prepared for Counsel repr es en ti ng the South Yorkshire
( Pol ic e at the Inquiry.           The process of c o l la ti ng all the evidence
  has n e c e ss ar il y^ be en brisk and some i n d i v i d u a l s" ma y have har boured
  some uncertainties about the purpose of the internal enquiry, and
  u.av now feel a little un in f o r m e d about its pr ogress - hence thi«=
  update.

 The report that is with Counsel for the South Yo rkshire Police,
 Mr. W i l l i a m Wo od wa rd Q C , paints the overall pictu re of our policincr
 the ma tc h at Hills bo ro ug h on 15 April 1989.              It contains an o v e r ­
 view of the Force; a d e s c r i p t i o n of the Stadium; a re v i e w of all
 the legislation c on ce rn in g the po li cin g of football; details of
 the pl an ni ng of this pa rti cu l a r mat ch and matches in general; an
 ex am ination of the quality of co mmunications that existed on the
 day a n d , ^f i n a l l y ; a summary of the events that occurred, drawn
 from o f f i c e r s 1 s t a t e m e n t s . It is this picture that we hope to
 present when given the o pp or tu ni ty to put our case to the Inquiry.

  Police evidence will be called from W e d ne sd ay 24 May 1989, b e g in ni ng
  with those senior officers responsi ble for p l a n n i ng and co n t r o l l in g
, the po li ci ng operation. Following-on from that, in dividual officers
  will be called to give their account of a p a r t i c u l a r part of the
  events in which they were involved.    Over 1,100 officers performed
 duty at Hillsborough, it' should be obvious that only a relative
  few of that number will be cal le d to give ev id enc e to the Inquiry.
  If you are called it does not imply that you have a n y t h i n g to answer
 for and, conversely, if you are not called it does not mean that
 your efforts are unrecognised.

So licitors for the Inquiry (who are sort of clerks to the court)
are respons ib le for sifting throu gh all the ev id en ce and choosing
those who might have^ something to add to the facts a l re ad y heard
by the Inquiry.    It is a n t i ci pa te d that s o m et hi ng in the order
    50-75 police officers will be called so, clearly, not everyone
will have the opp or tu ni ty to tell his or her story.
                                                                                                           (3)




At the c o nclusion of the Inquiry, however, Counsel for the South
Yorkshire Po l i c e can call additional w i t n e s s e s if we feel that
the whole story has not been pre s e n t e d or that the Inquiry has
been mis l e d in any way.

Attached to this report is a list of officers who, for one reason
or another, m a y be people that the Inquiry w o u l d w i s h to hear from.
That  is not to say that they will be called, we simply do not
know, but their p a r t i c u l a r evidence was c o n s i d e r e d useful in p r e p a r i n g
the report for our Counsel.

Each of these officers is e n c o u r a g e d and welcome, to see the prc-
cress cf the ir.~err.al evidence ga t h e r i n g to cate ar.d to get a
flavour cf the P u b l i c Inquiry.

At 9.00 am each mcrr.ir.g M o n d a y to Friday 22 - 26 May 198 9 , there
will be a video shewn at the Lecture Theatre, First Floor, Force
Headquarters.       The v ideo is a c o m p i l a t i o n of numerous films taken
by the BBC, the South Y o rkshire P o l i c e and S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
Football Club.       It lasts for a p p r o x i m a t e l y 2 hours and is the
'official' video of the Inquiry.              (There are many, m a n y , h o u r s of
video film available from different sources but this two hours
is thought to represent the most r e l e v a n t ) . A me m b e r of the internal
evidence gathering t eam will be on hand to answer any questions
you might have about the Inquiry, the e v i dence to date or about
any other concerns.        After v i e w i n g the v ideo there will also be
an opport u n i t y to visit the Town Hall to see the Inquiry in session.

If any officers are s u b s e q u e n t l y called who do not a p p e a r on the
list attached, then they will be p r o v i d e d w i t h similar o p p o r t u n i t i e s
prior to a t t e n d i n g the Inquiry.     At the m o m e n t we are g iven less
than 24 hours notice of the c a l l i n g of w i tnesses, so officers should
be p r e p a r e d to attend the Inquiry at that k ind of notice.

Would Divisional /Departmental Commanders please cause an individual
c o p y of thi s r e p o r t t o be h a n d e d t o e a c h of t h e n a m e d o f f i c e r s
b y M o n d a y 22 M a y 1 9 8 9 , a n d a r r a n g e f o r t h e b u l l e t i n t o b e b r o u g h t
to t h e n o t i c e of o t h e r m e m b e r s o f t h e force, w h o w e r e i n v o l v e d a t
H i l l s b o r o u g h on t h e 15 A p r i l 1 9 8 9 , at t h e e a r l i e s t o p p o r t u n i t y .
                                                                                                    (4)



 Please also elect a m e m b e r wit h i n the D i v i s i o n / D e p a r t m e n t who will
 arrange for all the n amed officers to att e n d one of the
 p r e s entations at H e a d q u a r t e r s in the f o r t h c o m i n g week.    It w o u l d be
 ap p r e c i a t e d if details of those officers a t t e n d i n g c ould be
 com m u n i c a t e d to Chief I n s p e c t o r B e t t i s o n by telephone, H e a d q u a r t e r s
 e x tension 3457 between 5.30 p m and 6.30 p m a n y evening.


If any officer feels certain that he or she is likelv to be called
by the Inquiry for some reason but dees not aooear on the list, then
tney snould contact Chief  Inspector Eettisor. ^personally between the

ir.vclvec m  tne ir.cicsr.t, you are u n l ikely tc be called unless                             vcu
have something unicue tc say.

- r a-"-y _c m c e r s   wisn to avail themselves cf the o p p o r t u n i t y tc v i e w
^     v     _    d  “ 0 s.nd c.wk Cwcs ;      ._Oiii abcc. ins m c u i r v , tne svicence cr
tne Soutn Yorkshire Police case, tr.sn tney are invi t e e tc teleohcne
rC-iice Constable Spark on Hea d q u a r t e r s ext e n s i o n 347 0 . If there is
surricient demand tnen this facility will be mad e ava l i a b l e durinc
tne week e n d 27-28 May 198 9.                 Please note that a t t e n d a n c e at that
pres e n t a t i o n will be in the officer's own time unless e x c r e s s l y
approved by the officer's individual D i v i s i o n a l / D e p a r t m e n t a l
C o m m a n d e r . This p r e s e n t a t i o n w o u l d be for officers' i n f o r m a t i o n and
interest only and w ould not serve the needs of the Inquiry.

As tne picture unfolds before the Inquiry a s u b s e q u e n t update for
the Force will be p r e p a r e d and distributed.     You should feel free to
contact the Inquiry Liaison Tea m on H e a d q u a r t e r s e x t ension 3457 if
you have any concerns w h a t s o e v e r (albeit it is a v e r y busy time for
the t eam at the moment).

No one at this time should feel that their i n d i v i d u a l actions on the
15 April 1989 are being c r i t i c a l l y s c r u t i n i z e d by e i t h e r the Inquiry
or the internal evidence g a t h e r i n g team.

The South Y o rkshire Police, as            whole, will s u b s e q u e n t l y be
re p r e sented by those indivi d u a l s called to give e v i d e n c e but they
are supported in that i ndiv idual r e s p o n s i b i l i t y by the whole Force.
The experiences of H i l l s b o r o u g h were, and c o n t i n u e to be, shared by
every South Y o rkshire Police officer, Special C o n s t a b l e and civilian
c o l league together with t h e i r families.




 Assis          -hief Constable,         Staff Services


DISTRIBUTION

All Chief Superintendents
Superintendent Parker - C o m m u n i c a t i o n s
Mr S t o thard - Special C o n s t a b u l a r y Commandant
Mr Richardson - Civil i a n Per s o n n e l Officer
Mr Middup -Police Federation
    s*_SSl.SIzsj,    Chief Constable Mr Jackscr
               i- ii w c .iC c r iiw   i / a c K e n i ± s j» g   PC 1421     Guest
Chief Superintendent Mole                                         PC 1674     Rich
Chief Superintendent Nesbit                                       PC  159     Marsh
Superintendent          Marshall                                  PC 2316     Scott
Superintendent          Murray                                    PC 2287     Grant
Superintendent          Greenwood                                 PC   42     Hcoson
Superintendent          Marsh                                     PC 1863     Buxton
Superintendent          McKay                                     PC 1035     Ryan
                                                                  PC 3107     Pearson
Chief Inspector Eeal .                                            PC 1543     Aitken
c~~ ~~~ ins teeter McF.cbb’
                          ’
                          '—                                      FC 2613     Lindsay
                                                                  VC  278     Schcley


                                                                       1285
                                                                  PC    700
                                                                  PC
^^pector Sykes                                                    PC   2634   Ford
i^'ectcr Purdy                                                    FC   3198   Akrsd
_:-__ectcr cennstt                                                PC   3186   Wilson
Inspector Ellis                                                   FC   1177   Davis
Inspector Delaney                                                 FC   2191   Llewellyn
Inspector Eullas                                                  FC   2806   Eutler
Inspector Eeresfora                                               FC   3023   Martin
Inspect Meek                                                      FC   1370   Eichara
Inspector Woodward                                                FC   2167   Frost
Inspector Charles                                                 FC     12   Taylor
                                                                  PC   3211   Priestley
PS 952 Charlesworth                                               PC   1368   McKenzie
PS 1341 Crawford                                                  PC   2185   Cooper
PS 758 Morgan (on behalf of Serial 18)                            PC   2083   Packer
PS 2001 Burman                                                    PC   1453   Phillips
PS 1066 Higgins (on behalf of Serial 20)                          PC    803   Tattershall
PS 323 Proctor (on behalf of Serial 19)
PS 1757 Burns (on behalf of Serial 15)                            Mr Sanderson (Communications)
PS 616 Goddard
PS 2379 Swift
P^^.288 Payne (on behalf cf Serial 16)
F£ 454 Chapman
PS 468 Whitlam (on behalf of Serial 17)
PS 2607 Eadison
PS 1829 France (on behalf of Serial 36)
PS 2822 Kennedy (on behalf of Serial 37)
PS 840 Wright (on behalf of Serial 13D)
PS 2235 Gutcher (on behalf of Serial 13D)
PS 1764 Thomas
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                     REF
        FROM   ACC Staff Services
                                                                     S T A T I O N . DEP1   Headquarte;
        T0     All Chief Superintendents
                                                                     DATE                      v,av 1QP'


                SU8JECT:           HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




                                                              of the Hillsborough Inquiry was
                  ’’or wa r de d for your information and in order that it may be brought
                               :tent ion o: 8 x .. )ther members     ’.e :orce.

                     a * l -C u :ar, reference was made to officers who, for one reason
                 or another, may be people the Inquiry would wish to hear from,
                 their names being appended on a schedule.

                 - wish to affirm that the update was for the information of ever y­
                 one , and the comments contained therein should be disseminated to
                      officers on your di vision not merely those named in the
                 appendices .

                 I am a d w s e d that some officers have expressed concern regarding
                 the editing of their original statements prior to submission to
                 the West Midlands Police.      The attached circular explains fully
                 the reasons for this course of action and should be brought to
                 the attention of all your officers.




                         tar.t Chief Constable
                 St       Services




GEN 2
                                                                                                        HOUSE
                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                        4QN
                                                                                                       0742 727599

                                                                                                       NN LANE POLICE S T A T IO N
                                                                                                       ' 3PR
                                                                                                       05 1-7 09 7175




                                                                                                                   <J I'ltJ   /   V



                                                                                                                   7 J u n e 1989




                                      V   :                ■'     / „.V ;    a :1

             : ;   _ 3   1z   a t ’       t   ■>   ;.ii9        T **a a a   u * v
                                                                                                           '3&"7


                                                       r


                                                                                                       I have j u s t
                                                                                                      id copy a t t a c h e d ) .

                                                                                                       .th you o r y o u r
                                                                                                        yesterday in the
                                                                                                      l i t o f t h e way i n
                                                                                                      iy be , o f c o u r s e ,
                                                                                                      idy a g r e e d w i t h
                                                                                                      .d be r e f e r r e d t o
                                                                                                        t o s u c h an
                                                                                                       c i t o r s r e p l y t o my
                                                                                                        t o a s s u r e you t h a t
                                                                                                      ir e a r l i e r




PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                                                       She f f i e l a
                                 S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                    REF:              CID/AF/JED
    FROM:   Chief Superintendent Denton
                                                                    STATION/DEPT.: Headquarters
            Chief Superintendent Nesbit, Ops & Traffic              DATE:             2 June 19 8 9

               SUBJECT:                     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


               The West Midlands Inquiry team have now requested that officers of your
               Division who are named in the attached schedules be asked to provide
               written accounts of their duties and activities relating to the FA Cup
               Semi-Final at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989-

               The written accounts, when obtained, will be subjected to the usual
               vetting procedures carried out by solicitors acting on behalf of the
               Chief Constable, prior to their submission to the West Midlands Police.

               Officers are being asked to co-operate           in providing      their individual
               written accounts,   but  the wishes of           any officer       who objects   to
               disclosure will be respected.

               It is requested that the officers' accounts are:-

               1.   Handwritten in clear, legible writing.

               2.   Written on plain paper (not statement forms).

               3.   To include   full n a m e , age and date of b i r t h , rank and n u m b e r , and
                    station.

               4.   To be factual accounts only - expressions              of   feelings,   opinions,
                    hearsay evidence, etc, are not required.

               5.   To  include Serial Numbers,    where          applicable,      and    details     of
                    specific duties, times and locations.

               6.   To be signed at the end of each page.     Corrections,               alterations,
                    etc, must be clearly marked and initialled.
m
               Officers should take a copy"of their written accounts which they should
               retain for any future reference.

               There is an urgent requirement for the submission of these accounts,'and
               it is therefore requested that they be prepared, collated and submitted
               on a 'section' basis to Detective Inspector Gunn, Hillsborough Incident
               Room, Force Headquarters, as soon as possible, and no later than Friday
               9 June 1989.

               Submissions  should   not be  delayed   due to   the unavailability   of
               individual officers   through Annual Leave, Sickness, etc.      Separate
               arrangements will be made      to    obtain written   accounts    from such offi
               as soon as it is possible to do so.

               Thank you for your assistance in this matter.




               Del                 ector Foster for
               Chief Superintendent Denton
                                                                                                                         2   June     r?89




 THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - UPDATE I I I




 The I n q u i r y i s a b o u c t o c o m p l e t e i t s t h i r d w e e k a n d t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e
 h a v e b e e n g i v i n g e v i d e n c e f o r e i g h t d a y s n ow.               The p o l i c e w i t n e s s e s t c d a t e
 h a v e b e e n t h o s e s e n i o r o f f i c e r s wh o h a d ,          f o r t h e m o s t F a r t , an o v e r v i e w o f t h e
 full           s e q u e n c e o f e v e n t s t h a t o c c u r r e d a : H i l l s b o r o u g h or. 15 A p r i l 1 5 5 ? , c r
 t h o s e who t o o k c r i t i c a l          decisions curing th at afternoon.                           I t i s f a i r tc sav
 that           t h e i r e v i d e n c e has b e e n s c r u t i n i s e d i n g r e a t d e t a i l and v i z c r e u s l y c r o s s -
 exa-ir.ed.              I t i s a n t i c i p a t e d , h o w e v e r , t h a t f u t u r e w i t n e s s e s w i l l n e t be
 c r. a - l e r. g ec. t o t n e s a n s d e g r e e .       These c i r i c e r s s t i l l tc zive evidence s i n c l v
 r.£.vs c. p i s e s t o cCd t c t n e                               Jigssv,

 i t i s c i r r i c u l t t c d e t e r m i n e who w i l l a n d who w i l l n o t b e c a l l e d t o               give
 evidence.         T h e l i s t c f o f f i c e r s w h i c h wa s a p p e n d e d t o U p d a t e I , a n d          circulated
 22 May 1 9 2 9 , r e m a i n s t h e " b e s t g u e s s ” i n t e r n s c f l i k e l y w i t n e s s e s ,           although
 setie C o n s t a b l e s i n t h o s e s e r i a l s r e p r e s e n t e d by S e r g e a r . t s on t h e l i s     t w ill also
 be c a l l e d by t h e I n q u i r y .       The p r o c e d u r e o f c a l l i n g i s as f o l l o w s :

. t r e a s u r y S o l i c i t o r s ( who a c t a s " C l e r k s o f C o u r t " ) h a v e now c o n s i d e r e d ma n y
s t a t e m e n t s made by S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e o f f i c e r s .       Daily thev d is t r i b u t e
c o p i e s or s e v e r a l such s t a t e m e n t s t o a l l p a r t i e s r e p r e s e n t e d a t t h e I n q u i r y -
t n a t i s t h e f i r s t i n d i c a t i o n t h a t a n o f f i c e r i s "on n o t i c e " f o r f u t u r e c a l l i n g .
As s o o n a s t h a t f i r s t i n d i c a t i o n i s g i v e n t h e n t h e r e l e v a n t o f f i c e r s w i l l b e
c o n t a c t e d b y a me mb e r o f t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e I n q u i r y L i a i s o n Team a n d
f u r n i s h e d w i t h a l l n e c e s s a r y I n f o r m a t i o n and a s s i s t a n c e .

S u b s e q u e n t l y we a r e w a r n e d , s o m e t i m e s w i t h o n l y 18 h o u r s n o t i c e , t h a t a n
o i f i c e r i s l i k e l y t o be c a l l e d on a p a r t i c u l a r d a y .       Obviously the o f f i c e r w ill
be n o t i f i e d o f t h i s f a c t a s s o o n a s p o s s i b l e a n d , a t t h i s t i m e , a r r a n g e m e n t s
w i l l b e ma d e f o r t r a n s p o r t t o a n d f r o m t h e I n q u i r y b y s t a f f c a r .

I hope t h a t t h e s e a r r a n g e m e n t s a r e c l e a r , b u t i f any o f f i c e r has a q u e r y o r
p e r c e i v e d d i f f i c u l t y t h e n h e o r s h e i s i n v i t e d t o c o n t a c t t h e L i a i s o n Te a m a t
Force H e a d q u a r t e r s , e x t e n s i o n 3457.




The e v i d e n c e t h u s f a r p r e s e n t e d t o t h e I n q u i r y h a s b e e n e x t e n s i v e i n b o t h
q u a n t i t y and s c o p e .        Each day t h e I n q u i r y g e n e r a t e s a t r a n s c r i p t of e v i d e n c e
w h i c h r u n s , o n a v e r a g e , t o 130 p a g e s .        C o n f r o n te d by t h i s volume o f m a t e r i a l
the media have c l e a r l y been overw helm ed.                        They a r e u n a b l e t o r e p o r t e v e r y t h i n g
and, s a d l y , have o f t e n o p te d f o r t h e s im p le and s e n s a t i o n a l .              For example,
" L i v e r p o o l g o a l k e e p e r s a v e d my l i f e " h a s b e e n t h e s o r t o f h e a d l i n e p r e f e r r e d b y
c e r t a i n n ew s e d i t o r s t o t h e 101 o t h e r h e a d l i n e s t h a t may h a v e b e e n r u n a s a
r e s u l t of a p a r t i c u l a r days e v id e n c e .

W h ilst i t i s a f a c t t h a t t h e I n q u i r y i s not b e i n g c o n d u c te d by t h e media and
t h u s any h e a d l i n e s s h o u l d be t r e a t e d a c c o r d i n g l y , i t i s p r o p e r t o h i g h l i g h t
j u s t one n e w s p a p e r i t e m t h a t a c c u r a t e l y r e c o r d s a p a r t o f t h e e v i d e n c e f r o m day




                                                                                                       t
                                                              -   2   -




12 o f Che I n q u i r y .        T h i s i t e m , c a k e n f r o m Che " S h e f f i e l d S c a r " d a t e d 1 J u n e
1989 , i s a t t a c h e d f o r Che i n f o r m a c i o n o f a l l o f f i c e r s : c h e s e n t i m e n t s e x p r e s s e d
i n t h i s p a r t i c u l a r a r t i c l e h a v e b e e n e c h o e d b y o t h e r s e n i o r o f f i c e r s who h a v e
given evidence to th e In q u iry .                   The s e n t i m e n t s a r e p r e c i s e l y t h o s e w i t h w h i c h I
would w i s h t o be a s s o c i a t e d .




                o

A ll Chief S uperintendents
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t P a r k e r , Communications & Computers
PC M i c d u p , P o l i c e F e d e r a t i o n
H r S t o t h a r d , S p e c i a l C o n s t a b u l a r y C o mma n d a n t
Mr R i c h a r d s o n , P r i n c i p a l P e r s o n n e l O f f i c e r

(Please      en su re wide c i r c u l a t i o n     fo r th e in fo rm a tio n of a l l          officers)
                     mmm


                            a



             S upt R o g er G reen -
             wood, the pclicc chief .
             who fcejBr. the rsicue
             bid c u rin g th e H ills-
           ! borough S u d iu m d:ss_s-
           ■ :e r, th is z h z rr.c o r.
             rssjicr.c-.eiv ce fe r.c sc
             iis o ffic e rs s : : i n s :
             :n u c s m .             —
               Mr Grreswccd tele “he
          {pubiic ir.cuiry ir.:a the
            tragedy that his officers
          I had beer, “heroic-.   __
               He said that shcr.ly after
          I kick ctThe realised there
            was a p ro b lem at the
          I Leppi.-.n Lar.e end.
               Mr G reer.w ccc. who             i
          Iw a s t h e " g r o u n d           j
          jc o m .T .a n d e r!’ f o r the-    ■'
          I natch, said he Icoked over         >
          I the perimeter fence a.-.c
          I realised the first three or
          [four rows o f fans were             '
          I being scuashed aeainst the         :
          [feace. _                            <
                • Frustration                  /
               “In my view alir.cst two-       1
          I thirds of that crowd were          ;
          [ w a t c h i n g th e m a t c h .   •
          I unaware of what was going          ’
          • on at the front.”                  i
               He had sto p p ed the j
          I natch by running on to the ,
          I pitch to contact the referee. .
          | Ambulances were called . .. ^
             He d e s c r i b e d t he
            frustration" of poiice who
          co uld n o t rescue fans
          quickly because the gate in
          the perimeter fer.ee was so
          narrow, and " ja m m e d " '
          with the injured.
             Mr Greenwood made
          clear his resentm ent o f 1
          criticism that some officers ■
          had stood around doing 1
          nothing.
                  Admiration
               "I have turned it over in
            my mind a thousand times
            since, what could we have
           done? What more could we I
           have done?                     j
              " I t 's difficult to taltc j
           about it in this room here,
           extremely difficult.’*
              “The police officers that j
           worked by the fence —; I j
           have the greatest respect j
           and admiration for them. •
             £ T h e heroics that they
           pejiormed —_I have been i
                                           J
           told by people who were 1
          unconnected with either
           N o ttin g h am F o rest o r
           Li ve r pool t ha t t hey
          deserved a rr.edoL" v:—
              M r G reen w o o d said ;
■■   Tr   some officiers had only',
          three oVfour w edu »gv>cc^-f;
  J V E R V Y N JONES M S c
  A S S I S T A N T CHIEF C O N S T A B L E                                                f u r n iv a l h o u s e
                                                                                           Furnival Gate
   HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y T E A M
                                                                                           Sh effield S i 4 Q N
                                                                                           Teleph one: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
  WEST M ID L A N D S POLICE H Q
  PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                                           s ." ; r ; - iD G iV N l a n e p o l i c e s t M I I U N
 Colmore Circus Q ue ensw ay                                                               Liverpo ol L7 3PR
 3;rm in gha m B4 6NQ                                                                      Telephone: 0 5 1 - 7 0 9 71 75
  r fi!lephone: 021 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn , 2 0 2 5
                                                                                          Your Ref:
 NECHELLS GREEN POLICE S T A T IO N
 Fowler Street
 Birmingh am B7 5DA                                                                       Our Ref:                        - /■
 T e>epbone: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                                          Date:                                       I*u
                                                                                                                         u une


               5 Wri ght Esq C3 E
              Chief Con s t a b l e
              ■South Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e
              Sni gg H i l l
              Sheffi e i d
              33 SLY




                                             'V'v
                                                     ~ l r

             -C P W a P Q 0 C i   iird p r               -




            se-ior                                                                                         y°“ ° r        J o u r
                                                                                                                          '




                                                                                     f     a P“ L n So r t ^ i a / K
            --■^at wOijnsel f o r t h e So u t h Y o r k s h i r e nol i                 ’ 11 may be> o f c o u r s e ,
           f r Andrew Co i l i n s QC Mna*- ^he i r M ^ /              t                  8 a l r e a d y agreed with
           lr- :ne ^-e a "ing.                However,       f am n o ^ a t   t h i ^ M 10"8 °°Uld be referred tc
          i£re e r,e nz . no d o u b t , in due c - v r s e ,-h ' t                             privy to such an
                                w i l l h e r ^ e ' , i e ^ C^ U^ e : ^ h^ „ T^ a s u p S o l i c i t o r s r e p l y t o my
          - nave a l w a y s i n t e n d e d t o m a i n t a i n ’“‘■hP f a " “lme 1 Wlsh t o a s s u r e you t h a t
          a gr e e r r : e nt .                          - ai . nt a . 1,1 une i n t e g r i t y o f o u r e a r l i e r



          e i t:           C..V ,      V




            tv                                        'i c v v    j




PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
J M ERVYN JONES M Sc                                                 F U R N IV A L H OUSE
A S S I S T A N T CHIE F C O N S T A B L E                           Furnival Gate
  H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                         She ffield S I 4Q N
                                                                     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
W E S T M I D L A N D S POLICE H Q
                                                                     S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE S T A T IO N
PO Box 52. Lloyd House
                                                                     Liverpo ol L7 3PR
C o lm ore Circus Q u e e n s w a y
                                                                     Teleph one: 0 5 1 - 7 0 9 7 1 7 5
B ir m ingh am B4 6N Q
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn, 2 0 2 5
                                                                     You r Ref:
N EC HE LLS GREEN POLICE S T A T IO N
F o w le r Stree t                                                   O ur Ref:                oi'id/     v«y„
B ir m in g h a m B7 5 D A
Teleph one: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                    Date1
                                                                         .                    7 Jun e           1939




              j srunime:: r.sq
              Tr easury S o li ci tor
                /0 iown Hall
              Slit'Tcy       CtrtrGL
             Shef field
             31 2HH




             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

             Ycu will recall ir. tne early stages, because of the slowness of the
             Supply of writt en reco llect ions from Sou th Yor kshire Police Officers, it
             was agreed tnat we would take from them their initial submissi ons wh ich
             would be later super se ded by their signed final versions, after they had
             been checked by their app rop riat e legal advice.      I personally made an
             u nd er taki ng witn the Chief Co nst able of So uth York shire Police that only
             the 1 inai versions would be the ones used in the Public Inquiry and this
             was after dis cussion with you.

             I arr, conce rned tnat yeste rday an offic er was referred to his initial
             su bmi ssi on which contained opinion that had su b se que ntly been removed
             f rom .n' final account.     Given the un de rt a ki n g I made to South Yo rk shir e
             Police      would nope that this would not happen in the future because it
             was only on that und er s ta nd i ng that we received     their information as
             early as we did.

             _ have f o r m a n s e d this m wr iti ng becaus e this ef fects our personal
             integrity in the matter.        I have copied this letter to the Chief
             Con st abl e of South Yorks hire Police for his information.




                                      X)
                     /I

                                 " V




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                     S h e ffie ld
J M ERVYN JONES MSc                                                                        F U R N IV A L H OUSE
A S S I S T A N T CHIEF C O N S T A B L E                                                  Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                                                She ffi eld S I 4Q N
                                                                                           Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
W E ST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ
                                                                                          S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE S T A T IO N
PO Box 52. Lloyd House
                                                                                          Liverpo ol L7 3PR
Co lm ore Circus Q u e e n s w a y
                                                                                          T ele ph one : 0 5 1 - 7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birm ingh am B4 6N Q
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , ex tn . 2 0 2 5
                                                                                          Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE S T A T iO N
F owle r Street                                                                           Our Ref:
Birm ingham B7 5D A                                                                                                  JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                                          Date:
                                                                                                                     8    June 1989



                 Wright Esq CEE

              joutn Yorkshire Police

             Sheffield




                                                                                                                                      /-‘■S /




            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

             ‘ j p' ~          a          '-j ‘ a. ±t..^er now r e c e . i v e a r rom i r e a s u r y Solicitors whi ch
             r       •ns             |JU^ - - ' a r i i e r a g r e e m e n t had been compr omi s e d.

             : . , ^ Sr 'a J CJ a c c e p t t n e e x p l a n a t i o n and t h e a s s u r a n c e i n t h e p e n u l t i m a t e



                     L-




          I V '




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                                      Sheffield
                                                             TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                                  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                                  TOWN HALL
                                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                  SI 2HH

                                                  Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                                  FAX       0742-736900

                                                  7th June, 1989


J . Mervyn Jones, Esq., MSc.,
Assistant Chief Constable,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN.



    /        I      t
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

    Thank you for your letter of today's date, which we have already discussed.

    The irain difference between the initial and final versions of the South
Yorkshire Police Officers' statements is that any expressions of opinion were
(as I understand it, on the advice of Mr. Woodward) removed from the final
version. As I understand it, Andrew Collins' view is that there is absolutely
no reason for excluding such expressions of opinion when they touch on matters
relevant to the Public Inquiry and that, in the circumstances, there is no
objection in principle to written statements containing such opinions being
submitted to the Inquiry.

        Clearly in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be
appropriate to use the original statement for the purposes of the Inquiry when
this has been superseded by a subsequent statement. However, what I understand
may have happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is
that the original unamended statement was circulated because of the need to
circulate statements to all parties as naich in advance of the calling of the
relevant witnesses as possible and because at the time of circulation of the
relevant batch of witness statements the revised, final version of the
statement in question had not yet been received.     I understand that in total
there are three cases where this has been necessary: P.C.s Best, Huckstepp and
Illingworth. However, in such cases only the final, revised version of the
s t a t e m e n t was given to the press.

        I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

     I have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
 Police, but am naturally happy for you to do so.



                                   ""o       a—


                                         A    w

                                D. Brummell
HAMMOND
 /
        SUDDARDS
          _____------
                        S O L I C I T O R S

ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY          JOHN H. G. HELLER                G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:            EMPIRE H OUSE
D. TREVOR LEWIS             IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH             STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS cse   10 PICCADILLY
MICHAEL E. GREGSON          PETER C. METCALF                MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP        BRADFORD BD1 3LR
JOHN D. DE MAIN            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES             PAUL R. MANSER         IAN W. WHITSON
MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD        ANDREW R. JORDAN                 JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                             TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
PETER N. WILBRAHAM          SIMON R. B. STELL               STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                           TELEX 517201
J. RICHARD ARCHER           SIMON R. INMAN                  RONALD S. DRAKE
BARBARA W. FRANCE           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                                                          M .D.X. NO. 11720
                                                            RICHARD BURNS
C.   NOEL HUTTON           JOHN G. BECKETT                  DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                           FAX (0274) 737547



OUR REF.           PCM/PAB                      YOUR REF.      DD/AT                        DATE      loth May, 1989




     ear Sir

Hillsborough

We have commenced checking the self-taken-statements and will be
faxing comments as checking proceeds.

We have the following comments to date.  Where the name of an
Officer is mentioned without further comment, this indicates that
we have checked the statement and would not object to its release
as drafted'i  -


1.           Serial No. 13

1.1          Inspector Bullas

We would suggest alteration of comments in page 3 to amend
descriptive language to a more factual basis, i.e. reference to
large number of people, rather than river of people, etc.

1.2          Sergeant Burman

We think that this statement should be re-drafted on a factual
basis, removing the entirety of the comment on the final pages of
the statement.



                                                                                                               /... contd




              UR       G E N      T

D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent (Management
Services)
FAX 0742 523409                                  v

LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                    JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
HAMMOND SUDDARDS                                             PAGE NO.




1.3      P.C. Shimwell

1.4      P.C. Coupland

1.5      P.C. Naylor

1.6      P.C. Scholey

1.7      P.C: Frost

This statement refers, at the end, to a map.  This reference should
be removed, unless a map is going to be provided with the statements
to West Midlands.

        P.C. Fairclough

1.9     P.C. Shearwood

1.10    P.C: Mercer

See comments above as regards reference to plan.   Observation at
bottom page 3/top page 4 is surely incorrect, in that double row
fence separates-pens 4 and 5, rather than 3 and 4.   Suggest removing
reference at page 6 to report of Superintendent Gough.   Suggest
remove reference to question 4 at page 7.

1.11    P.C. Savory

All comments applicable to P.C. Mercer apply also here.  Suggest
also removing reference in both statements to time deviations, so
that statement merely indicates that times given are approximate.
Finally, suggest reconsideration of reference to lack of leadership
at page 7.

1.12    P.C. Parkin

Statement gives the impression that the injured whom he encountered
on the concourse areas were injured outside the ground.  If he is
sure of this, then it should stay in, but we should like him to
reconsider the content of the statement.

1.13   . P:C. Newbould


2.     Serial No: 14

2.1    Inspector White

Suggest removal of additional points arising.



                                                         /... contd.
                                        #




        Hammond Sudd►ARDS
                     ,                                             PAGE NO.   3




        2.2     P.S.     Crawford

        Suggest review of comments made on page 3 about manpower and about        I
        former use of serials on centre tunnel.                                   /

        2.3     P :C .   Lang

        Suggest remove final comment.

        2.4     P.C.     Grant

        Suggest remove final comment about radio.

'   0     5     P.C.     McManus
        As for P.C.      Grant.

        2.6     P.C.     Smallman

        Reference to comment on page 3 about abusive fan.  This Officer may
        wish to make clear that the abusive fan was dragged away by his
        fellows, rather than by Officers.  Perhaps also reconsider use of
        word "bollocked" in statement for disclosure.

        2.7     P.C:     Branston

        2.8     P.C.     Butler

        2.9     P.C:     Thomas

        Page 5 has reference to plan, as to which see above. Page 6 has
        reference to gate C, which we believe must mean gate 3. Page 7,
        third paragraph, does not entirely make sense and should be reviewed.

        2 *10   P-C:     Wild

        2.11    P.C:     Burton



        Comments on further serials will follow in due course.


        Your




                                                                                      J
         H am mond Suddards
                 r>:                                     —     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



                                 SOLI CI TORS
         ALAN I. B0TT0MLEY           JOHN H. G. HELLER                  G. N. IAN GREENFIELD                                                          CONSULTANTS:              EMPIRE H OUSE
         D.   TREVOR LEWIS           IAN R. SHUTTLEW0RTH                STEPHEN GALE                                                                  ROGER W. SUDDARDS c b e   10 PICCADILLY
         MICHAEL E. GREGS0N          PETER C. METCALF                   MARK W. HILTON                                                                SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
         JOHN D. DE MAIN             CHRISTOPHER W. JONES               pau l r. m anser                                                              IAN W. WHITSON
         MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD         ANDREW R. JORDAN                  JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                                                                                       TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
         PETER N. WILBRAHAM          SIMON R. B. STELL                 STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                                                                                                TELEX 517201
         J. RICHARD ARCHER           SIMON R. INMAN                    RONALD S. DRAKE
         BARBARA W. FRANCE           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH             RICHARD BURNS                                                                                            M.D.X. NO. 11720
         C.   NOEL HUTTON            JOHN G. BECKETT                   DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                                                                                     FAX (0274) 737547


         OUR REE           PCM/PAB                       YOUR REE                     DD/AT                                                                    d a te     10th May, 1989

                                                                                                                                                                                    THIRD FAX

f   0         ar Sir,

         Hillsborough

         We have further comments on statements, asxbelow:


         5.            Serial No: 18

         5.1             Inspector Sykes

        We wonder if there is a word missing from paragraph 5 on page 9.
         5.2           P .S : Morgan

        We should like him to review the comment on page 10, first
        paragraph, relating to the apparent lack of organised Police effort.
         5.3           P.C:      Bradshaw
C         .        . ---------------
        5.4            P:C:      Jenkinson

        5.5            P.C:      Crookes

        5.6            P.C: McIntosh

         Suggest omission of last paragraph and review of spelling.  We make
        ,this point, not because we regard spelling as critical, or even
         important in the statement provided for our benefit, but suggest
         that the-wrong impression should not be given in a statement which
         is to be put before the inquiry.


                                                                                                                                                                                  /... contd.
                    UR       G E N      T

        D. Denton Esq.,
        Chief Superintendent
        (Management Services)

        FAX 0742            523409                       v
    *                                                                                      •
        LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4 /5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199                                                                    ^
        ____________________ JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
    H ammond Suddards                                          PAGE NO.




     5.7      P.C. Horsefield

     5.8      P.C. Francis

     5.9      P.C; Marsh

     5.10     P.C; Scholey

    5.11      P.C. Alexander

    5.12      P.C; Blount


              Serial No. 19
0
    6 .1      P. C. Thorpe

    6 .2      P. S. Proctor

    6.3       P. C. Booth

    6.4       P. C; Singh

    6.5       P. e. Pratt
    VO
         VO




              P. C. Roberts
         •




    6.7       P. C; English
    VO
         00




              P. C. Robinson
          •




    6.9       P. C. Lockley

    6 .1 0    P. C. Burnlees

    6 .1 1    P. C. Glaves

    He refers to plans and diagrams at various points in the statement
    and these references should be removed.


    Yours faithf
      H am m ond Suddards
                                SOLI CI TORS
      ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY             JOHN H. G. HELLER              G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:              EMPIRE H O U SE
      D.    TREVOR LEWIS            IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH            STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS   cbe   10 PICCADILLY
      MICHAEL E. GREGSON            PETER C. METCALF               MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
     JOHN D. DE MAIN                CHRISTOPHER W. JONES           PAUL R. MANSER         IAN W. WHITSON
      MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD           ANDREW R. JORDAN               JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                               TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
     PETER N. WILBRAHAM             SIMON R. B. STELL              STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                                    TELEX 517201
     J. RICHARD ARCHER              SIMON R. INMAN                 RONALD S. DRAKE
     BARBARA W. FRANCE              RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH          RICHARD BURNS                                    M.D.X. NO. 11720
     C.    NOEL HUTTON              JOHN G. BECKETT                DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                                    FAX (0274) 737547


     OUR REF.         PCM/PAB                           YOUR REF       DD/AT                       date      10th May, 1989


                                                                                                                           SECOND PAX

0          ear Sir,

     Hillsborough

     May we firstly refer to the telephone conversation between Chief
     Superintendent Wain and our Miss Norcliffe and,, subsequently
     between our Mr. Metcalf and A.C.C. Anderson.      You requested that we
     urgently check the statement of Chief Superintendent Nesbitt with
     a v i e w t o commenting on any points which ought to be reconsidered
     or revise4L.pr.ior to that statement being submitted to the West
     Midlands inquiry.

     We have checked the statement and confirm our comment to A C C
     Anderson that we would not suggest any alterations prior to*the
     statement being handed over.

    We now return to comments on statements of other Officers and as
    -1-1} °ur Previous ^a x ' where the name of an Officer is mentioned
    without comment, this indicates that we have checked the statement
    and would not object to its release as drafted:


     3.           Serial No; 15

    3.1           P.C; Richardson

    3.2           P;C. Burns

    There are references to a plan, which should be removed, unless a
    plan is to be submitted.


                                                                                                                      /... contd,

                 U R G E N T

    D. Denton Esq.,
    Chief Superintendent
    (Management Services)

    FAX 0742           523409
    LEEDS OFFICES:         BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4 /5 0 X F 0 R 0 PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                           JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX w r a        FAX 426868
Hammond Suddards
         /                        rAQaENO.
                                                               PArcMn



3.3          P.C. Pearson

3.4          P.C. Martin

3.5          P.C. Rich

We think that the reference to "difficulties" on page 1 should be
replaced with a reference to "size of the crowd".  The reference at
the bottom of page 2 and top of page 3 to turnstile alterations:   we       i
had thought these alterations had been made long before turnstiles
were opened.  Perhaps the Officer can check this point.  On page 5,         1
we would suggest reconsideration of the reference "we had lost              \
  ntrol".  Perhaps "ticket control had got out of hand"?                     1


«    6       P.C. Booth

We should like him to review the comment on the last line of page 2.        I
                                                                            \
3.7          P.C: Ford

3.8          P.C. Llewelyn

3.9          P .C.-Burke

3.10         P.C. Atkin


4.           Serial No. 17

4.1          P;C;   Auckland

Our copy has numerous green markings.    Are these deletions or
emphasis?

4.2          P.C. Wadsworth

We think that the end of paragraph 1 of page 7 has become scrambled.
Could this be reviewed?

4.3          P;C.   Pulfrey

Paragraph beginning "Gate A ..." on page 2 is somewhat incoherent.
Could this be reviewed?

4.4          P.C.   Elsam

4.5          P .C . Whitton

We think that the quote from Macbeth on page 4, although in many
ways apposite, could be misunderstood and would suggest substitution
of more prosaic comment, e.g. "I took the view that I would be of-
more assistance by remaining in the enclosure than making my way
back to the gate."     '



                                                           /      r-on^r!
                                                                            7
         Hammond Suddards                                                                              pageno




         4.6        P.C. Wilson

         C o u l d he r e c o n s i d e r the final p a r a g r a p h ,   w i t h a v i e w to removal.

         4 .7       P.C. Kirby

         C o u l d he c o n s i d e r removal of final p a r a g r a p h a f t e r first sentence.

         4.8        P.C. Moore

         W e s u g g e s t remo v a l of the o b s e r v a t i o n s   section.

(    ^      9       P.C; Thompson

         4.10       P;S; Whitlam

         4.11       P .I . Purdy

         Reference to "animals" on page 2 appears out of context.    Suggest
         either expansion or (preferably) delete to leave, e.g. "they were
         nice but others were not” . On page 2, the paragraph beginning "They
         arrived ... " does not appear to be coherent.    Are references on
         page 3 to JJthe -tunnel" in fact references to "the funnel", meaning
         the area between the outer stadium gates and the turnstiles?
         Overall, a l t h o u g h this is a m o s t h e l p f u l s t a t e m e n t from our p o i n t of
         view, g r a p h i c a l l y p o r t r a y i n g the p r o b l e m s a n d diffi c u l t i e s , we t h i n k
         that I n s p e c t o r Purdy should r e v i e w t h e w h o l e s t a t e m e n t p rior to its
         release, to tr y and reduce the g r a p h i c c o n t e n t and render it rather
         m o r e p r o s a i c an d factual.           W e wil l a t t e m p t to re-draft, w o r k i n g from
         the original, if Inspector P u r d y w o u l d like us to do this.

{
X,       Comments      on further serials w i l l            f o l l o w in due course.


         Yours    fait
»•


                                                                       1 2 t h May,     1989




     N O T E S O N F U R T H E R S T A T E M E N T S R E Q U E S T E D BY W E S T M I D L A N D S




      7.       I n spectors

     V .1       Ins p e c t o r B r o o m h e a d

     S u g g e s t he ma y w i s h to r e v i e w th e final paragraph.

     7.2        I n spector M i l l e t t

     Page 3 c o u l d give the i m p r e s s i o n t hat I n s p e c t o r
     M i l l e t t was in some w a y at f a u l t in b e c o m i n g d e t a c h e d
     from his serials.            W e s u g g e s t e i t h e r o m i s s i o n or some
     e x p l a n a t i o n of how this ha p p e n e d .

     7.3       C h i e f I n s pector P u r d y

     C o m m e n t at page 3 as r e g a r d s l a c k of d i s c e r n i b l e
     c o m m e n t from match control:          is he saying t h a t there
     we r e no m e s s a g e s at all, or t h a t t h e r e w e r e messages,
     but t h e y w e r e too d i s t o r t e d to hear?

     7.4       Ins p e c t o r W a r d l e

     7.5       Ins p e c t o r W a l k e r

     He m a y w i s h to r e v i e w his c o m m e n t on page 4 r e f erring
     to the s i t uation b e i n g one of chaos.           The i m pression
     c o u l d be given that it was t h e P o l i c e that w e r e in
     chaos, rather than t h e g e n e r a l situation.

     7.6       Inspector Robinson

     7.7      D ;I ; M e e k

     This is a graphic and p e r s o n a l account, e n t i r e l y
     s u i t a b l e for the p u r p o s e s of C o u n s e l to the South
     Y o r k s h i r e Police.   T h e O f f i c e r m a y w i s h to r e v i e w it,
     in g e n e r a l terms, p r i o r to s u b m i s s i o n to the W est
     M i d l a n d s inquiry, but w e w o u l d not suggest an y
     s p e c i f i c changes.

     7.8       Inspector Ellis

     7.9       Ins p e c t o r T o w n e n d

     The O f f i c e r m a y w i s h to r e v i e w the a d d e n d u m at pages
     6/7.

     7.1 0     I n spector D e l a n e y




                                                                            /...     contd.
f
                                                        - 2 -



               8.       S e r i a l No;      16

               8.1      P;S:    P ayne

               T here ar e r e f e r e n c e s to plans.

               8.2      P.C;    Ho o s o n

               He m a y w i s h to r e v i e w c o m m e n t s on page 9 a b o u t
               o r g a nisation.

               8.3      P.C:    Pa c k e r

               8.4      P;C; M a c k e n z i e

               R e f e r e n c e to "panic" on page            6 c o u l d be r e a d as Police
               panic, u n l e s s clarified.

               8.   5   P;C;    B est
    (~ - - 9
               He m a y w i s h to r e v i e w c o m m e n t s at the b o t t o m of page
               4 r e l a t i n g to O f f i c e r s s t a n d i n g a bout an d lack of
               direction.

               8.6      P ;C ; H u c k s t e p p

               8.7      P:C; W r i g h t

               He m a y w i s h to r e v i e w c o m m e n t at the end as to d elay
               of match.

               8.8      P.C.    Hickstep

               Suggest removal of last p a r a g r a p h of comment.

               8.9      P.C.    Taylor
     v
               Suggest removal of                 summary.

               8.10     P.C;    Duffy

               8.11     D.C;    Evans

               8.12     D.C;    Cerrone

               Suggest re m o v e last             sentence.
    H am m ond S uddards
                                                                                                      X




              a
                             SOLI CI TORS
    ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY           IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH            MARK W. HILTON                CONSULTANTS:
    D.   TREVOR LEWIS                                                                                                        EMPIRE H OUSE
                                PETER C. METCALF               PAUL R. MANSER                ROGER W. SUDDARDS         cbe
                                                                                                                             10 PICCADILLY
   MICHAEL E. GREGSON          CHRISTOPHER W. JONES            JONATHAN H. WRIGHT            SIR DESMOND HEAP
   JOHN D. DE MAIN                                                                                                           BRADFORb BD1 3LR
                               ANDREW R. JORDAN                STUART A. VERITY              IAN W. WHITSON
   MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD         SIMON R. B. STELL               RONALD S. DRAKE                                               TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
   PETER N. WILBRAHAM          SIMON R. INMAN                  RICHARD BURNS
   J. RICHARD ARCHER           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                                                                         TELEX 517201
                                                               DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
   BARBARA W. FRANCE           JOHN G. BECKETT                J. PATRICK MITCHELL                                            M.D.X. NO. 11720
   C.    NOEL HUTTON           G. N. IAN GREENFIELD           CHRISTOPHER MARKS
   JOHN H. G. HELLER                                                                                                         RAX (0274) 737547
                               STEPHEN GALE                   MICHAEL S. HENLEY

  OUR RER            PCM/PAB                     YOUR RER
                                                                                                           DATE
                                                                                                                       15th May,        1989


                                                                                                                       FOURTH FAX
   Dear Mr.             Denton,

         11s b o r o u g h


   thehwIIttM ^ L ° i a r i ^ ^ ^ her C° " entS °n statements requested by


  statement 'ha^beer^read'^and ?ha?                                                         lndlcat« that the
  or alteration:                                                             6 haVS n° su99estions for review


  9.          Serial No; 21

 .9.1         P.S. Eddison

  Good statement, but he m a y w i s h to r e c o n s i d e r qnraP       fu
  on pages 3/4, as to his views p r i o r t o “ a l i l i n a           =         comment
  the situation.                                  r e a l i s i n g the s e r i o u s n e s s of
                         Smith (Martyn)
  9.2         P.C.                             *
  9.3         P.C: Frost


 h o t ^ c e ^ r i i n J i S b l f                                                                                      d Su« e s t is
 factual s t a t e m e n t to the Wes t M i d l a n d s                                 inquiry.                s u b m i s s l o n as a




                                                                                                                              /. . . c o n t d ,



D. D e n t o n E s q . ,
M a n a g e m e n t Services

FAX 0742          523409


LEEDS OFFICES:

                                                                                                                                                       n
                              THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE C O N O U C T O F INVESTMENT BUSINESS
                   UDDARDS                                                                 PAGE NO.        2




 9.4      P.C.    Crookes

 This s t a t e m e n t ends a b r u p t l y at p a g e   9 a n d we w o n d e r   if t here are
 any pages missing.

 9.5     P.C;     Trewick

 9.6     P.C.    Wilks

 9. 7    P.C.    West

We w o n d e r if this is complete, as the s e c o n d pag e does                   not a p p e a r to
follow d i r e c t l y from the first.

^^8      P.C.    Justice

9.9      P.C;    Griffiths

9.10     P;I;    Beresford

Insofar as the references to c o m m u n i c a t i o n s d i f f i c u l t i e s r e p r e s e n t
comment, rather than part of the n a rrative, t hese c o u l d p e r h a p s be
reviewed.


iO.      S e r i a l No.   1

10.1     P ;S . C h a p m a n

1 0 *2   P-C.    Walpole

Comment on p age 3 about lack of r a d i o m e s s a g e re e n t r a n c e to c e n t r a l
pen and further comment about the c i r c u m s t a n c e s p r e v a i l i n g w h e n
request to d e l a y start was m a d e c o u l d p e r h a p s be reviewed.             On pag e
4, we t h i n k that the ref e r e n c e s h o u l d be to S u p e r i n t e n d e n t G r e e n w o o d
rather tha n Chief Su p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k enfield.  W e w o u l d sugg e s t that
the sta t e m e n t c o u l d conclude at the end of the first p a r a g r a p h on
page 5, i.e. en d i n g w ith the w o r d s "... f rom other divisions".

10.3     P.C;    Burkinshaw

Cen t r e p a r a g r a p h on page 4. We t h i n k that the s e n t e n c e b e g i n n i n g
"Numerous O f f icers ..." to the e n d of this p a r a g r a p h are comment.

10.4     P;C;    Illingworth

The last s e n t e n c e w ould appear to be comment.

10.5     P.C.    Smith

10.6     P;C;    Groome

The r e f e r e n c e on page 4 to control           r oom   "paralysis"       is comment.


                                                                                      /. . . con,td.
                 UDDARDS                                    PAGE NO.   3




Likewise, the references to supervisory Officers on pages 4 and 5.
The numbered paragraphs of-comment, beginning on page 5, are helpful
from our point of view, but not appropriate for inclusion in a
statement of fact.

10.7      P.C. Helliwell

10.8      P;C; Cuckson

10.9      P;C; Holmes

We consider that the words from "In conclusion ..." at page 4
onwards to the end are comment.

0.10      P ;C ;• Brookes

The comment at 2.50 p.m. on page 1 could give the impression that it
was the view of Superintendent Marshall that the centre pens were
too full whereas, presumably, it is in fact this Officer's own view.
We would suggest that the statement should end at the point where
the Officer goes off duty and, hence, should not exhibit the notes.

10.11 P.C. Lamb

There is a reference to a map on page 1. We suggest that the
statement should terminate when the Officer goes off duty (page 6 ).

10.12 --------------
      P.C; Collins

10.13 P.C.- Finnegan

10.14 P;C; Richardson

10.15 P;C. Richardson-(2)

10.16 P.C; Farthing

1 0 *17        Croot

We think that this statement should end when the Officer goes off
duty (page 1 0 ).



Yours sincerely,


ft. CL /SuXs
Peter C. Metcalf
   H am m ond Sudd ards
                          SOLI CI TORS
  ALAN I. BOTTOM LEV         JOHN H .G . HELLER          G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:              EMPIRE HOUSE
  D.   TREVOR LEWIS          IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH         STEPHEN GALE
                                                                                ROGER W. SUDDARDS c b e   10 PICCADILLY
  MICHAEL E. GREGSON         PETER C. METCALF            MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
  JOHN D. DE MAIN            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES        PAUL R. MANSER         IAN W. WHITSON
  MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD        ANDREW R. JORDAN            JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                               TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
  PETER N. WILBRAHAM         SIMON R. B. STELL           STUART A. VERITY
  J. RICHARD ARCHER          SIMON R. INMAN                                                               TELEX 517201
                                                         RONALD S. DRAKE
  BARBARA W. FRANCE          RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                                                        M.D.X. NO. 11720
                                                         RICHARD BURNS
  C. NOEL HUTTON             JOHN G. BECKETT             DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                          FAX (0274) 737547


  OURRER         PCM/PAB                       YOURRER        ADM/DD/JEL                 date       16th May, 1989



^Jlear Don,

  Hillsborough

  Here are further comments on statements requested by West Midlands.

  11.            Chief Superintendent Mole
  12 .           Mounted Officers

  12.1           P.C. Gillett

  12.2           P:C: Wilson

 C o r n e r s are made about the lack of foot Officers on page 4 and pace
 8 , which the Officer might like to review.
 12.3            P.~C.~ Swain

 12.4            P.C; Henwood

 numberinghlS Sh°uld go into a brief statement form, without

 12.5            P.C. Scott

 •12.6           P:C. Wheatcroft

 12.7            P.C; Herman


                                                                                                            /... contd.

 D. Denton Esq.,
 Chief Superintendent
 (Management Services)

FAX 0742 523409


LEEDS OFFICES:      BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PWCE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (€632) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                    JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s                                PAGE NO.   2




 1 2 .8    P.C: Kaye

 1 2 .9    P.C. Blades

 12 .10    P.C. Woodward

 Again, there is comment on the lack of foot Officers on page 4. The
 final sentence of this statement, although probably true, cannot be
 within this Officer's knowledge.

 12 .11    P.S: Thomas

piuggest removal of final section headed "Police Deployment".

 12-12     P.S. Sorsby

 12 .13    P: S. Sorsby (2)

 12 .14    P.S; Sorsby (3)

 1 2 *15   P:C: ^ nd say
 Suggest review-of comments on page   2,   re manpower.



 Yours sincerely,




 Peter C; Metcalf
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:   16th. May, 1989


RE:     HILLSBOROUGH




Attending Don Denton on telephone.

I told him that I had been through the statements
Mr. Marsh and Mr. Brougham, both of which were in
order.




                       P. C. Metcalf
  H am m ond Sudd ards
                         S OLI CI TORS
 AUVN I. BOTTOM LEY         JOHN H. G, HELLER             G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:            EMPIRE H O U S E
 0 . TREVOR LEWIS           IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH           STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS cae   10 PICCADILLY
 MICHAEL E. GREGSON         PETER C. METCALF              MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP        BRADFORD B 01 3LR
 JOHN D. DE MAIN            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES          PAUL R. MANSER         IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD        ANDREW R. JORDAN              JONATHAN H, WRIGHT                             TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM         SIMON R. B. STELL             STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                         TELEX 517201
 J. RICHARD ARCHER          SIMON R. INMAN                RONALD S. DRAKE
 BARBARA W. FRANCE          RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH         RICHARD BURNS                                  M.D.X. NO. 11720
 C.   NOEL HUTTON           JOHN G. BECKETT               DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                           FAX (0274) 737547


 OUR £?EF.         PCM/PAB                    yo ur ref     ADM/DD/JEL                    d a te    19th May, 1989



£par Don,

 Hillsborough

Here are further comments on statements requested by West Midlands:


13.           Control Room Communi. cat ions •Officers

In your absence, I spoke to Superintendent Bennett yesterday to make
the point that the three Officers and Mr. Sanderson have slightly
different perspectives as to exactly what happened in relation to
the communications problems.

Factually, the statements all agree that, after Mr. Sanderson's
visit, there was working radio communication, but only on talk-
through via the hand-held radio.   The tenor of Mr. Sanderson's
statement is that this was perfectly satisfactory and did not give
rise to any problems.   However, as I understand it, the fact that
the radio could only be operated on talk-through meant that any
control room transmission would automatically be cut-off by an
incoming transmission from any of the Officers with a hand-held
radio.  As there were likely to be a number of such transmissions,
the result would be a problem in getting out any instructions from
the ground control box.

I have suggested that the three Officers and Mr. Sanderson be seen
again to go through their recollections of this crucial period, with
particular reference to exactly why there had to be a use of (a)
hand-held radio; (b) on talk-through and also whether there was,
thereafter, anything wrong with the transmissions as such.



             4-                                                                              COntd.
D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services)

FAX 0742 523409

                                                                                                                             0
LEEDS OFFICES.      BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
       ___________JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
      H a m m o n d Su d d a rd s
                                                                       page n o .




       I have the following specific comments:


       13.1    P.C; Bichard

       I assume that the abbreviation "PR" means Personal Radio and, if so
       this should be explained.    Likewise, although the abbreviation "XS",
               * ldely understood within the South Yorkshire Police to refer
       t?. I?® Force operation control room, this may not apply to persons
             t tnqUirJ:     appreciate that the abbreviation is defined in
       7 aDnearsTo h             S°' ^ may be thou9ht of as confusing.   Page
       7 appears to have a line missing near the top.    There is also a
r    ^ re£erence to the "Purpose" of fans climbing into the west terrace
             J ft i      SUld bf omitted* Again, the use of the word "angry"
           page 8 could be replaced with something more neutral.
      13.2     P.S. Goddard

      I am not particularly happy about the comment on page 4, about the
      packing of the terraces.   I should like to omit this, unless it has
      already bee n_accepted in the statements of both Mr. Murray and Mr
               copies of which I do not have to hand.    On page 5, I would
      like the final paragraph to be reviewed, not only in relation to the
      general points made above, but in the reference to the radio beinq
      useless and to pop music being received for "a long period" last
      year.  On page 8 , I think that the words "literally fighting" could
      be misunderstood. I think that the briefing note Appended lo this
      statement should be detached and should be produced by Inspector
               aS to ™hlch see later.    Finally, I think that the comment
      about manning the tunnel on page 11 should be expanded, by statinq
      in terms that the purpose of manning the tunnel was to ensure
,    segregation of home and away    supporters and had nothing to do with
v,   safety considerations.

      13.3    P.C. Ryan

      O.K., subject to general comments above.

      13.4    Mr; Sanderson

      O.K., subject to general comments above.


      14      Inspector Darling


      15.     Serial No. 3

      15.1    P.S. Gardner

     The use of the word "fright" on page 2 suggests a concern for his-
     own safety, whereas my understanding is that the concern was for the
     safety of others and, if that is also P.S. Gardner's understanding,


                                                               /. ..    contd.
                                                                                    (8
 H a m m o n d Su d d a rd s



  then the statement should be altered to make the meaning clear,
  perhaps the words "serious concern".

  15.2    P.C; Whiteley

  However much one may agree with the further observation on page 5,
  I think that it should be removed from the statement for submission
  to the inquiry.

  15.3    P.C. Collier

  15.4    P.C. Bennett

0 5 .5    P.C. Mitchell



  16.     Inspector Harvey

  I think that the use of the word "panic" on page 3    should be
  reviewed and also the reference to animals on page    4 (two occasions).
  The observations on page 10 are helpful to Counsel,    but I think
  should go from the statement for submission to the    inquiry.


  17.     Serial No. 5

  17.1    P.S. Hodgett

  I should like him to review the comments on page 7 about panic and
  unprofessionalism.  I suggest removal of the comment after going off
  duty at page 11 .

  17.2    P.C. Smith

  17.3    P.C. Botley

  17.4    P.C. Cartwright

  17.5    P.C. Mutch

  17.6    P;C. Lewis

  17.7    P.C; Wicken

  17.8    P.C. Fairclough

  17.9    P;C; Craigie

  17.10   P.C; Mace

  17.11   P;C; Davis

                               v


                                                             /...   contd.
        H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s
                                                                   PAGE NO.   4




        18.      Inspector Calvert

        * thin^ that this should be worked into one complete statement   in
        chronological order, i.e. dealing first with history and background
        and working up to the match itself.  The document referred to in
        Sergeant Goddard's statement should be identified and exhibited.


        19-      Superintendent Parker

        We have already discussed this statement, which I found at the
        bottom of the existing pile.
f

        Yours sincerely,




    p   Peter C. Metcalf




(




                                       v
    h am m o nd Sudd ards
                          SOLI CI TORS
   ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY         JOHN H. G. HELLER                       G, N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:
    D.   TREVOR LEWIS                                                                                                 EMPIRE H OUSE
                             IAN R. s h u t t l e w o r t h          STEPHEN GALE
   MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                                                       ROGER W. SUDDARDS   cbe   10 PICCADILLY
                             PETER C. METCALF                        MARK W. HILTON
   JOHN D. DE MAIN                                                                          SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
                             CHRISTOPHER W. JONES                    PAUL R. MANSER
   MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD                                                                      IAN W. WHITSON
                             ANDREW R. JORDAN                        JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
   PETER N. WILBRAHAM                                                                                                 TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
                             SIMON R. B. STELL                       STUART A. VERITY
   J. RICHARD ARCHER         SIMON R. INMAN                                                                           TELEX 517201
                                                                     RONALD S. DRAKE
   BARBARA W. FRANCE         RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                   RICHARD BURNS                                    M.D.X. NO. 11720
   C.    NOEL HUTTON         JOHN G. BECKETT                         DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                                      FAX (0274) 737547


   OUR REF        PCM/PAB                           y o u r r ef .      CCO/DD/JEL                  DATE
                                                                                                                23rd May, 1989



^ p e a r Don,

   Hillsborough

   Here are further comments on statements requested by West Midlands:

  20 .           Senior Officers

  20.1           c ;I ; Purdy

  20-2           C;I. Edmundson


  s h o u l d ^ e ^ x p l a i n e d ^ s ^ s u c h .Whlch 1 think means Force Control and

  20- 3           C;I. McRobbie


 n u ^ r 'o f^ a g e r iis 't S g ^ a r io L 'o f ? " " iS 2 ? fSprint for
 I wonder if these are in anv    offlcers follow on from page 17 and
                                                                                                                                         *
 at page 17.                  Way relevant.  If not, this should end

 20.4            C;I; Bettison


 J h ? S r t M r d o e i bJmoun?Ut o t Som^en?!' SSntenCe ° f th e P o s t s c r ip t , as I




                                                                                                                       /... contd.


D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services)
South Yorkshire Police

FAX 0742 523409

                                                                                                                                             X /
LEEDS OFFICES:
                   JO SE FS                          LEEDS LS13AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                  JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
 H a m m o n d Su d d a rd s
          i                                                      PAGE NO.




 20.5         C.I. Price

 2 0 .6       C;I. Waring

His perceptions of the crowd position at page 5   do seem at odds with
most other Officers but, obviously, this should   not be altered if it
is his clear recollection.  I wonder what other   Officers he saw on
his walk down Leppings Lane and perhaps details   could be included.

 20.7          C.I. Sumner

     would suggest substitution of the words "extreme urgency" for
^ ^ a n i c " on page 4. As a personal matter, he may wish to consider
^P,ether he wishes to include the comment made to Mr. Lock on page 6 .
 Other Officers have commented unfavourably on fans who asked whether
 the game was going to re-start.

20.8           C.I; Creaser

I believe that I have already been through a statement with Mr.
Creaser, but I do not know whether this is the original or an
amended version.    At all events, I feel that the comment about the
packing of ..pension page 4 should either be expanded to include
detail of when (in his experience) this had been done, or the entire
section dealing with this should be deleted.    On page 7, there is a
reference to a request to delay the kick-off.    It is indicated that
this request was not acted upon, but can he say, with certainty,
that it was received.    If this is not within his own knowledge, then
I think this comment should be deleted.    Comments on page 8/9 re: Mr.
Greenwood^could either be expanded to indicate the nature of the
difficulties or omitted after the factual comment that P.C. Goodwill
was deployed as Communications Officer to Mr. Greenwood.

2°.9          C ; I ; Beal

This has been used as the basis for much of the background material
on planning for the match.  I do not think that this should be
duplicated in the statement and, accordingly, would suggest the
statement should actually start at page 21 , beginning with the words
"On 29th March . . . "

20.10         C.I. Beal (2)

20.11         P ;I ; Athorn

I think that the comment on page 5 to the effect that messages on
the air did not indicate the nature of the incident should either be
expanded on or deleted.

20.12         P ; I . Bennett

He may wish to reconsider the use of the word "louts" at page 3.
                                v
                                                                            1 1
                                                          /...    contd.
H a m m o n d Su d d a rd s                                 PAGE NO.   3
       i




 Whilst they probably were louts, some of them may claim to have been
 trying to escape serious injury - a claim which will be difficult to
 disprove.



 Yours sincerely,




^ ^ t e r C. Metcalf
   H am m ond Su d d a r d s
                             S OLI CI TORS
   ALAN I. BOTTOMIEY             JOHN H. G. HELLER             G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:
   D.   TREVOR LEWIS                                                                                             EMPIRE H OUSE
                                 IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH           STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS cse      10 PICCADILLY
   MICHAEL E. GREGSON            PETER C. METCALF              MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP           BRADFORD BD1 3LR
  JOHN D. DE MAIN                CHRISTOPHER W. JONES          PAUL R. MANSER         IAN W. WHITSON
   MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD           ANDREW R. JORDAN              JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                               TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
  PETER N. WILBRAHAM             SIMON R. B. STELL             STUART A. VERITY
  J. RICHARD ARCHER              SIMON R. INMAN                                                                 TELEX 517201
                                                               RONALD S. DRAKE
  BARBARA W. FRANCE              RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH         RICHARD BURNS                                    M.D.X. NO. 11720
  C.    NOEL HUTTON              JOHN G. BECKETT               DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                                FAX (0274) 737547


  OUR REF.            PCM/PAB                      YOUR REF.        CCO/DD/JEL                date     23rd May, 198 9



^ P e a r Don,

  Hillsborough

  Here are further comments on statements requested by West Midlands:

  21.            Serial No.              11

  21*1           P-C: Oakes

  Where   on page 5,  he states that he was "alone", I feel that this
 D a a e h ^ qua       by reference to the fact that, on a previous
 page, he does refer to seeing other Officers in the vicini?v
 Perusal of other statements from this serial suaapqf
 the crucial period, two Officers had taken a fan to be e j e c t e ^ i n t o
 Pennistone Road.    Perhaps this could be referred to.    e3ected lnto
  21.2         P:C: Larkin

 21.3          P.-C; Thickett

 21.4          P;C; Turner

 21.5          P.C; Friend




                                                                                                                  /. ..contd.




D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services)
South Yorkshire Police

FAX 0742 523409                                    v

LEEDS OFFICES:        ^ '™   A   CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199      ^
----------------------------- JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
• '
        K


      H a m m o n d Su d d a rd s                                 PAGE NO.   2




       21.6      P.C. Brophy

       Suggest that this statement ends at the word "gymnasium" on page 4.

       21.7      P.C. Bungay

       21.8      P.C. Roe

       21.9      P.C. Marsh

       2 1 *10   P:C; E llis

  j^l.ll         P :S . Edwards

      Last paragraph is comment.




      Yours sincerely,




j Q   Peter C. Metcalf




                                    v
      H am m ond Su d d a r d s
      ----- f. .-------— ---- — ---- —                                  ________________

                               S OLI CI TORS
      ALAN I. 80TT0MLEY            JOHN H. G. HELLER                 G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:            e m p ir e h o u s e
      D.   TREVOR LEWIS            IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH               STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS cat   10 PICCADILLY
      MICHAEL E. GREGSON          PETER C. METCALF                   MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP        BRADFORD BD1 3LR
      JOHN D. DE MAIN             CHRISTOPHER W. JONES               PAUL R. MANSER         IAN W. WHITSON
      MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD         ANDREW R. JORDAN                   JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                             TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
      PETER N.WIL8RAHAM           SIMON R. 8. STELL                  STUART A. VERITY
      J. RICHARD ARCHER                                                                                             TELEX 517201
                                  SIMON R. INMAN                     RONALD S. DRAKE
      8AR8ARA W. FRANCE           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH              RICHARD 8URNS                                  M.D.X. NO. 11720
      C.   NOEL HUTTON            JOHN G. 8ECKETT                    DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                                    FAX (0274) 737547


      OUR REF.          PCM/PAB                       YOUR r e f .     CCO/DD/JEL                    date      24th May, 19 8 9



t      ear Don,

     Hillsborough

     Here are further comments on statements requested by West Midlands:


     22 .         Miscellaneous requested statements
                  (Letter 19th May, 1989)

     22.1         D.C. Lilley

     22.2         P.I. Booth

     22.3            P .I . Newey

     22.4            P.I. Bateman

    * Shi^ V his i s .an extremely helpful statement for our Counsel and
    indeed for consideration by those planning future events

    as a factual 'statement to Wh"ther
    as'a'factual                the WestAtMidlands
                                           is appropriate
                                                   inquiry.for submission
    22.5             P.I. Burgess

    ahnfS9? Ik h0 ten^ t i v e l y times a message re: match postponement at
     bout 2 35 p.m.   There is no other evidence of this, the request
    for such consideration coming from P.C. Buxton at 2 . 5 0 p m    or a
    little after.   Is he sure about this? Also suggest closing
    statement, at point of retirement from duty.



                                                                                                                     /... contd.
    D. Denton Esq.,
    Chief Superintendent
    (Management Services)
    South Yorkshire Police

    FAX 0742 523409                                 v

    LEEDS OFFICES:        BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
    ___________________JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1A8 TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
              H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s
                                      '   “   -   " ___                   „_________           PAGE NO.




              2 2-6     P-C. Wilkes

              22 -7     P.C. Blackham

              22 *®     P .I . Woodward


            first.  Even°theasecondSstatP seJond of which incorporates the
            of where he was between sav .mJn^ would benefit from some indicatioi
            then can whereabouts S e ' i n ^ c a t e d ? ^ ^ 2 -4° ^ « P a E S u m
            2 2 -9      P.C. Bichard


 •                                                R
                                                  “^      hoSlcee S ? n                “   -lier    fax
           22.10       P.s. Fidler

           22.11       C ;I K i n g

           22.12       D . i . Charles


           refer^S L'eppLgseLfnefitI?rIces.Page 2 t0 the W0St Stand should
          22-13        P.I. Wallace


          should be d e l e t e d J i j f s ^ g e s t ^ e J e J S ^ J r o m ^ f f'duty?h p6rhaps
          22.14 P ;I ; Scholey

     1    Page 4 refers to a log.

          22.15       M r ; Sanderson

          This statement has already been checked and commented on.
         22.16        P.C; Butler

         Already checked.                 See our fax 10.5.89.
         22.17        P.S. Swift

         22.18        P.C. Smith

                 statement has already been checked under Serial No. 1 .



         of 19thPMay0and t h e ^ h e r s will b e ^ a l t ^ i S j 8 °°Vered by the .letter
         Yours sincerely,                                      ^ “ S°°n *S P ° « ible-

          $                                                                                   2.7
/ V ° ’ Pater C. Metcalf
     H am m ond S u dd ards
                                               IT OR
     ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY
                                 IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH      MARK W. HILTON
     D. TREVOR LEWIS                                                             CONSULTANTS:
                                 PETER C. METCALF                                                        EMPIRE H OUSE
                                                          PAUL R. MANSER         ROGER W. SUDOARDS cbe
    MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                                                                   10 PICCADILLY
                                 CHRISTOPHER W. JONES     JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
    JOHN D. DE MAIN                                                              SIR DESMOND HEAP
                                ANDREW R. JORDAN                                                         BRADFORD BD1 3LR
                                                          STUART A. VERITY       IAN W. WHITSON
    MICHAEL L SHEPHERD          SIMON R. B. STELL
                                                          RONALD S. DRAKE
    PETER N. WILBRAHAM          SIMON R. INMAN                                                           TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
                                                          RICHARD BURNS
    J. RICHARD ARCHER           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                                                    TELEX 517201
                                                          DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
    BARBARA W. FRANCE           JOHN G. BECKETT
                                                          J. PATRICK MITCHELL                            M.D.X. NO. 11720
    C. NOEL HUTTON
                                G. N. IAN GREENFIELD
                                                          CHRISTOPHER MARKS
    JOHN H. G. HELLER           STEPHEN GALE                                                             FAX (0274) 737547
                                                          MICHAEL S. HENLEY

   OUR REF       PCM/PAB                       YOUR REF     MS/DD/CEC                      DATE
                                                                                                    26-th May, 19 89



^ > e a r Don,

   Hillsborough
  Here are further comments on statements requested by west Midlands:

  23
                               re^uested statements
                 (Letter 23rd May, 1989)

  23.1           D.I. Towell

  23.2       P .I .      Selwood

  23.3       P .I .      Sewell

 Already covered by telephone.

 23.4        P.I;        Riley

 23.5        P ;S ; Norburn

 23.6        P;C:        Bradshaw

 23.7        P.C;        Metcalfe




                                                                                                         /... contd.



D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services;

FAX 0742 523409

LEEDS OFFICES:
                   BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TFI FPw nw c
                  .JO SEPHS W E U HANOVER WALK U E O S LS3 , > B                                            " *
      H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s                                PAGE NO.   2




       23.8     P;C. Roberts

       The reference in the second paragraph on page 2 to comments by
       Sergeant Hemingway is strictly hearsay and could be removed.



       Yours sincerely,




f~-     eter C; Metcalf




c




                                     v
    H am m ond Su d d a r d s
             t                                                               ------------------------------------------- -— -------------- -

                             S OLI CI TORS
    ALAN t. BOTTOMLEY             IA N R c m r m n ju n o T u   u A m /../                             __________
                                                                                                                                               e m p ir e h o u s e
    D.   TREVOR LEWIS            PETER C. METCALF               PAUL R, MANSER                        ROGER W. SUDDAROS cse                    10 PICCADILLY
    MICHAEL E. GREGSON           CHRISTOPHER W. JONES           JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                    SIR DESMOND HEAP                         BRADFORD BD1 3LR
    JOHN D. DE MAIN              ANDREW R. JORDAN               STUART A. VERITY                      IAN W. WHITSON
    MICHAEL L SHEPHERD           SIMON R. B. STELL              RONALDS. DRAKE                                                                 TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
    PETER N, WILBRAHAM           SIMON R. INMAN                 RICHARD BURNS
    J. RICHARD ARCHER                                                                                                                          TELEX 517201
                                 RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH          DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
    BARBARA W. FRANCE            JOHN G. BECKETT                                                                                               M .D.X. NO. 11720
                                                                J. PATRICK MITCHELL
    C,   NOEL HUTTON             G. N. IAN GREENFIELD           CHRISTOPHER MARKS                                                              FAX (0274) 737547
    JOHN H. G. HELLER            STEPHEN GALE                   MICHAEL S. HENLEY

 OUR REF.         PCM/PAB                            YOUR REF         CCO/DD/JEL                                         DATE           25th May, 1989



t    'ear Don,

    Hillsborough

 Here are further comments on statements requested by West Midlands
 continuing by fax of 24th May:                                   s,


 22 .            Miscellaneous requested statements
                 (better 19th May, 1989) continued

 22.19           p.-S.- Wright

 22.20           P; C; Lindsay

Already checked (fax 16/5).

 22 .21          P.C. Craighill

In the last paragraph on page 4, I think that the word "locked" is
a misprint for "blocked".                                    Q 1S

22.22            P.C; Buxton

?Tf^ e T1S eKt 04-rS lief thG si9ht of chief Superintendent Mole (page
5) could be taken as indirect criticism of command up to that time.
22.23            P.S. Higgins



                                                                                                                                                 /... contd.


D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services)
South Yorkshire Police

0742 523409                                          V
                                                                                                                                                                      iU
LEEDS OFFICES          BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 0XF0R 0 PLACE LEEOS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                       JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s                                      PAGE NO.   2




 22.24    P.C. Titterton

 On page 2, the reference to four extra turnstiles should be two,
 unless previous information has been incorrect.  The timed and
 subsequently numbered comments from page 5 onwards effectively
 repeat the narrative statement which terminates with the word
 "Police Officers" at the end of the first paragraph on page 5.

 22.25    Superintendent Chapman

The second version (3rd May, 1989) of this statement was prepared
by this Officer following my meeting with him on 2nd May.

^22.26    P.C.   Guest

In this Officer's own interests, he should consider carefully the
comment which he makes on page 2 , to the effect that it was "obvious"
that the crowds outside could not fit into the stadium.          If it was
obvious, then this Officer could be subjected to serious criticism
for failing to take urgent steps to notify control of this fact.            I
must also       question whether it        was obvious, given that the Leppings
Lane terraces were showing (in his words) 7,000 plus, against a
total c a p a c i t y _of 10,100.  Finally, I wonder why he did not use
either Club radio or the internal telephone system to reach the
control box, if he did not wish to interrupt transmission by using
his personal radio.          It may be helpful if P.C. Guest recalls, as
accurately as possible, the actual figures for the north stand, west
stand and       Leppings Lane, when        he studied these at, orshortly after,
2.40 p.m.         If need be, I. will willingly see this Officer to go
through his statement.

 22.27    D ;S ; Charlesworth

Report R227A, however accurate, might cause some loss of goodwill
with Merseyside Police, when goodwill from mounted Officers,
particularly, is very much needed.  I appreciate that this criticism
is not in any way directed at mounted Officers and may well have no
effect on their evidence.  However, the possibility ought to be
considered before this particular statement is submitted.

22.28     P:I;   Sewell

We have dealt with this over the telephone.

22.29     P;C:   Walmsley

22.30     P.C:   Bellamy

2 2 .31   P.C.   Thornhill

Yours sincerely,




Peter C. Metcalf
    H am m ond S u d dar ds
                         S O L                 T O R S
   ALAN I. 80TT0MLEY       JOHN H. G. HELLER            G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:
   D.    TREVOR LEWIS      IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH                                                           EMPIRE H OUSE
                                                        STEPHEN GALE
   MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                                          ROGER W. SUDDAROS   cse
                                                                                                         10 PICCADILLY
                           PETER C. METCALF             MARK W. HILTON
   JOHN D. DE MAIN                                                             SIR DESMONO HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
                           CHRISTOPHER W. JONES         PAUL R. MANSER
   MICHAEL L. SHEPHERO                                                         IAN W. WHITSON
                           ANOREW R. JORDAN             JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
   PETER N. WIL8RAHAM                                                                                    TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
                           SIMON R. 8. STELL            STUART A. VERITY
   J. RICHARD ARCHER       SIMON R. INMAN                                                                TELEX 517201
                                                        RONALD S, DRAKE
   BAR8ARA W. FRANCE
                          RICHARD W.WADE-SMITH          RICHARD BURNS                                    M .D.X. NO. 11720
   C, NOEL HUTTON         JOHN G. BECKETT               DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                         FAX (0274) 737547'

   OUR REF,   PCM/JPA                       YOUR REF.
                                                                                       DATE 30th May 1989.




^Dear         Sir,

  Hillsborough Enquiry; Statements


  s:» s s r s r c -is a r is j"
  24
                                  Requested statements
                          _hand-written note 26.5.89.
  24. 1          P.C. McCall

 24.2            P.C. Goodwill
 24.3           P.C. Brayford
 24.4           P.C. Billings
 24.5           P.C. Whitelam
 24.6.          P.C. Salway
 24.7.          P.C. Webster
 24.8          P.C. Barker
 24. 9         P.C. Norton
24. 10         P.C. Gee
24. 1 1        P.S. Ashton



The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,

FAX 0742 523409




                                                                                                            ----------
H * MMOND SUDDARDS                                          PAGE NO. 2
 (■




      24.12   P.C. McDonnell

  The comment at page 3 to the effect that "there was no organisation"
  should either be omitted or should read "I was not aware of any
  organisation".  Suggest this statement ends at the word "serial"
  on page 4.

  24.13       P.C. Frost

 The comment at page 5 about the lack of organisation could be           I
 reviewed.                                                  I

  24.14       P.C. Dawson

^Suggest that this statement finishes at the words "for standby there"
page 6 .

 V n n r Q    i   + *h fn l   1   \r




 P E T E R 'C . METCALF
         H am m ond Su d d a r d s
                              S O L I C I T O R S
        ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY        JOHN H. G. HELLER               G. N. IAN GREENFIELO            CONSULTANTS:
         0. TREVOR LEWIS                                                                                                  e m p ir e h o u s e
                                  IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH            STEPHEN GALE
        MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                                                       ROGER W. SUOOAROS css    10 PICCADILLY
                                 PETER C. METCALF               MARK W. HILTON
                                                                                                 SIR OESMOND HEAP         BRADFORD BD1 3LR
        JOHNO. OE MAIN           CHRISTOPHER W. JONES           PAUL R. MANSER                   IAN W. WHITSON
        MICHAEL L. SHEPHERO      ANOREW R. JOROAN               JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                                        TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
        PETER N. WILBRAHAM       SIMON R. B. STELL              STUART A. VERITY
        J. RICHARO ARCHER        SIMON R, INMAN                                                                           TELEX 517201
                                                                RONALD S. DRAKE
        BARBARA W. FRANCE        RICHARO W. WADE-SMITH          RICHARD BURNS                                             M.D.X. NO. 11720
        C.   NOEL HUTTON         JOHN G. BECKETT                OAVIO W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                                          FAX (0274) 737547


        OUR REF     PCM/JPA                          YOUR REF
                                                                                                            date    3 0th May 1989.




        Dear Sir,

        SECOND FAX
        Hillsborough Enquiry; Statements

        Herewith further comments on statements submitted for
        prior to despatch to the West Midlands Enquiry Team? conslderatlon

        24.            Miscellaneous requested statements
                       (First hand-written note 26.5.89.)
                       (continued)_____ ■ •

        24.15          P.C. Landers

       24.16           P.C.Kitson

       24.17         P.C. Welch

       24.18         P.C. McFarlane
V..
       We think the reference to serial 28 must be a mistake as P s
       Ashton was in charge of serial 30.  Suggest this statement 4nds
       at the point where the officer goes off duty, i.e at "     7 15
       p.m." on page 6 .                            y, x.e. « ... /.lb

       24.19         P.C. Greatorex

       24.20         P.S. Pearson

      24.21          P.C. Evans

      This statement refers to a map on page 2.


      The Chief Constable,
      South Yorkshire Police,
      FAX 0742 523409


                                                                                                                                                 3t4
      LEEDS OFFICES.                                   PLACE LEEDS 151 ^  TELEPhONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
       __________________ JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868

                                  THIS FIRM IS R FG UIATHD 3Y THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CO NDUCT O F INVESTMENT BUSINESS
          /im o n d Su d d a rd s
                                                                                                            PAGE NO. 2




      24.23         P.C. Wade

      24.24         P.C. Kent



      as t h e ^ v e r w h e l m i n g ^ e v i d e n c e ^ o d a t e ^ i s ^ h a t ^ t h e ^ i v e ^*1 °?         2
                                                                                                   „oula
      to factual content as follows:                                          0r omitted or pruned down

             "Approximately 1400 hours a couple of hundred
             we?e°f^omStheSS0d my1location' 1 Presumed they
                      u f sPecial train that stopped at
             Wardsley Bridge.   From this time onwards the
             were0^     supporters grew to thousands who
              ere passing my location walking along the
             carriageway at Halifax Road causing traffic
             problems at the roundabout.  At this time
             rnnah*a^       ^ ?'C> Raybould that we may have a
             finhSi*0+.°£v,lt and there could    well be
             fighting at the end of the match."
     24.25       P.C. Langley

     24.26       P.C. Raybould

    Sentence at the bottom of page 2 refers to a map.
    24.27        P.C. Smith


    situatLnith              K                                                                          ^
i
V   effect thatetheJe°waJ'qiiteOa CsSrqenofVariOUStOth0rS is ^ t h e * ' 9 '
    hour.  We should like P c Smith to      suPPorters ln the last half
    re-considering his c o m m ^ t s ^ t ^ l ^ t                          S'tSSTffivflen^.
    24.28        P.C. Woodcock

    We suggest the statement ends after the fir^t         u
    with the words "... at the ground".           paragraph on page 5

    Yours faifehftdrry7-
    HAMMONfT"3UDDARDS


                           ^ hS T n 5 ao I f ? c e r d e n t a l l y                  2 4 ‘22 but thi s does
                                 S OL I C I T 0 RS
       ALAN I, BOTTOMLEY
                                      JOHN H. G. HELLER
       D,     TREVOR LEWIS                                         G. N, IAN GREENFIELD
                                      IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH                                 CONSULTANTS:
       MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                          STEPHEN GALE
                                      PETER C, METCALF                                                              EMPIRE HOUSE
       JOHN D. DEMAIN                                              MARK W. HILTON         ROGER W, SUDDARDS cat
                                     CHRISTOPHER W. JONES                                                           10 PICCADILLY
       MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD                                                                SIR DESMOND HEAP
                                                                  PAUL R. MANSER                                    BRADFORD 8D1 3LR
                                     ANDREW R. JORDAN                                     IAN W. WHITSON
       PETER N, WILBRAHAM                                         JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
                                     SIMON R. B. STELL
      J. RICHARD ARCHER                                           STUART A. VERITY
                                     SIMON R. INMAN                                                                TELEPHONE (0274) 73470
      BARBARA W, FRANCE                                           RONALD S. DRAKE
                                     RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                                                         TELEX 517201
      C.    NOEL HUTTON                                           RICHARD BURNS
                                     JOHN G. BECKETT
                                                                                                                   M.D.X. NO. 11720
                                                                  DAVID W .K . ARMITAGE

      OUR REF.                                                                                                     PAX (0274) 737547
                    PCM/JPA                            YOUR REF
                                                                                                 DATE
                                                                                                           30th May 1989



      Dear sir,

   THIRD FAX
   £ ^ S S £ ° u g i L Eng u irY!
   Herewith               fu r-t-h

   Prior to                                                                                                       consideration




  24.29             P.C. Nugent
                                                                      £ JJo
  24.30           P.c. Thornton
                                                                        703
 On pages 3 and 4 he rpf

 lot some^ ime^w hen                                                                          °Pened".
 Of     being unblocked?                         arrived-              Does he mean "opened" Javf, been °Pen
                                                                                      p nea m the sense
 24.31            -P.C. Scholey
                                                                    1834
 24.32            P.S. Wilson
                                                                    2408
 It seems to us t-ha-t-

13 the entiret^               0tnda?taerra ^ aph 2 ? ^ ?
                   « e ereS|oCr                                                                  «         c o g e n t as
24.33^  D.c. Tomlinson                 4Q

Suggest this ends at "Ditch •
                      Pitch invasion" on page 4 .

=j!\uhief Constable,
South Yorkshire Poiir^
FAX 0742 523409    C8 '
p \ m m o n d Su d d a r d s



    24.34    P.C. Smith            2846
    24.35    P.C. Richards          761
    Suggest this ends at the point of going off duty.

    24. 36   P.C. Smart           2127
    24.37    P.C. Roberts         2644
    24.38    P.C. Pattison         1620
     References on page 3 to lack of supervision and distribution of


•   radios are comment.  On page 4, we suggest that the sentence
    beginning "Again — " should read "I did not have a radio and could
    not advise Ground Control of the approach of these fans."  On page
    6 we would suggest omission of the paragraph beginning "I felt ...".

    24.39    D.C. Wren            2399
    24.40    P.I. Humphries

 On page 4 he refers to requests from Mr. Marshall for the game to
 be delayed.   Our recollection is that the only request passed to
 Control was'"from P.C. Buxton and that this request came after the
 opening of Gate C.   Is Mr. Humphries quite sure of his recollection
 on this point?

 .Yours faithfully,
  HAMMOND ^ B O A R D S
                                  I CI T 0 Rs
   ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY
                          JOHN H. G. HELLER
                                                       G. N. IAN GREENFIELD
   D.    TREVOR LEWIS                                                         CONSULTANTS:
                          IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH                                                           EMPIRE H OUSE
                                                       STEPHEN GALE
  MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                                          ROGER W. SUDDARDS cse
                          PETER C. METCALF                                                             10 PICCADILLY
  JOHN D. DE MAIN                                      MARK W. HILTON
                          CHRISTOPHER W. JONES                                SIR DESMOND HEAP         BRADFORD BD1 3LR
                                                       PAUL R. MANSER
  MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD     ANDREW R. JORDAN                                    IAN W. WHITSON
  PETER N. WILBRAHAM                                   JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
                          SIMON R. B. STELL                                                            TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
  J. RICHARD ARCHER                                    STUART A. VERITY
                          SIMON R. INMAN
  BARBARA W. FRANCE                                    RONALD S. DRAKE                                 TELEX 517201
                          RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH
  C. NOEL HUTTON                                       RICHARD BURNS                                   M .D.X. NO. 11720
                          JOHN G. BECKETT
                                                       DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                       FAX (0274) 737547
  OUR REF    PCM/JPA                        VOUR REF
                                                                                      DATE 30th May 1989.




  Dear Sir,

  FOURTH FAX
  Hillsborough Enquiry; Statements


                                                                                                      c°"Si<aeration
 2 4 -
                 (continued)

 24.41           1734    P.c. Foster


 co-ordinating          comm^nt 0" ^ 00 b®giJ nin9 "No-one was
 wxth " I could not see anyone co-ordinating"?.b ».removed or replaced
 24.42         1684     P.s.     Mozley

 24.43         2054     P.c.     Wilkes

24.44          2752     P.C.     Jowitt

Suggest this            ends at the worrfc; »                      D   •
                                     WOrds                         Police     action" on page 3 .
24.45         2584      P.C. Musk

24.46          1432     Wright

24.47         2526      P.c. Ayres


The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police
FAX 0742 523409.




                                       V                 ..                                                           it
HAMMOND SUDDARDS                       PAGE NO.   2




24.48   2042   P.C. Drury

24.49    598 P.C. Stubbins

Suggest this ends at "... off work".

Yours faithfully,
HAMMOND S
 H am m ond S ud d a r d s
                          S OLI CI TORS
 ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY           JOHN H. G. HELLER              G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:            EMPIRE H O U S E
 D.   TREVOR LEWIS           IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH            STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS cue   10 PICCADILLY
 MICHAEL E. GREGSON          PETER C. METCALF               MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP        BRADFORD BD1 3LR
 JOHN D. DE MAIN             CHRISTOPHER W. JONES           PAULR. MANSER          IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD         ANDREW R. JORDAN               JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                             TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM          SIMON R. B. STELL              STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                           TELEX 517201
 J. RICHARD ARCHER           SIMON R. INMAN                 RONALD S. DRAKE
 BARBARA W. FRANCE           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH          RICHARD BURNS                                  M .D.X. NO. 11720
 C. NOEL HUTTON              JOHN G. BECKETT                DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                           FAX (0274) 737547


 OUR REF                                         YOUR REF
                     PCM/JPA                                                                DATE
                                                                                                      30th May 1989,




  Dear Sir,

 FIFTH FAX
 Hillsborough Enquiry; Statements                                                  \

 Herewith further comments on statements submitted for c o n q i ^ f i
 prior to despatch to the West Midlands Enquiry Team.            ration

 24 •              Miscellaneous requested statements
                   (First hand-written note 26.5.89 )
                   (continued)

 24.50             P.C. ;;2711 Pattison

 Suggest ending at final paragraph

 24.51             P.S.    1561 Reynolds
 24.52             P.C. 3145 Punton

24.53            P.C.      1169 Kerr
24.54            P.C.      114 Bradley
Suggest removal of final sentence

24.55            P.C. 2668 Fletcher

Suggest this statement ends at "... Doncaster" on page 4 .




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police.
FAX 0742 523409.




LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                     JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
•   '

<           "

    H ammond Suddards



        24.56   P.C. 214 Coulson

        24.57   P.C.    2915 Severn

        24.58   P.C.    2840 Pearson

     24.59      P.C.    1280 Hebdige

    Suggest remove observations at end.

    24.60       P.C.    3151 Marsden

    ,24,61      P.C.    1247 Street

    24.62       P.C. 975 Washington

    Suggest that the sentence beginning "I feel ..." on page 3 should
    go.

    24.63       P.C. 259 Coney

    Could we check whether the reference to 1.15 p.m.. on page 2 should
    really be-to-2,15 p.m. which would be more consistent with the other
    evidence.

    24.64       P.C. 620 Yates

    We should like him to consider his comments on page 2 referring to
    3,000 fans entering the gates and to them all going through the tunnel
    This does not appear to be directly borne out by the video camera
    evidence.

    24.65       P.C. 3027 Tagg

    24.66       P.C. 2902 Roberts

    24.67       P.C.   1758 Winfield

    24.68       P.S. 2305 Lomas

    24.69       P.C.   46 9 Shaw

    Yours faithfjuJrlyr
    HAMMOND SI
          /I




                                   v
                           SOLI CI TORS
     ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY
                            JOHN H. G. HELLER
     D.   TREVOR LEWIS                                   G. N. IAN GREENFIELD
                            IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH                                 CONSULTANTS;
     MICHAEL E. GREGSON                                 STEPHEN GALE                                          EMPIRE H O USE
                            PETER C. METCALF
     JOHN D. DE MAIN                                    MARK W. HILTON           ROGER W. SUDDARDS cse        10 PICCADILLY
                            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES                                SIR DESMOND HEAP
     MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD                                PAUL R. MANSER                                        BRADFORD BD1 3tR
                            ANDREW R. JORDAN                                    IAN W. WHITSON
     PETER N. WILBRAHAM                                 JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
                            SIMON R. B. STELL
    J. RICHARD ARCHER                                   STUART A. VERITY                                     TELEPHONE      (0274) 734
                           SIMON R. INMAN
    BARBARA W. FRANCE                                   RONALDS. DRAKE                                       TELEX 517201
                           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH
    C. NOEL HUTTON                                      RICHARD BURNS
                           JOHN G. BECKETT                                                                   M .D.X. NO. 11720
                                                        DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
                                                                                                             B4X (0274) 737547
   OUR REF      PCM/JPA
                                             YOUR REF
                                                                                        DATE
                                                                                               3 1st.May 1989 .



   Dear Sir,



   Herewith

   prlor to                                                                                              —              ratio„
  2 5 .          M 1 e     ___




  25. 1
                P-C. 28985 Thomas
  25.2          P.C. 2103 Frost
  25.3
                P-C. 2298 Cooper
 25.4          P.C. 3110 Edwards
 25.5          P.C. 201 Olney
 25.6         P-C. 3087 Keenan

 We think that the quoted serial
                   4     a serial number 31 is a    4. ,
 25.7    p s 299 o    .                          mistake for 32.
              ^228 Atkin
 25.8        P.C. 2576 MeEwan

             P.C. 2689 Lacey

25'10        P-C. 2063 Stevenson



The Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
FAX 0742 523409.
HAJ ' MOND SUDDARDS




 25. 1 1   P.C. 2749 Allen

 25. 12    P.C.   2510 Paterson

 25.13     P.S. 2248 Sherratt

 Suggest this ends at "... Mexborough", i.e
 page 8 .

 25.1 4    P.C. 506 Gant

 25. 15    P.C.   1232 Hood

^Suggest omit last two sentences on page 2 .

 25. 16    P.C. 2718 Ward

 25.1 7    P.C. 2055 Donnison

 25. 18    P.C. 2375 Turner

 25. 19    P.C. 2586 Brain

 25.20     P.C. 3234 Cobb

25.21      P.S.   2936 Lindop

25.22      P.C. 2848 Robinson

25.23      P.C.   1320 Wilson

25.24      P.C.   1923 Staniforth

25.25      P.C.   106 Goss

25.26      P.C.   1 130 Binns

25.27      P.C. 2527 Dewey

We think there is some confusion on page 2, perhaps reflecting
.unfamiliarity with the ground, a s the officer gained access through
the Penistone Road turnstiles, it seems likely that he entered the
pitch between the North Stand and the Kop and the problems which he
witnessed were at the Leppings Lane terraces which he refers to as
the Kop.

Yours faijih.f4i-lj.y,
HAMMpNB^SUDDARDS'



                                                                  43
                                v
  H am m ond Su dd a rd s
                           S OLI CI TORS
 ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY            JOHN H. G. HELLER              G. N. IAN GREENFIELD   CONSULTANTS:              EMPIRE H O U S E
  D.   TREVOR LEWIS           IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH            STEPHEN GALE           ROGER W. SUDDARDS   cbe   10 PICCADILLY
  MICHAEL E. GREGSON          PETER C. METCALF               MARK W. HILTON         SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
 JOHN D, DE MAIN              CHRISTOPHER W, JONES           PAULR. MANSER          IAN W, WHITSON
 MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD          ANDREW R, JORDAN               JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                               TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM           SIMON R. B. STELL              STUART A. VERITY
                                                                                                              TELEX 517201
 J, RICHARD ARCHER            SIMON R. INMAN                 RONALD S. DRAKE
 BARBARA W. FRANCE            RICHARD W.WADE-SMITH           RICHARD BURNS                                    M.D.X. NO. 11720
 C. NOEL HUTTON               JOHN G. BECKETT                DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE                             FAX (0274) 737547


 OUR REF     PCM/JPA                              YOUR REF                                  DATE       1st June 1989.




^ D e a r Sir,

  Hillsborough Enquiry: Statements

  Here are further comments on statements submitted for consideration
  prior to despatch to the West Midlands Enquiry Team.

  26•              Miscellaneous requested statements
                   (Hand-written note of- 31 .5.53; )'

  26.1             P.S.       1829 France

 His impression on page 4 of the game starting before the crush at the
 turnstiles eased does not accord with other evidence.  Could it be
 that he heard the roar of the crowd as the teams came onto the pitch
 at about 2.54 and mistook this for the kickoff?

 26.2              P.C.       1266 Adshead

 26.3              P.C.       72 Lipski

 26.4              P.C.       2910 Cammock

 We should like him to review his criticism of the briefing so as to
 ensure that this is not exaggerated (page 1).    Bearing in mind that
 the statement is to be submitted to the Public Enquiry and will be
 on record as such, he may like theopportunity of reviewing some of
 the language used, although we would not wish to insist on this beinq
 changed^if he is happy with it.

 26.5            P.C.         3183 Treck



 The Chief Constable,
 South Yorkshire Police.

 FAX 0742 523409.

                                                v
                                                                   •’


LEEDS OFFICES:        BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PU\CE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 4 44 7 94/421199
                      JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
h   ^   am ond S u d d a rd s
                                                                PAGE NO. 2




 26.6        P.C.   1429 Bashforth
 26.7        P.C. 3044 Donnell

 26.8        P.C.   13 Rose

 26. 9       P.C. 2 4 03 Morton

 26. 10      P.S. 2 822 Kennedy



with the words "... regroup
                    reg“ Sp my
                            mj serial".
                               serial".           St Para^ « p h on page 6

r26. 1 1    P.c. 2969 Dunn

We think this statement should end after the f i r - ^ - t -    u
page 6 , although we would have no o b i e c M o n ^ £? Paragraph on

?La-Ah- 5T55
Yours fait
HAMMOND SU
 H am m ond Su dd a rd s
                         SOLI CI TORS
 ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY            IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH          MARK W. HILTON         CONSULTANTS:            EM PIRE H O U SE
 D.   TREVOR LEWIS            PETER C. METCALF             PAUL R. MANSER         ROGER W. SUDOARDS cue   10 PICCADILLY
 MICHAEL E. GREGSON           CHRISTOPHER W. JONES         JONATHAN H. WRIGHT     SIR DESMOND HEAP        BRADFORD BD1 3LR
 JOHN D. DE MAIN              ANDREW R. JORDAN             STTJART A. VERITY      IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L SHEPHERD           SIMON R. B. STELL            RONALD & DRAKE                                 TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM           SIMON R. INMAN               RICHARD BURNS
                                                                                                          TELEX 517201
 J. RICHARD ARCHER            RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH        DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
 BARBARA W. FRANCE            JOHN G. BECKETT              J. PATRICK MITCHELL                            M .D .X. NO. 11720
 C.   NOEL HUTTON             G. N. IAN GREENFIELD         CHRISTOPHER MARKS                              FAX (0274) 737547
 JOHN H. G. HELLER            STEPHEN GALE                 MICHAEL & HENLEY

OUR REF.    PCM/JPA                            YOUR REF.                                     DATE
                                                                                                     2nd June 1989,




 [Dear Sir,

  Hillsborough Inquiry; Statements

  Here are further comments on statements submitted for consideration
  prior to despatch to the West Midlands Enquiry Team.

  26   .         Miscellaneous requested statements
                  (Hand-written -note■of -31.5 ; §TT "
                  (Continued)
  26.12          P.C.       2547 Ramsden

  The section beginning at the bottom of page 6 "I also felt ..."
  ending with the first paragraph over the page "... to the crowd"
  appears to be comment, as does everything after "... transmissions
  on the day were poor" on page 10 .

  26.13          P.C.       2929 Bennett

 We should like him to review the comments about senior officers on
 page 4.

  26.14          P.C.       211 Brickley

  26.15          P.C.       1679 Oxley

  2 6.16         P.C.       451 Cooper

  26.17          '-P.C. -260 Shipman

 We think this statement should end at the words "... to Liverpool fans"
 on page 7. The rest would appear to be comment.
                                                                  •

 The Chief Constable,
 South Yorkshire Police,
 FAX 0742 523409.



                                                v

LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PU\CE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                     JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
F   a m m q n d Su d d a r d s




    26.18    P.C. 3291 Schofield

    Yours faithf
    HAMMOND SUDD




m




                                 v
  H am m ond S u dd a rd s
                          SOLI CI TORS
 ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY            IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH        MARK W. HILTON         CONSULTANTS:                  EM PIRE H O U SE
 D. TREVOR LEWIS              PETER C. METCALF           PAUL R. MANSER         ROGER W. SUODARDS cat         10 PICCADILLY
 MICHAEL E GREGSON            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES       JONATHAN H. WRIGHT     SIR DESMOND HEAP              BRADFORD BD1 3LR
 JOHN D. DE MAIN              ANDREW R. JORDAN           STUART A. VERITY       IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L SHEPHERD           SIMON R. B. STELL          RONALD S. DRAKE                                     TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM           SIMON R. INMAN             RICHARD BURNS
                                                                                                             TELEX 517201
 J. RICHARD ARCHER            RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH      DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
 BARBARA W. FRANCE            JOHN G. BECKETT            J. PATRICK MITCHELL                                 M .D .X. NO. 11720
 C. NOEL HUTTON               G. N. IAN GREENFIELD       CHRISTOPHER MARKS                                   FAX (0274) 737547
 JOHN H. G. HELLER            STEPHEN GALE               MICHAEL S. HENLEY

OUR REF.         PCM/PAB                     YOUR REF.     CCO/DD                           date        5th June, 1989




  'ear Don

Hillsborough

Here are further comments on statements for. submission to the West
Midlands inquiry:


27               Miscellaneous requested statements
                 (Handwr itten note 1.6.89)

27.1             D.S. 2235 Gutcher

27.2             P.S. 1952 Smith

He is a Merseyside Officer and I am a little surprised that we have
been asked to provide his statement.  At all events, he refers, on
page 2 and page 4, to a sketch plan which is not attached.

27.3             P.C. 2348 Hanson

Suggest this ends with the sentence beginning "I went off duty .                                                                  "
on page 7.

27.4             P.C. 861 Wadsworth

Suggest this ends at the signature on the final page.




D. D'
Chie'   _
(Management Services)

FAX 0742 523409

LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORO PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TElEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
__________________ JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX                 FAX 426868
      H am m ond Su d d a r d s
                               S OLI CI TORS
     ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY              IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH         MARK W. HILTON            CONSULTANTS:
     D.   TREVOR LEWIS              PETER C. METCALF                                                                     e m p ir e h o u s e
                                                               PAUL R. MANSER             ROGER W. SUDOARDS cat
     MICHAEL E GREGSON                                                                                                   10 PICCADILLY
                                    CHRISTOPHER W. JONES       JONATHAN H. WRIGHT
     JOHN D. DE MAIN                                                                      SIR DESMOND HEAP               BRADFORD BD1 3LR
                                    ANDREW R. JORDAN           STUART A. VERITY           IAN W. WHITSON
     MICHAEL L SHEPHERD             SIMON R. B. STELL
                                                               RONALD S. DRAKE                                           TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
     PETER N. WILBRAHAM             SIMON R. INMAN             RICHARD BURNS
     J. RICHARD ARCHER              RICHARD W. WAOE-SMITH                                                                TELEX 517201
                                                               DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
     BARBARA W. FRANCE             JOHN G. BECKETT             J. PATRICK MITCHELL                                       M .D.X. NO. 11720
     C.   NOEL HUTTON              G. N. IAN GREENFIELD        CHRISTOPHER MARKS
     JOHN H. G. HELLER             STEPHEN GALE                                                                          FAX (0274) 737547
                                                               MICHAEL S. HENLEY

    OUR REF.        PCM/PAB                        YOUR REF.      CCO/DD
                                                                                                      batc     5th June, 1989



j^^Dear Don,

    Hillsborough

    Here are further comments on statements submi +-+-^                                                                       '
    prior to despatch to the West Midlands inquiry?                                                                   consideration


   26.              Miscellaneous requested statements
                    (Handwritten note of 31.5.89) continued

   26.19            D.S. Tissington                     (182)

   This statement could finish at the end of page 14.
   26.20          P.I. Broomhead                   (M)

   26.21          P.S. Keenan               (2171)


■ turnstiles ^ 1 9 8 8 ^ H a s ^ ^ L L ^ t ^ i g l a ^ i d e o ’110!?!                                                       ^
  certain of his comments, then so be it.                    - *                                                         1S guite

  26.22           D.C. Braddock (1042)

  26.23           P.C. Holmes               (811)

  Last sentence appears to be comment.




                                                                                                                          /... contd.

 D. Denton Esq.,
 Chief Superintendent
 (Management Services)

 FAX 0742 523409
                                                  v
 LEEDS OFFICES:      BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PU C E LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELFX
                                                                                                                    557202 FAX 444794/421199
 ---------------------------------------------WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
H am m
    i■
       o n d Su d d a r d s




 26.24   P.C.    Hemsworth (782)

 He may wish to review the use of the word "animals" and "louts", in
 case this exposes him to damaging cross examination.

 26.25   P.S.    Miller (1948)

 26.26   P.S.    Shaw (2207)

26.27    P.S.    Hallbrook (1075)

26.28    P.S.    Cressey (760)

26.29    P.S.    Taylor (2140)

Suggest remove first sentence.

26.30    P.C.    Dexter (660)

Suggest remove last sentence.

26.31     P.C. Hunt (84)

26.32     P.C.   Humphries (1775)

26.33     P.C. Hubbard (877)

Suggest remove first sentence.

26.34     P.C. Edwards (2155)

On the last line of page 3, we think the word "not" is a misprint
for "riot".

26.35     D.C. Burrows (2523)

26.36     P.C. Winter (951)

Suggest remove first sentence and omit paragraph 7.

-26.37    P.C. Waldron (340)

Suggest omit first sentence and end at off duty on page 3.

26.38    P.S. Johnson (1771)

26.39    P.C. Royle (1914)

Suggest this ends at off duty on page 3.

26.40    P.C. Powell (1839)

Suggest this ends at of^ duty on page 4.


                                                        /... contd.
    •   :   .

i



        H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s                      PAGE NO.   3




            26.41   P.C. Vallance (2783)

            26.42   P.C. Russen (2593)

            26.43   P.C. Gardner (2343)

            Suggest this ends at stand-down on page 4 .

            26.44   P.C. Love (682)

            26.45   P.C. Eustis (2102)

        ^Suggest this ends at off duty on page 4 .

            26.46   P.C. Langfield (2292)

            26.47   P.C. Lighton (2828)

            26.48   P.C. Cooper (2298)

        26.49       P.c. Staniforth (1891)

        26.50       P.C. Womack (1691)




        Yours sincerely,




        Peter C. Metcalf




                                       v
          H am m ond S u dd a rd s
                       f •           "
                                         SOLI CI TORS
         ALAN I, BOTTOMLEY                   IAN R. SHUTOavORTH       MARK W. HILTON          CONSULTANTS:
         D. TREVOR LEWIS                     PETER C. METCALF                                                            EMPIRE H OUSE
                                                                      PAUL R. MANSER         ROGER W. SUDDARDS cat
         MICHAEL E GREGSON                   CHRISTOPHER W. JONES                                                        10 PICCADILLY
                                                                      JONATHAN H. WRIGHT     SIR DESMOND HEAP
         JOHN D. DE MAIN                     ANDREW R. JORDAN                                                            BRADFORD B D l 3LR
                                                                      STUART A. VERITY       IAN W. WHITSON
         MICHAa L. SHEPHERD                  SIMON R. B. STELL        RONALDS DRAKE                                     TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
        PETER N. WILBRAHAM                   SIMON R. INMAN           RICHARD BURNS
        J. RICHARD ARCHER                   RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH                                                       TELEX 517201
                                                                      DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
        BARBARA W. FRANCE                   JOHN G. BECKETT           J. PATRICK MITCHELL                               M.D.X. NO. 11720
        C. NOEL HUTTON                      G. N. IAN GREENFIELD      CHRISTOPHER MARKS
        JOHN H. G. HELLER                   STEPHEN GALE                                                                FAX (0274) 737547
                                                                      MICHAEL S. HENLEY
       OUR REF.                 PCM/PAB                   YOUR REF.        CCO/DD
                                                                                                                7th June, 1989



.0^ Dear               Don,

       Hillsborough

       Midlands:furt^er comments on statements to-be submitted to West


      28.                   Miscellaneous requested statements
                               Rewritten note 5.6.89)


      28.1                  Superintendent Stewart




     28.2                p.i. Walker

     28.3                 D.S. Char1esworth

    Although this statement has been revised                                                  i+-                        •
    fairly trenchant criticism o£ Merseyside'policeFootin'T/??"?
    and it also exhibits a nnnw nf         roiice Football Intelligence
    even more critical.                               lfCthat°istD 0 srerhrt °f 9th M a y ' 1989, which




   I still wonder if the report really needs to b ^ e L i b i t e d ^ n d ^ ^ 0 1 '


                                                                                                                         /... contd.
  D. Denton Esq.,
  Chief Superintendent
  (Management Services)

  FAX 0742 523409                                        v

  LEEDS OFFICES:                BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 4 4 4 7 ^ 1 1 0 0
  ---------------------------   ^ E P H S WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532, 4 5 0 ^5 £      £      £      £     444794/ 421199
t




    H a m m o n d S u d d a rd s                               PAGE NO.   2




    whether the first paragraph on page 2 could not be toned down by
    simply indicating that the response did not appear to be particularly
    helpful. The Officer can then develop his evidence under questioning
    if called, rather than this evidence being formally submitted in
    writing by the South Yorkshire Police.

    The only other point I have is that he refers, in the fifth paragraph
    on page 2, to calling other Football Liaison Officers and I think it
    might be as well to specify which ones, bearing in mind that we are
    now seeking evidence from other Forces in connection with a possible
    conspiracy to enter the ground by non-ticket holders.  It would be
    embarrassing for the other Force if it transpired that they had
    information but did not disclose it to D.S. Charlesworth and it


    •
    would be embarrassing to us if they had such information and allege
    that they did disclose it.



    Yours sincerely,




    Peter C. Metcalf
         H am mond S uddards
                              S O L I C I T O R S
         ALAN I.BOTTOMLEY         IAN R.SHUTTLEWORTH    MARK W. HILTON           CONSULTANTS:
         0. TREVOR LEWIS          PETER C.METCALF                                                           e m p ir e h o u s e
                                                        PAUL R. MANSER          ROGER W. SUDDARDS css
         MICHAEL E.GREGSON        CHRISTOPHER W. JONES JONATHAN H. WRIGHT                                   10 PICCADILLY
        JOHN 0. DE MAIN                                                         SIRDESMOND HEAP            BRADFORD BD1 3LR
                                 ANDREW R.JORDAN        STUART A.VERITY
        MICHAEL L SHEPHERD                                                      IANW. WHITSON
                                 SIMON R.B.STELL        RONALD & DRAKE
        PETER N. WILBRAHAM                                                                                 TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
                                 SIMON R. INMAN        RICHARD BURNS
        J.RICHARD ARCHER         RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH DAVID W. K.ARMITAGE                                 TELEX 517201
        BAR8ARA W. FRANCE        JOHN G. BECKETT       J.PATRICK MITCHELL                                  M .D.X. NO. 11720
        C.NOEL HUTTON            G. N. IAN GREENFIELD  CHRISTOPHER MARKS
        JOHN H. G. HELLER        STEPHEN GALE                                                              FAX (0274) 737547
                                                       MICHAEL S.HENLEY
       OUR REF         PCM/PAB                 YOUR REF.      CCO/DD                       DATE    12th June, 1989



'(      Dear Don,

        Hillsborough

        Midlands ;fUrther cornrnents on statements to be submitted to West


        29.           Miscellaneous requested statements
                      (Handed to PCM-9.6.89),.

       29.1           D.C. 1190 Ketton

       29.2           P.C. 120 Harris

       29.3           P.C.

       29.4           P.C.

       29.5           P.C. 205 Beardshall

      This Officer
      about the
            tine severitv
                 severity of
                          of thp     k®” outside
                                          mentloned below make comments
                             the crushing         the turnstiles in 1 qaa
      These are not particularly helpful to our case b u t i f ZLt




                                                                                                             /... contd.


      D. Denton Esq.,
      Chief Superintendent
      (Management Services)

     FAX 0742 523409


     LEEDS OFFICES:
                      BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PU C E LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (C632) 444821 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421
                      JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1A8 TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 Tb S    I ^ ^ S    S        444794/421199
  Hammond
     fc":
          Suddards                                                PAGE NO.     2




           (a)   A clear comment to the effect that the ingress
                 of mounted Officers eased the problem.

           (b)   An indication that the problem was relatively
                 short-lived, e.g. by 2.45 p.m. the crush had
                 eased, if that is the case.

           (c)   Perhaps an indication that the Officers have
                 watched the 1988 and 1989 videos and that the
                 1988 situation was clearly not as bad as that
                 in 1989.


^^29.6    P.C. 1144 Reynolds

  29.7    P.C. 2981 Barnes

  He comments that pen 4 was almost full at 3\00 p.m.   How did he get
  this information?- Is he in fact saying that there was effectively
  a solid wall of fans at the pen end of the tunnel, thereby giving
  the impression of fullness?   Is it the case that this Officer and
  those with him, including ex P.S. Higgins, were simply taking up
  phase 2 duties -and took it upon themselves to turn people away from
  the tunnel, for the reason given above, i.e. that the fans appeared
  solidly packed at the pen end of the tunnel?   If so, I think that
  this should be made clear, so as to avoid any invidious and incorrect
  comparison with the phase 1 operation this year.


  29.8    P.C. 1157 Castleton

  See comments re P.C. Beardshall.

  29.9     P.C. 138 Saunders

  29.10    P.C. 2528 Hughes

  See comments re P.C. Beardshall.

  29.11   P.C. 654 Kettleborough

  See comments re P.C. Beardshall.

  29.12   Ex P.S. Higgins

  See comments re P.C. Barnes.

  29.13    P.C. 3291 Schofield

 .29.14    P.C. 229 Cable

  See comments re P.C. Barnes.
                                                                             inr
                                                            /. . . contd.
        H a mr m
               V
                 o n d S u d d a rd s
                                           PAGE NO.




        29.15       P.C. 1051 Hobson

        29.16       D.C. 2517 Shelton

        29.17       D.S. 182 Tissington

        29.18       P.C. 451 Cooper

        See comments re P.C. Beardshall.

        29.19      P.C. 78 Booth


'   «
        Yours sincerely,




        Peter C.        calf




                                                      &   \
                                                          i
 H am m ond Su dd a r d s
                         S O L I C I T O R S
  ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY            IANR. SHUTnjEWOHTH        MARK W. HILTON         CONSULTANTS:             e m p ir e h o u s e
  0 . TREVOR LEWIS             PETER C. METCALF          PAULR. MANSER          ROGER W. SUDOARDS cae    10 PICCADILLY
  MICHAEL E GREGSON            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES      JONATHAN H. WRIGHT     SIR DESMOND HEAP         BRADFORD BD1 3LR
  JOHN 0 . DE MAIN             ANOREWR. JOROAN           STUART A. VERITY       IAN W. WHITSON
  MICHAEL L SHEPHERD           SIMON R. B. STELL         RONALD S. DRAKE                                TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
  PETER N. WILBRAHAM           SIMON R. INMAN            RICHARD BURNS
  J. RICHARD ARCHER                                                                                     TELEX 517201
                               RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH     DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE
  BARBARA W. FRANCE            JOHN Q. BECKETT                                                          M .D.X. NO. 11720
                                                         J. PATRICK MITCHELL
  C. NOEL HUTTON               Q. N. IAN GREENFIELD      CHRISTOPHER MARKS                              FAX (0274) 737547
 JOHN H. Q. HELLER             STEPHEN GALE              MICHAEL S. HENLEY

 OUR REF.          PCM/PAB                    YOUR REE       CCO/DD                        DATE     14th June, 1989



 Dear Don,

 Hillsborough

      a*>G further comments on statements to be submitted to West
 Midlands:


 30.             Miscellaneous requested statements
                 (fiandwritten.note undated, received PCM 13.6.89)

 30.1            P.C. 2302 Powell

 Suggest removal of the words "The first thing I said ___                                                       cordon"

 30.2            D.S. 727 Lindley

Suggest removal of impressions on page 3.
30.3             D.C. 2968 Hall

30.4             P.C. 570 Stoker

30.5             D.C. 2540 Lindsay

30.6             D.S. 457 McSloy

30.7             D.C. 1209 Askew



                                                                                                           /... contd.

D. Denton Esq.,
Chief Superintendent
(Management Services)

FAX 0742 523409
                                                                                                                                S7
LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4 /5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
    Hammond
      f
            Suddards
            ..                                                   PAGE NO.   2




     30.8        D.C. 2812 Lawrence

     Suggest this ends at the wor

     30.9        D.S. 815 :
                          Buxton

     30.10       P.C. 1651 Moulding

     30.11       P.C. 1181 Drajling

     30.12       D.C. 2405 Dynes

                 D.C. 3119 Bagguley
    P0 - 1 3
     30.14       P.S. 1153 Booth

     30.15       P.C. 420 Davis
                                               \
    30.16        D.C. 2947 Liversidge

    30.17        P.C. 1679 Oxley

    30.18        P.Cv 2342 Beard

    30.19        D.C. 2569 Blake

    30.20        P.C. 3253 Campbell

    30.21        P.C. 1826 Walton

    On page 3, there is a reference to C.I. McRobbie being at the
(   communications caravan at 2.55 p.m.   Surely, this cannot be correct,
    as he was in the Police control box at the ground.

    30.22        P.C. 525 Bevington

    30.23        D.C. 366 Stevenson

    30.24        D . I .Scaife

    30.25        D.C. 1108 Locking

    30.26        D C . 458 Hallam

    30.27        D.C. 735 Tuke

    30.28        D.C. 1788 Hirst

    30.29        D.C. 1600 Jones

    30.30        D.C.S. Addis
    Yours sincerely,
                                    V
  BODY   NAME                      PERSON REQUESTING                                 DISCLOSED
  No                                                                                 TO
  1      Thomas Anthony HOWARD     Mr T Howard, Grandfather                          Solicitor
  3      Gary HARRISON             Mrs K Harrison, W ife                             Solicitor
  3      Gary HARRISON             Mr D Harrison, Brother                            Self
  5      Colin ASHCROFT            Mrs J P Ashcroft, Mother                          Solicitor
  6      Ian David WHELAN          Mr W Whelan, Father                               Solicitor
  9      James Gary ASPINALL       Mrs Aspinall, Mother                              Solicitor
  13     Colin WAFER               Mr J Wafer, Father                                Solicitor
  14     gary Christopher CHURCH   Mr & Mrs D G Church, Parents                      Self
  22     Brian MATTHEWS            Ms D Matthews, Sister                             Solicitor
  23     Peter BURKETT             Mr T J Burkett, Father                            Self
  25     Joseph CLARK              Mrs J Gilchrist, W ife                            Solicitor
  26     Francis McALLISTER        Mrs V McAllister, Mother                          Solicitor
X 28     Steven Jospeh ROBINSON    Mrs R Robinson, Mother                            Solicitor
  29     Ernie HANKIN              Mr & Mrs Hankin, Parents                          Solicitor
  31     Henry BURKE               Mrs C Burke, W ife                                Solicitor
  32     Keith McGRATH             Mrs Corrigan, Mother                              Solicitor
  37     Ian Thomas GLOVER         Mr J Glover, Father                               Self
  38     Christopher EDWARDS       Mr S Edwards, Father                              Solicitor
  39     Peter TOOTLE              Mrs J Tootle, Mother                              Solicitor
  40     Peter McDONNELL           Mrs L McDonnell, Mother                           Solicitor
  43     Graham W RIG HT           Mr G Wright, Father                               Solicitor
  45     Nicholas Peter JOYNES     Mr & Mrs Joynes, Parents                          Solicitor
  50     Andrew Mark BROOKES       Miss L Brookes, Sister                            Self
  51     Kevin WILLIAMS            Mrs W illiams, Mother                             Solicitor
M 52     Simon BELL                Mrs F Lyons, Sister                               Solicitor
  56     David W illiam MATHER     Mrs L Mather, Mother                              Solicitor
  57     Christopher TRAYNOR       M rs J T ra y n o r, Mother                       Self
  59     Gordon HORN               Mrs D Hough, Sister                               Solicitor
  60     Martin TRAYNOR            Mrs J Traynor, Mother                             Self
  61     Colin SEFTON              Mrs T Sefton, Mother                              Self
  63     Richard JONES             Mr & Mrs Jones, Parents                           Solicitor
  64     Sarah HICKS               Mr T Hicks, Father                                Self
  65     W illiam Roy PEMBERTON    Mrs J Pemberton, Mother                           Self & Solicitor
  66     Thomas Steven FOX         Mr & Mrs Fox, Parents                             Solicitor
  70     Alan McGLONE              Mr & Mrs McGlone, Parents                         Solicitor
  72     Michael KELLY             Mrs J Sinclair, Sister                            Solicitor
  73     Paul CARLILE              Mrs Stringer, Mother                              Solicitor
  79     Graham ROBERTS            Mr & Mrs D Roberts, Parents                       Solicitor
  81     Thomas HOWARD             Mr T Howard, Father                               Solicitor
  82     Philip John STEELE        Mrs D Steele, Mother                              Solicitor
  83     Jon Paul GILHOOLEY        Mr R Gilhooley, Father & Mrs J Gilhooley, W ife   Solicitor
  84     Paul David BRADY          Mr H Brady, Father                                Solicitor
  85     Carl LEWIS                Mr & Mrs Lewis, Parents                           Solicitor
  86     Gary JONES                Mr P Jones, Father                                Self
  87     Stephen Francis O'NEILL   Mr K O’Neill, Father                              Solicitor
  89     Victoria HICKS            Mr T Hicks, Father                                Self
  90     David THOMAS              Mrs V Thomas, Mother                              Solicitor
  91     Stephen HARRISON          Mr D Harrison, Brother                            Self
  92     Arthur HORROCKS           Mrs S Garnett, W ife                              Solicitor
  93     Phillip HAMMOND           Mr P Hammond, Father                              Self
  94     Adam SPEARRITT            Mr E Spearritt, Father                            Solicitor
X 95     Lee NICOL                 Mrs P Donnelly, Mother                            Solicitor
                                                 /)^2cT /fLrS&VUL
  S o u th Yorkshire                                                       ,


  PO LICE
  JUSTICE        with   COURAGE                                        U
 --------                                                  ,o^r ‘
                                                                O' ■'£%&<-
                                           ■4&    £ t & U 4& 4 S
                                                               U+
                                                      3                            -CiuO-cjLf       4-C^UJZ*<st,
C o m p l i m e n t s                        y

                                             0ta& /£?■/<■<?•}                                   .         /
  Discipline and Complaints D epartm ent     ^7                    *           X
  Windsor Road                               /* * *
  Sheffield S8 8 UB
  Tel: 0114 250 0700    Fax: 0114 252 3855        Direct Line:   &((.%...                  .
