THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975


DESIGNATION


How does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act work?


The principle mechanism for achieving spectator safety is by the
issue of a safety certificate for a sports ground designated by
the Secretary of State.


How is designation done?


Designation is by Order, subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.   The individual ground is named in the
Order.


Are there limits in designation?


The Safety of Sports Grounds Act provides for the designation of
sports grounds which have accommodation for over 10,000
spectators.


Is there provision to change the 10,000 limit?


Yes; the Secretary of State has power to vary the limit, either
up or down, by Order - subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.


How many grounds are designated?


91 out of the 92 football league grounds are designated.    The
exception is the ground used by Torquay Utd which holds less than
10.000 spectators.
   j




What is the designation policy?
       i


All sports grounds identified as having accommodation for over
10.000 spectators and used for either association football, rugby
union, rugby league, cricket are designated.     (This follows HMG's
acceptance of the Popplewell Inquiry recommendation).


SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Issue of the Safety Certificate


The issue of the safety certificate is the responsibility of the
local authority, who is under a duty to issue one.


Contents of a safety certificate


A safety certificate will contain terms and conditions "necessary
of expedient" to secure "reasonable" safety.   For example, it
includes conditions on authorised numbers of spectators to a
ground, or any part of a ground; the exits/entrances to the
ground; size, location, strength of the crush barriers.


Effects of the Popplewell Inquiry on the 1975 Act


The 1975 Act was amended as from 1 January 1988 by Part II of the
Fi^re Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 which
reflected HMG's response to the Popplewell Inquiry.

  I
Has Hillsborough a safety certificate?


YES


Is the ground inspected?


There is a duty on the local authority to arrange for an annual
inspection of the ground.   Inspections are carried out in
accordance with guidelines from the Home Office.     These are in
addition to any test/inspection requirements set by the safety
certificate.


SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR GROUND OPERATORS


The Home Office/Scottish Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds" is intended to provide advice to both ground operators
and "certificating" local authorities on spectator safety.


Status of the Guide


The Guide is a voluntary code but may be called up in terms and
conditions in safety certificates.



Adequacy of the Guide


The Guide was revised in October 1986 in the light of
recommendations from the Popplewell Inquiry.


Does the Guide contain advice about the ingress to sports
grounds?


Yes.   The Guide specifically highlights the dangers of crowd
pressure and over crowding and includes advice on crowd
dispersal, crush barrier specification stewarding and controlled
egress.


What is the purpose of crush barriers on a standing terrace?


Barriers control the movement, density and pressure build up on a
terrace.   It is necessary to comply with the strength and spacing
requirements, of the guide or reduce the capacity of the terrace.


Any additional studies on adequacy of crush barriers?


Home Office engineers have attended tests on crush barriers with
engineers carrying out the test procedures advocated on the Guide
to Safety at Sports Grounds.   There have been no indications that
the procedure recommended in the Guide were inadequate.


Is the advice in the Guide adequate?


This is something which the Inquiry will wish to examine.
Does the Guide contain advice on First Aid?


The Guide reminds ground management of their responsibility to
provide adequate first aid provision and first aid staff.


[Note: St John's Ambulance have recently pressed for compulsory
minimum first aid provision to be the subject of regulations.      We
have said we believe this to be a wrong approach.    Safety
certificates are the main safety mechanism and their
terms/conditions can be tailored to individual needs.    It is also
doubtful whether the provisions of the Act are wide enough to
make such.regulations.   We have told_St John's that we will
include expanded advice on the subject when updating the Guide
this year.]


RESPONSIBILITY FOR SAFETY


Who is responsible for safety?


Prime responsibility lies with the ground operators to ensure the
safety of their customers.


Who is in charge: the club or the police?


It will be one of the tasks of the inquiry to examine the
arrangements made by the club and the police for the stewarding
and policing of spectators at the match.    There is invariably
close consultation between the police and clubs over such
arrangements.


IF PRESSED:


The police have responsibility for the preservation of the peace
and the maintenance of public order.   If they perceive a threat
to public order or public safety, they have a duty to take action
to counter it. This is an operational Judgement for the senior
police officer.
What part of the Popplewell Inquiry were not implemented?

The Government did not accept the need for the issue of "annual"
safety certificates;   (b) power to revoke safety certificates.


The 1975 Act works in a way that revocation is unnecessary.       A
safety certificate can however be amended if circumstances change
so as to justify such a course.    (designated grounds are
inspected by local authorities annually).
Does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 make specific
requirements as to the provision of pitch perimeter fencing to be
contained in safety certificates?


No. The 1975 Act provides that terms and conditions in safety
certificates should be necessary or expedient to secure
"reasonable" safety.


Has the 1975 Act been changed as to the contents of a safety
certificate?


Yes.    It was changed following the Popplewell Inquiry and how
makes no stipulation as to the contents of a safety certificate.


What were the previous provisions?


The 1975 Act previously required a safety certificate to include
terms and conditions:


(a)    specifying the maximum number of spectators to be admitted;


(b)    as to the number, size and situation of entrances and exits
       (including means of escape) and means of access to them;


(c)    requiring those entrances and exits and means of access to
       be properly maintained and kept free from obstruction;


(d)    as to size, strength, number and location of any cnish
        barriers.


Why the change?


The reason was that the Popplewell Inquiry recommended
application of the 1975 Act to all sports grounds not simply
sports "stadia11.   By widening the scope of the Act it was
necessary to be less specific as to the contents of safety
certificates.


Does this mean safety certificates no longer have conditions as
described above?


No.   It merely makes discretionary what was previously mandatory
and ensures that the issuing     authority are not restricted inwhat
they can include in a safety certificate.


What advice is contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
on access through Pitch Perimeter Fences?


The Guide recommends that:


      "Gates or other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres)
      should be ...   provided   for use in an emergency and, at
      those grounds where a perimeter track is used as part of the
      exit system for the departure of spectators at the end of
      the event.   Provision of such gates or access points is
      particularly important to allow full access to the playing
      area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a place of
      safety in an emergency ..."
Should there be a Home Office inspectorate to check that safety
measures at grounds are up to standard?


A sports ground requiring a safety certificate is so designated

by the Secretary of State by Order under the 1975 Safety at

Sports Ground Act.   Thlfe issue of the safety certificate is the

responsibility of the local authority.    Responsibility for safety

at the sports ground rests with the operators of the ground.

There is therefore no direct Home Office monitoring of individual

grounds; but the Home Office guide to safety at sports ground

provides advice to both ground operators and "certificating"

authorities on spectator safety.   Before issuing a certificate

the authority is required to consult the police, and either the

fire brigade or the building authority.   The Home Office would be

likely to hear if a certificate were issued when the police or

fire brigade were dissatisfied.
Drv Moats


Dry moats were considered when the issue of Pitch Perimeter

Fences was originally raised in 1973/4.     The reasons for their

exclusion are still valid:



     i.     spectactors trying to gain access to the pitch

     could be injuried falling into the moat;



     ii.    players in the pitch could be injuried falling

     into the moat;



     iii.    the construction of a moat at most grounds would

     be impractical in that it would reduce the size of the

     pitch, would require major construction work, and would

    tend to undermine the pitch and the spectator terrace.
Background note



History of Pitch Perimeter Fences



1.   Pitch perimeter fences, preventing crowd access to the pitch,

did not form a part of the original concept of crowd control.

The recollections of the Home Office structural engineer is that

they were introduced $at the drafting stage of the Guide in 1974

after the change of Government at the request of the Minister of

Sport (Mr Dennis Howell) as a crowd control measure.



The issue of perimeter fences was first raised in 1973 during

seminars, arranged by the Home Office to advise police, fire

brigade and local authorities on the application of the Guide.

Discussion of such fences was introduced into the seminar as a

crowd control measure.



It has always been essential that access to the pitch, via gates

in the fence, should be provided.        This is clearly stated in

all editions of the Guide

Popplewell (Page 81, Rec 34 and 35).
APPEAL FUND



Can further details be given about the appeal fund


As I announced in my statement, an appeal fund has been set up by
the civic authorities of Liverpool, Nottingham and Sheffield.
The Government will be contributing £500,000 immediately toward
this fund.     I understand that an appeal fund has also been
established by Liverpool Football Club and I am advised that
discussions are taking place about the two funds being merged.


BACKGROUND


The three cities appeal is entitled "The Hillsborough Disaster
Appeal".     Its terms of reference are "An appeal fund for
assistance to those who have suffered injury or loss as a result
of the Hillsborough disaster".    The appeal is based at the Co­
operative Bank, West Street, Sheffield.
AMBULANCE SERVICE


What was the response of the ambulance service to the incident


I understand that before the match began 2 ambulances were
located at the ground together with an attendance from the
St John Ambulance Service.    The first call for additional
ambulances was received    by the ambulance service at 8 minutes
past three.    Within 17 minutes a total of 10 additional
ambulances had attended.


BACKGROUND


There is criticism of a slow and badly coordinated response by
the ambulance service in today's "Times" and elsewhere.       These
criticisms will be matters for the inquiry to consider.


FIRE BRIGADE


What was the response of the fire brigade to the incident


The brigade received the first call about the incident at 14
minutes past three.   The first appliance reached the scene some
six minutes later and was quickly joined by five other appliances
together with support vehicles.   A further four appliances were
called for and, in total, 65 fire brigades staff attended.


BACKGROUND


When the brigade arrived at the scene all rescues had taken
place.   Brigade staff used resuscitation equipment to treat
casualties - one set of resuscitation equipment is carried on
each appliance.   Other brigade staff gave mouth to mouth
resuscitation and gave general assistance.
HOSPITAL SERVICE


What was the role of the hospital service, can further
information be given about the number of injuries


As I said in my statement, 94 people died in this tragic incident
and 174 people were injured.   The injured were taken to the
Northern General Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.     Of
these 94 people were treated and discharged on the day.     80 were
admitted.   The latest information I have is that 44 people are
still in hospital of whom 18 are in intensive care units.
How many police on duty?


773 police officers were on duty in connection with the match of
whom 225 were inside the ground.   Outside the ground there were
548 officers including 30 mounted police and 26 dog handlers.


Casualty bureaux


Both South Yorkshire Police and Merseyside Police ran large scale
casualty bureaux to handle calls from members of the public
anxious about friends or relatives who had attended the match.
