Early Day M otion N o. 552 - Hillsborough Tragedy —10th Anniversary

Speaking N ote

I understand the abiding pain felt by those who lost loved ones in the Hillsborough
disaster.

The original Taylor Inquiry into the disaster was very thorough and was unequivocal in
identifying the main cause o f the disaster as a failure o f police control.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a thorough scrutiny at the H om e Secretary’s request
to determ ine w hether there was any significant new evidence n o t available to the original
inquiry and inquests. The conclusion, which the H om e Secretary accepted, was that there
were no grounds for a further inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.

I understand that discussions have taken place with Sheffield W ednesday FC on a
perm anent memorial at Hillsborough to the victims o f the tragedy.


Background

T he tenth anniversary o f the disaster in which 96 people died was marked on 15 April
with a service at Anfield, Liverpool FC’s ground and the place where many fans laid
tributes in the afterm ath o f the disaster.

The Hillsborough Family Support G roup is pursuing a private prosecution against
form er Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and form er Superintendent Murray, the m ost
senior officers in charge at H illsborough on the day o f the disaster.

The families continue to call for a new public inquiry into the disaster and for the original
inquest verdicts o f accidental death to be quashed. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked
by the H om e Secretary to carry out a scrutiny to determine w hether there was significant
new evidence n o t available to the original public inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor into the
disaster and the later inquests. His report, published in February 1998, considered all the
material allegations about missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged
interference with witnesses and witness statements and concerns about the use o f the
3.15pm cut-off time at the Inquest. His conclusion was that the evidence subm itted to
him did n o t add anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the
Taylor inquiry and the inquests.

There is a memorial at Anfield to the victims o f the Hillsborough disaster but it has been
reported that Sheffield W ednesday FC are giving consideration to a memorial at the
scene o f the disaster at Hillsborough.




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#90217#l
