From:        J L Goddard                         cc: Ms    Snow
             F8 Division                             Ms    Craig
             Ext. 3314                               Mr    Yates
                                                     Mr    Hammond
             25 October 1990                          Ir   Burns

                                                     Mr 'Angel
                                                     Mr Boys Smith
                                                     Mr Clayton
                                                     Mr Cogbill
                                                     Mr' 'Kinney'
                                                     Mr Moorey
                                                     Mr Simmonds
Mr storr


TAYLOR OFFENCES; HANDLING

 Following the recent decision by H Committee to accept the
 Home Secretary's recommendation that the new Taylor offences
 be introduced as early as is practicable, and the article
.Reflecting that.decision in yesterday’s Telegraph (copy '•
 attached), it would seem both helpful and right to announce
 the Government's intentions as soon as possible to Parliament.

2. I attach a draft arranged PQ for this purpose. This might
be offered to Mr Steven Norris who was on the Standing
Committee which considered the Football Spectators' Bill: .he .
has ^insistently supported firm Government action against
football hooliganism.

3.      The proposed reply refers to creating offences "on the
lines recommended". This gives scope for some minor variation
from the Taylor formulations if this seems desirable in the
course of drafting precisely.


4. The proposed reply also'makes'explicit:;-the potential for
disorder as providing the justification for outlawing touting
at football. This implicitly sets football aside from other
Sports where touting is a nuisance but not a public order
problem.




                                        J L GODDARD
E.^
  87-10.RB


  ARRANGED PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR ORDINARY WRITTEN ANSWER ON
  FRIDAY 26 OCTOBER


  Steven J Norris (Epping Forest): To ask the Secretary of
  State for the Home Department if, in the light of his
  consideration of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, he
  will introduce new public order offences at football grounds;
  and if he will make a statement.




  Having considered very carefully the four new offences
  recommended by Lord Justice Taylor, I have concluded that they
  would provide valuable new measures to control hooliganism at
  football grounds. As soon as the legislative timetable
  allows, I shall bring forward legislative proposals to create
  offences on the lines recommended.   These proposals will cover
  selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
  the authority of the home club to do so. In connection with
  football the potential for disorder makes touting
  unacceptable. The proposals will also outlaw, at football
  grounds, the throwing of missiles; the chanting of obscene and
  racialist abuse; and going onto the pitch without reasonable
  excuse.
                                                 .
L    List     Ss    H a n s -v -   i.im i   ii       Mi,S«    a n




       Tough new laws to
       curb soccer louts
                          By O u r P o l i t i c a l E d i t o r
    A NF.W c rack d ow n on s m w r h o o l i g a n i s m is Ikmiik
    p i c p .iiod by the G o v ern m en t with specific offences to
    s op iinss.lc tlmm-uiR. ch a n tin g obsccne and racialist
    alm.se an d n iim in g on to the pitch. Ticket touting
    o u ts id e football g ro u n d s w ill also be banned.
    ---------------------- The legislation, to be drawn
                                                up by the liome Office, will be
                                                introduced as soon as Parlia­
                                                mentary time allows.
                                                  Mr Waddington, Home Sec­
                                               retary. has secured Cabinet
                                               backing for the curbs in the
                                               wake of the Government's
                                               decision not to proceed with its
                                               c o n tr o v e r s ia l com pu lsory
                                               membership card scheme.
                                                  Lord Justice Taylor recom­
                                               mended the new offences in a
                                               report published on the Hills­
                                               borough d isaster in April.
                                               1989. when 95 people were
                                               crushed to death at an FA Cup
                                               semi-final between Liverpool
                                               and Nottingham Forest.
                                                 Prosecutions for throwing
                                              missiles and chanting abuse
                                              can already be brought under
                                              the Public Order Act.
                                                 M inisters accept that an
                                              offence of going on to the pitch
                                              without reasonable excuse is
                                              necessary because the Taylor
                                              report recommended lowering
                                              perimeter fences and remov­
                                              ing spikes intended to deter
                                             pitch invasions.
                                                 At Hillsborough, many fans
                                             w e r e cru sh ed against th e
                                             f e n c e s th a t could not b e
                                             opened in time to allow them
                                             to escape.
                                                 Banning' ticket touting at
                                             grounds will be controversial
                                             and could lead to demands for
                                             similar bans at other sporting
                                             events like Wimbledon.
                                                 However, the Government
                                             will argue that soccer is a
                                             special case because the pres­
                                            ence of touts can make crowd
                                            c o n tr o l m o r e d ifficu lt by
                                            encouraging people to turn up
                                            to matches without tickets as
                                            well as making it more difficult
                                            to segregate rival fans.
                                                In an interview in The Daily
                                           Telegraph today, Mr Wadding­
                                            ton makes it clear he is press­
                                           ing ahead with proposals to
                                           increase parental responsi­
                                           bility for children who get into
                                           trouble, despite criticism from
                                           the Magistrates' Association.
                                               But Mr Waddington said the
                                           Government was determined
                                           to procecd with proposals to
                                           relate fines on children to their
                                           parents' means, as well as
                                           binding over parents to ensure
                                          th e ir        c h ild r e n 's   good
                                          behaviour.
                                               parental responsibility pro-
                                          wsions arc expected to form a
                                          key part of a major criminal
                                          justice Bill to be announced in
                                          th e Q u e e n 's S p eech n ext
                                          month
                                             Waddington interview — P9
                                               Editorial comment — P18
                                     Q U E E N A N N E S GATE L O N D O N SW1H OAT


                                                    /£     October 1990




Thank you for your letter of 21 September in response to mine
of 20 August about Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations for
new criminal offences.

You asked for an estimate of the costs which would fall to
local authorities. For the police the level of activity
generated by the proposed new touting offence is expected to
be absorbed within their existing and planned resources. The
police are already actively engaged in the control of touts at
football grounds: what Taylor has proposed is a specific
offence of touting which will make the law more adequate to
deal with this mischief rather than impose any significant
additional burden on the police or the courts.

As for the other three proposed new offences, the number of 3
prosecutions will not be high since the new offences will only
apply at football matches. It is estimated that the three
offences together are unlikely to produce more than 1,000
cases a year - there were only 2,734 arrests for all offences
in grounds in the 1989/90 season - and, working on the basis
that each case will cost the police an average of £180 to
process, it is unlikely to cost in excess of £180,000. There
is also some prospect of unquantifiable off-setting savings in
that enabling the police to deal more quickly and easily with
offenders will reduce the damage and disorder which they might
otherwise have gone on to cause.

It is expected that these cases will be dealt with summarily.
The cost to magistrates' courts is therefore unlikely to
exceed £64,000 per annum, based on the estimate that such a
case in a magistrates' court would cost £64.




The Rt Hon Norman Lamont MP
Chief Secretary
Treasury Chambers
Parliament Street
LONDON SW1                                                            /over
It is inevitable that the workload figures are somewhat
speculative but our best estimates indicate that the total
cost implications for local authorities will be rather less
than £250,000 a year, of which something over £140,000 would
be met from specific grants. When the additional costs would
begin to be incurred would depend on when Parliamentary time
could be found for the legislation, but the full year effect
would not be felt before 1992/93 at the earliest.

Chris Patten's officials have now been informed of these
proposals under the new burdens procedure. They are content
that the additional duties for local government have been
properly identified and that as much as possible has been done
to estimate the costs. We will of course keep them informed
of any further developments.

Turning to your point that new proposals of this kind should
be accompanied by an equivalent saving in a central government
programme, I do not think that we and colleagues are agreed
that proposals which cannot be accompanied by an equivalent
saving should automatically attract a low priority. I fully
accept that testing proposals against this criterion is a    c
valuable discipline, but I think we must accept that there
will be some which remain a high priority even though no
immediate offsetting saving can be made. I would put Taylor's
recommendations for new offences in this category. The
projected costs are modest and the new offences are, I am
sure, justified in public order terms. Taylor's proposals
have been widely supported across the political spectrum and
we should incur needless criticism if we failed to legislate
on them.

I am copying this letter to members of QL and H Committees,
First Parliamentary Counsel and Sir Robin Butler.
