J MERVYN JONE8 MSc                                          MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                   Watery Street
 HILLSBOROUGH INQ UIRY TEAM                                 Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                            Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 10 5
                                                            Fax: 0 7 4 2 726247
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                      KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensway                                    Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                           Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0 21 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025                      Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Fax: 0 21 -2 33 3256                                        Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2976
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                               Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 50A
                                                            Our Ref:          MF/SA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3332
Fax: 0 21 -3 59 6735
                                                            Date:          24 August 1989


                                         pt   tr
  Mr R M Whalley
  Secretary to the Inquiry
  50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
  London SW1H 9AT




   Dear Mr Vhalley
                                                           Ah .
   Please find enclosed correspondence from Stadium Technology International Ltd
   regarding crowd monitoring.

  A letter informing Mr Rubens of this action has been sent.

   Yourfs sincerely


                          /
             ClAA
   Mr Foster
   Detective Chief Superintendent
   (Hillsborough Inquiry)




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT              NECHELLS.GBEEN .EQLICE .STATION
     STADIUM TECHNOLOGY INTERNATIONAL LTD.
                 MOBILE TELEPHONE 0831-487266
                                                                                              U.K SALES OFFICE:
                 FACSIMILIE 0953-884681
                                                                                              78 NORWICH ROAD,
                                                                                              WATTON, THETFORD,
                                                                                              ENGLAND, IP25 6DW
                                                                                              Tel: 0953-883882
TO   DET SUPT R CHIDLEY
     WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
     341 BOURNVILLE LANE
     BIRMINGHAM
     B30 1QX.


     AUGUST 12th. 1989


     Dear Sir,

     Following our telephone conversation since the publication of the
     preliminary report into the Hillsborough tradgedy I enclose my
     comments for you to pass to the enquiry.

     Whilst writing I would inform you that our new "Idiot Proof" crowd
     monitoring computer is completed and should be installed at Spurs
     in the very near future. We have already initiated talks with the
     Metropolitan Police (Y division) and the Tottenham council safety
     officer regarding the installation.

     The features which distinguish our new system from anything else
     available (even from us) are that it is :-

                 A: Fireproof
                 B: Waterproof
                 C: Does not even need switching on!

     We hope to break new ground with this system and actually instal
     it in the proposed new police observation room at Spurs, rather
     than in the club's counting house, where the older system was
     housed. I will inform you of the "Grand opening" in order that you
     can arrange any visit you think fit.

      Regards,



      Graham Rubens.




                                    Registered in England and W ales, No. 2014996
                      Registered Office: 1 Intw ood Road, Cringleford, Norw ich, Norfolk, England
                                          V.A.T. Registration No. 426-4542-56
STADIUM TECHNOLOGY INTERNATIONAL LTD
MOBILE 0831-487266
FACSIMILIE 0953-884681                                                                 U.K SALES OFFICE:
                                                                                       78 NORWICH ROAD,
                                                                                       WATTON, THETFORD,
The Lord Justice Taylor Enquiry                                                        ENGLAND, IP25 6DW
c/o the West Midlands Police
Birmingham.                                                                            Tel: 0953-883882

12th. August 1989

I write as a contributor to the original enquiry and my experience
is that of the designer and installer of spectator monitoring systems
at several football grounds including Aberdeen, Glasgow Rangers,
Tottenham Hotspur and many others. The system at Villa Park is one
of our company's 1988 design and includes the feature of showing the
Flow per minute per zone , used to anticipate the time until all
spectators are safely in the ground.

My comments on the preliminary report are as follows.

A:    The report in its final form should include some reference to
     the "End of game" time where an incident may take place in the
     match causing an "Ibrox" like shift in the flow of the exiting
     spectators.

B:    The report should stress the need for full height turnstiles as
     now insisted upon in various parts of Scotland. The use of older
     low pattern turnstiles is still all too common in England and
     these turnstiles do not present a proper barrier to enable the
     safety limits to be adhered to.

C: The Popplewell recommendation regarding the age and fitness of
   turnstile operators and stewards has been largely overlooked.
   This should again be stressed.

D: The classification of "High Sensitivity" matches might be a good
   idea. Any match where attendance is not expected to be any higher
   than say sixty per cent of the capacity does not need the same
   treatment as one where say 80-90 per cent plus is expected.

E: The control of monitoring equipment (Turnstile Computers and
   Cameras) must be given to the Police. At present (Especially
   with counting systems) the police may have access to the figures
   but the equipment is usualy under the control of the club. It
   has been my experience that Counting systems have always been
   sold by reference to Fraud and never by reference to Safety.
   The same applies to full height turnstiles, and to systems which
   monitor exit gates.

F: Perhaps a minimum standard of qualification could be introduced
   for a person responsible for a place of public entertainment
   where attendance may exceed a certain level. It has been my
   experience that the best qualification for getting a job running
   a stadium is the ability to sell sponsorship rather than safety.


                                 continued


                             Registered in England and W ales, No. 2014996
               Registered Office: 1 Intw ood Road, Cringleford, Norw ich, Norfolk, England
                                   V.A.T. Registration No. 426-4542-56
G:    A clear formula for the numbering of seats should be introduced
     as a standard to enable clear signposting outside the ground. At
     the new St. Johnstone ground (Where we have actually done the
     seat numbering) careful planning has enabled entrances to be
     signed by seat number range. Even there the first attempts at
     the signs were not as logical as they could have been.

H: The "All seater" factor should be better explained in terms of
   persons per square metre. It has been my experience (Including
   Aberdeen for 10 years) that the reduction in capacity due to
   all seater areas is the main factor in reducing incidents of
   crowd unrest. The difficulty in moving quickly through a s e a t e d ’
   area is to be balanced against the use of seats as missiles. The
   main reason for introducing seats seems to be to increase the
   admission prices to compensate for the lower numbers.

I:   Whilst it is not simple to introduce unique entrances for "Pens"
     so that one can guarantee an even distribution of spectators in
     individual safety zones or partitions therein, it is possible to
     use Stewards/Police quite effectively to "Dress" the stadium and
     ensure that the first supporters fill the first Zones before any
     access is allowed to other zones. This technique would ensure that
     those wishing to get the best positions came early, however at
     Hillsborough the central tunnel would have required angled gates
     to divert late spectators to the wing areas.

J: Police in England should follow the procedures used north of the
   border where officers outside the ground actually assist in the
   control of the crowd into orderly queues. I have never seen this
   in England, but it is the norm in Scotland.

Since the Hillsborough tradgedy I have spoken twice to the football
league about providing "State of the Art" crowd counting systems at
half the current price. My argument has been that I do not wish to
make more money, but can produce more systems and supply then at less
than the authorities currently contribute in grants. No reply has
been received, in spite of the leagues awareness of the effectiveness
of the system installed at Villa Park. I have seen many V.I.P. guests
including more than one sports minister viewing control facilities at
leading and lesser football grounds, but at ten to three when the
action is at the turnstiles , they can always be seen in the
hospitality areas. Most club secretaries and directors also prefer to
be involved in the hospitality at this time.

Whilst I would like to spend more time compiling this letter (and
checking the spelling), I am currently installing Systems at Spurs,
St. Johnstone, Dunfermline and Wolverhampton Wanderers as well as
pre-season checks for all existing customers.


Graham Rubens



Head of U.K. Operations.
