                     TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY


Proposed Structure of Report

     A few pages of text outlining the main principles considered
by the Technical Working Party,       accompanied by appendices
containing suggested re-draftings of the Green Guide.    The main
text should refer to the following aspects:

     Seating/standing              Enclosures/turnstiles
     Capacities                    Inspections and Tests
     Structural Elements           Fire Safety
     Stands                        Communications
     Ingress and Egress

Introduction

     Reference to value of existing Green Guide.       Note that
earlier Inquiries had led to incremental improvement.   A general
review of content and presentation should now be undertaken. The
technical aspects of * safety should be emphasised,       and the
corresponding   requirements    should  be   clarified   wherever
necessary.

     The Technical Working Party recognises that prevailing
conditions vary widely in designated grounds and that a degree of
flexibility in application of the Green Guide will have to be
retained.   Nevertheless, the Technical Working Party is strongly
of the opinion that considerably more standardisation should be
sought in practice.      Required levels of technical provision
should be clearly stated in the Green Guide for general
applications;   any lesser levels arising from local circumstances
should be fully defined and should be subject to written approval
by the certifying authority.

1.   Seating and Standing

          The Technical Working Party noted that FIFA has agreed
     regulations on seating for certain classes of football
     matches, and that the regulations are to be imposed within a
     short time-scale.     It also recognised that the British
     tradition of standing on terraces runs counter to these
     international requirements.

          It is clear that if British Clubs are to continue
     within the international community, they will be obliged to
     close their standing accommodation for matches that fall
     within the FIFA definition.        For other matches,    the
     Technical Working Party recognises that, whilst standing
     accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe, the benefits to
     spectator comfort and crowd control brought about by all-
     seater stadia are likely to accelerate the move towards such
     venues.
Capacities

     The    safe allowable   capacity of any viewing area,
whether seated or standing, is the least of (i) its holding
capacity,   (ii) the number of persons who can leave through a
normal exit system within a prescribed time at the end of an
event, and (iii) the number of persons who can leave through
an emergency exit system within a prescribed time.

     The holding capacity of a seated viewing area is simply
the   number of seats in good condition (The corresponding
packing densities in some of the newer continental stadia
lie   in the range 3.5 - 4.0/m2.)        Determination of the
holding capacity of a viewing terrace or slope is not so
simple;   factors that must be taken into account include the
strength and spacing of the crush-barriers, the position of
gangways,     the dimensionsand physical state of the steps,
the   effective standing area, and     the acceptable packing
density.

     A packing   density of 5.4/m2   is recommended in the
current Green Guide as the maximum allowable figure for
terraces and viewing slopes that meet all the specified
guidelines.   A reduced figure of 2.7/m2 is recommended for
areas deviating materially     from the guidelines.      The
Technical Working Party sees no point in retaining reference
to the lower figure and recommends that the range extend
from a maximum figure to zero when the terrace or slope is
in an unacceptably poor condition.

     As to the maximum figures, the Technical Working Party
concluded that a uniformly distributed density of 5.4/m2
should be safe in ideal conditions.  It recognises, however,
that there may be variations of density within a given
enclosure, and that conditions may be less than ideal.   All^
that can be said is that lower average densities are likely
to reduce the incidence of dangerous peak densities, andf
that the margins of safety will increase as the average'
allowable density is decreased.

     The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
allowable average packing density determined by the Inquiry
should   establish   a general    reference  for certifying
authorities.   For an individual Ground, the packing density
applicable to a given standing area should be derived from
this figure, the full figure for areas in good condition and
reduced figures for areas in poorer condition.      Detailed
calculations of holding capacities should then be determined
on the basis of the packing density.      These calculations
should take into account specific features of the crush-
barriers and fences and of step dimensions as illustrated in
the Green Guide.

Structural Elements

     It   is a fundamental   requirement of safety that
structures at Grounds should provide spectators with safe
accommodation and safe means of ingress and egress.  They
should also enable police and stewards to exert proper
control over crowd movements. If a conflict should occur
between these objectives, a substantial re-arrangement may
be required;  in no circumstances should safety standards be
compromised.   The Technical Working Party recommends that
references to sub-divisions in Chapter 14 of the Green Guide
be reviewed with these considerations in mind.

Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch

     The Technical Working Party recognises ihe importance
of barriers as deterrents to pitch invasions.        It also
recognises that not all viewing areas present the same risk,
and   recommends     that   consideration    be   given   to
differentiating those areas requiring higher levels of
security and other areas, such as seated accommodation and
members' enclosures, where a lesser degree of security might
be acceptable.

     The general principle of separation erjeibsed by the
Technical Working Party is that the means adopted should
provide sufficient security against pitch invasions to
enable the police to take timely and effective action should
such incidents occur.   Clearly a balance has to be struck
between crowd control and safety# and— expedience -hag— shown

configuration adopted at friverpool -antt- recommended for wider
consideration consists of a perimeter fence on the pitch-
side backed by a parallel and continuous crush-barrier on
the terrace-side, set back from the perimeter fence so as to
provide a clear walk-way between the two;             except in
emergencies, spectators would not be allowed to enter the
walk-way.    Such an arrangement would reduce the risks
associated with a common feature of British grounds, namely
that the front steps of terraces are substantially lower
than the level of the pitch:    immediate attention should be
given to the elimination of this hazard.

     The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
height of perimeter fences should be determined in relation
to the UEFA standard of 2.2m.       It also recommends the
removal of overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire
attachments at the tops of fences.

     A form of separation increasingly adopted in new stadia
is the dry moat.     To be effective, a dry moat must be
sufficiently wide and deep, and should be protected by
fences on both sides to ensure that spectators and players
do not fall into it.    Where enough space is available, a
moat may offer an attractive solution, but its application
to older Grounds is likely to be restricted by limitations
of space.

Emergency Access to Pitch

     The Technical Working Party recommends that emergency
access to the pitch should be provided from all adjacent
viewing areas.     Where  fences, barriers or moats are
installed    there should be clear gangways leading to
emergency exits on to the pitch.   The exit gates should be
at leas*rc. as wide as the gangways and sufficient in
dimensions and spacing to allow evacuation of the enclosure
within a prescribed time.

Crush Barriers

     The   Technical     Working    Party    endorses    the
recommendations of the Green Guide on the front-to-back-
spacing of crush-barriers and on the preferred height of the
horizontal rail. More emphasis, however, should be given to
the continuity of crush-barriers along a terrace-step, and
to restrictions on gaps between adjacent barriers.

     The requirement that 25% of all crush-barriers should
be tested annually has led to the testing of blocks of
barriers without reference to their age and condition.    It
is recommended that a more selective schedule, of about the
same annual extent but based on an appraisal of the physical
state of the barriers, should be determined by the testing
organisation    and approved annually by the certifying
authority.   A major review of the procedures for inspection
and test is recommended, as detailed in a separate document.
Particular attention is drawn to the importance of recording
the results of visual inspections as well as of loading
tests.    A revised pattern of loading cycles is proposed
together with a fuller definition of deflections to be
measured. Finally, the criteria for acceptable performance,
expressed in terms of the recovery of deflections on
unloading, should be clarified along the lines proposed.

Stands

     A substantial part of Chapter 10 of the Green Guide,
'Roofed Stands with Seated Accommodation',       deals with
temporary structures.   It is recommended that this material
should be placed in a- separate chapter, and that it should
give explicit references as required to British Standards
and to applicable regulations.

      The remainder, which might be called 'Covered Standing
and Seated Accommodation',     should clarify   the special
requirements for safety that are involved, nothing that fire
risk is not the only hazard and that statutory control of
the requirements may be vested in different authorities.
Appropriate references to Building Regulations should be
made.   It is important to ensure that all spectators can be
cleared into4^protected escape routes within prescribed
times, although such routes need not be exits from the stand
as a whole.

Ingress/Egress

     The current Chapters on Ingress and Egress in the Green
Guide (Chapters 5 and 6) contain much useful information,
but are nonetheless in need of some revision.  Consideration
was given by the Technical Working Party to the possible
            /amalgamation of features common to both ingress and egress,
             but it is recognised that the^e— drs— cumpa'i'at ivet?— little
             ©0Hm©n“^gaeotmdw“arrd**^CfrS't' emphases might well differ. The
             Working Party does not therefore recommend amalgamation of
             the individual chapters.

            Ingress

                 The Technical Working Party felt that Chapter 5 needed
            expansion to incorporate additional clauses on (a) the
            positive counting and recording of those passing through
            each turnstile;    (b) the location of amenities inside the
            ground to avoid obstructing or disrupting the flow between
            turnstile   and   enclosures;      (c)  the sub-division of
            enclosures;   (d) the adequacy of well distributed entrances
            into large enclosures to facilitate even packing;     and (e)
            the design of entrances so as to avoid local pressure on
            spectators   caused,    for  example,   by   downward ramps.
            Informative    diagrams   should  be   adopted   and general
            principles laid down, wherever possible.        The Technical
            Working Party would not favour the introduction of numerical
            examples which might,      in any event,    be difficult to
            establish.   The Technical Working Party views the current
            maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of 750 persons per
            hour (as set out in paragraph 47 Green Guide) as too high,
            and recommends a figure of 500 as the median for a normal
            turnstile. Furthermore, it recommends that variations up or
            down be approved by the certifying authority,      ^
                  ^       I*.
            Egress              !

                     Greater   cross-referencing with otherChapters is
                required, and the Technical Working Party favours expansion
                or amendment of a number of paragraphs.   In particular, the
                density figure set out in paragraph           in respect of
                reservoir areas is felt to be too high, and the members of
                the Technical Working Party recommend that, where reservoir
                areas cannot be removed from egress routes, a lower density
v<^ m,- !9swfs* °f 35-40 persons be il^^ed.     The Technical    Working Party
    !          favours greater emphasis on networking, and      believes that
                the Green Guide should include a stipulation that each
                ground produce a proper, networked plan^ delineating all
                aspects of ingress/egress.

       6•   Enclosures/Turnstiles

                 The Technical Working Party strongly recommends that
            there should be a direct one-to-one relationship between
            turnstiles and enclosures in order to maintain accurate
            counts of entries.   A review of the current state of League
            Grounds had shown that sub-divisions such as had occurred at
            Hillsborough were rare, and had been initiated by police for
            crowd control.    Where such sub-divisions do exist, it is
            imperative that the totals entering each sub-division should
            be counted separately.
        7•        Inspections and Tests

                       The   Technical   Working  Party   recommends   that a
                  comprehensive tabulation of inspections and tests covering
                  all technical aspects of Grounds ^be incorporated in the
                  Green Guide, and that the levels of competence of the
                  inspectors and testers should be prescribed.    The range of
                  inspection and test is wide;        it extends from visual
       ,    jfl   inspection immediately before and after each event to annual
iW(W>N\ W         testing of major structural components.       In all cases,
,    (~j          accurate records of the results should be certified by those
                  carrying out the work. % a                                ^
                  iivrtfoPaHvs   1/ H-       mV .vtthfetaW'   -»    H I*   W   C*44>Wj V>V
                  VwMi* ^ K*4w4ti         -r VVf(^ ft              .fvfliwi W «AcA«^ti*S 4 * 'V*
        8-        Fire Safety               ^ MJb

                       There is general recognition amongst Technical Working
                  Party members that the current Chapter on Fire Safety
                  (Chapter 11) is well-defined.       It contains much useful
                  advice on egress and means of escape^, application of which is
                  not restricted to fire risks and which would bear repetition
                  in other Chapters.

                       The Technical Working Party considers that, it is
                  essential to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and
                  Communication;   independent input from individual bodies is
                  to be avoided. With that in mind, its members believe that
                  consultation on all safety matters should be directly with
                  the certifying authority who, in turn, would consult with                        .
                  the fire,fand other authorities . / ^ The current Green Guide
                  contains T.nsufficient information on emergency lighting, and
                  the emphasis on "emergency" is wrong;         it should more
                  accurately be considered as "auxiliary" lighting and set out
                  in a separate Chapter.         The Technical Working Party
                  recommends this approach.

        9.        Communications

                       The Technical Working Party considers that too little
                  weight has in the past been attached to the need for a
                  comprehensive communications system.                     "r-

                       Chapter 12 of the Green Guide therefore requires
                  substantial amendment to reflect the importance of effective
                  communications systems,   the need to make use of high-
                  technology equipment, and the value of closer co-operation
                  between club and police personnel.    The Technical Working
                  Party considers that Interim Recommendations 31-34 should be
                  retained permanently and incorporated into the Green Guide.
