E.R.
     From:         Miss A M Edwards           cc    Miss P Edwards LAB
                   F2 Division                      Mr Addison
                   Extn 3141                        Mr Bolton
                   29 June 1990                     Mr C 0 gJ5.Hl


                                                    Mr Grant
                                                    Mrs Lee
                                                    Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                                    Mr McClelland, N10



     Mr Goddard



0k   TAYLOR REPORT


     Thank you for sending me a copy of your minute of 22 June and
     attached draft submission on the Taylor Report recommendations
     for new offences and penalties.


     2.    We have noted what you say in paragraph 2 about drafting the
     submission with the Home Secretary's initial view in mind.
     However we think there is a case for drawing out a little more
     than does the present draft the emphasis in the Home Secretary1s
     initial view that he wished to accept the recommendations for the
     creating of offences provided this did not cause any harm.
     Criminalising football in this way, which is how these measures
     will inevitably be seen, will give the police an even higher
     profile and raise the stakes all round. The particular^ worry we
     have is in the implications for police community relations, for
     example,   some heavy handed arrests of a few youngsters
     celebrating the end of a match by running onto the pitch full of
     "j oie de vivre" could rebound very negatively, particularly if
     they were black.    We hope that some reference to this general
     downside of the recommendations could be made in the submission,
     perhaps in the introductory passage.


     3.   Paragraph 13 of the draft submission discusses the
     formulation of a possible offence of throwing a missile.        I
     understand that one of the most obnoxious "missiles" thrown at
     football grounds is the banana (at black players). This would
     not be caught under chanting obscene or racialist abuse, and I
     wonder if the definition of missile could be drafted to cover it?


     4.   We share the reservations of the CPS, discussed in
     paragraphs 16-18 of the draft submission, about a new offence of
     chanting obscene or racialist abuse.    It does seem to us that
     there will be real practical difficulties about whether this

     AME-033.BAB
offence will be more than words on the statute book. A further
complication in our view is that it will be very difficult to
argue that such an offence should onlyjlipplied to football, given
that, for example, a number of similar problems have occurred
recently at cricket matches. However, our view is that this is
definitely the most socially offensive of the three targeted
activities, and therefore the test for whether or not any of the
proposed criminal offences should be introduced needs to rest on
whether or not it is believed that action could properly be taken
in relation to this aspect of behaviour. We think it would be
even more unsatisfactory to decide that we should reject the
Taylor recommendation for this offence, but create new offences
to cover the other areas of behaviour.

5.   We suggest that there should be an even stronger rejection
than is currently in paragraph 20 of ACPO's view that the
"reasonable excuse" defence be omitted for the offence of going
on the pitch without reasonable excuse. Given that the Taylor
Report is responding to the Hillsborough disaster where people
were trying desperately to escape onto the pitch there are surely
clear and overriding reasons why such a suggestion could not be
taken seriously, and indeed we find it rather surprising that
ACPO should have put forward the view at all.

6.   In relation to the discussion in paragraphs 21 and 22. we
have some difficulty in understanding why running onto a pitch
at the end of a game is behaviour which should be judged as
criminal.  Is there evidence that this particular activity has
led to public order problems?      As I understand it, it is
something which happens in most sports, and if there is evidence
to suggest that it is causing serious problems we doubt whether
it would be easy to confine an offence to football.




                               MISS A M EDWARDS
