f H A    o   r.l^l |   B y



                                                                                                      O^/ioz-Jr     i.3•JD




             ^                      JOHN SINCLAIR                                                                 STATI°N
                                    CAT.DER


         ADDRESSi                                        H0Si>ITAJ'
                                       MERRIES RD, SHEFFIELD
         AGE / Date of BIRIH;

         OCCUPATION:               DOClX>R



                                        ^ * ^ to?^iKi2'JL0anc^
        it knowing that if it is tonA>?Su-^^*’
                                                          0l-r?belief
                                                                ?9'' M ch
                                                                      and I make
        prosecutior If 1 have wilfully «tatad7                             1 slMl1 1x1                  to
        to be false or *, * * S d £ » t o                              " ,ythln9             I W


        DATED: 161C89
                                                                                   JC*1N S CALDER (SIGNED)


                             T sm a qualified doctor my qualifieatirme             ur.
                                                      y ^   A£lCdtl0ns ^           «BBS I qualified in
                                  (000085) at the London Hospital.
                           X t a » - H e d .t ^                 ^                  ^     ^         ^

                        " * » •.     On Saturday 15th AprU w           (15046S) it w , ^

                        weekend and I was at the (tortham Oeneral H ^ p ^ .                  M

                        K - 05/15. W    (1505/1510) _          ^                   ^                                 '
                 | - n          fro„ John ^        ^     ^      ^      ^           ^     ^        itoru^

                        <*roral HospltaJ ^             statfid ^             ^ ^                         ^    ^ ^

                       «       that ^ t h i ^ m s occurring at the . U U . t o r o ^
                       He wont on to say that there were
                                               tiiere were ambulance* present and to expect
                       patients at the hospital.

                               result of this call       made ny way to casualty to see if I

                       obtain any further details.           I spoke with charge Itarse          batty   but he
                   was unable to provide me with further detail, r       J
                                                      *r details I ensured that the staff
                   - th» _     al

                   services may be required and then I made ny way back to casualty.

                              my return I contacted switchboard and informed w                    that „     had a
                  » 3 o r incident                                                 ^         ^    ^




                                                                                                                             21
                                                        CK' l O' ^ r    13, 33     fi,.   J




CATDER                 JOHN   SINCLAIR


(Registrar) I believe that this was done.

By this time the first patients were arriving by antulance.            The first

patient that I had any dealings wit.h wan a white nwle, aged in his

late teens.    Hr apppnm] to be approximately 5’10H tall (5'10), of

mocivm kxiild and had short dark brown hair.    I am unable to recall

whet he was rearing, I think he had a pair of joane on and that his

tof clothing had already been removed.     He was in the resuscitation

rocra when I first made contact and to the best of my recollection

there was a staff nurse from casualty whose name I do not know, with

the patient.    The youth was cyanoeed but there were no obvious

external injuries.    He was having difficulty breathing,

fie had small pupils but they were reactive to light.     1 intubated the

patient and together with the nurse we ventilated him.        In a short

tins his colour returned bo normal.

I r©-examined the patient who was still un-consciou* and could not

fir.d any obvious major abdominal or chest injuries.    The patient

appeared stable and in view of this and the fact that I was required

to assist with other patients I left the nurse, who had been assisting

me, to continue ventilating the patient.    As far as I on aware this

patient lived, 1 would certainly have expected him to.

The next, person I assisted was a young female, i new knew that this

patient was Victoria HICKS.    She was brought into the roan where I vras

dealing with the patient I have described above.    I remember she was

accompanied by a young man who I believe was wearing « Liverpool

shirt, he was definitely a football supporter and an aRbulanoeman or

policeman.    Ihe supporter appeared distressed and was calling for a

doctor to assist.

The female was not breathing her face was purple, her pupils ware

fixed and dilated, and I recall that she had vomit in her mouth.

                                                                                              22
CALUfcK                 JOHN SINCLAIR                                         3


There was a staff nurse present whose nan® I do not know.       I intubated

the patient.     There was no antau bag immediately available so I blew

ck>n the tube and vcroit cams back up tho tube and her lungs did not

dpjieor to expand.    Vte sucked out the tube end then connected it to an

arofcu bog and whilst the staff nurse manually ventilated the patient I

inserted an I.V line into her arm and adminstered adrenaline.         I think

that a cardiac monitor had been attached and there were no signs of

cardiac activity.     The patient was still deeply cyanosed with fixed

dilated pupils.     I do recall giving the patient Rome int.ra cardiac

adrenaline twt there was still no response.      After approximately tun

to fifteen minutes, I made the decision to stop treatment.       I then

moved on to other patients to see if I could be of assistance.        I did

not have any   further dealings with   Victoria HICKS.

1 recall that I moved on to two or three other patients to see if I

cot Id help but all of them had sufficient medical staff with them and

appeared to be receiving adequate treatment.      I cannot describe any o f

the above patients or their condition.     By this time the place was

chcotic,

The next patient that I had specific dealings with was a young white

male, aged approximately fourteen/fifteen years of age.      He was

hrcught into the clean theatre on an ambulance stretcher.      1 can't

ren& ttoer who carried the patient into the hospital. Martin MCSHANE,

John evncan and I approached the patient I iimediately saw that he was

not breathing and that he was cyanosed.     I started to put a cannula

into his arm but before I had finished John DUNCAN certified the

patient dead and instructed me not to proceed.

Ab previously stated the patient was a white male aged fourteen to

filteen years.    He had short dark hair and was of very slim build I

car.not recall what clothing he was wearing.
                                                       i-rt~/'M't o»/±O'            IM •



        CAIDER               JOHN SINCLAIR


        I have boon shown seme photographs by W.P.S APPLETON on todays date,

        16.10.89 (161089) and frcm the photographs shown I would say that tho

        phctograph bearing tho print number eighty-two (Philip STEELE) is the

        best resemblance to the patient that I am referring to.

        Once the patient had been certified dead by John DUNCAN I had no

        further dealings with the patient.

        I noved on and assisted with several other patients including sane in

        1.3 .U but to the best of my knowledge none of these people died.

        At the beginning of my stat«T**nt r refer to the first patient that I

        dee It with wham I believe ]ived to be in the resuscitation roan, I

        no* believe that this patient was in fact in c]«*n theatre.        He was

        definitely in the same room that Victoria HICKS received her treatment

        in.

        J d t n CALTER

                                                         JOHN S CALDBR SIGNED

STAUMENT 1AKEN
         PLACE:

          lIMEs            DAIEs

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE!

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      APPLETON PS7844
h a   j   n   i




                                                                                 STATION
  NAME:


  ADDRESS:           C/0 NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL, HERRIES RD
                     HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S57AU
 AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

 OCCUPATION:         HIGHER SENIOR ANATOMICAL PA3WXOGY


Who states.-- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if r have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATCD: 030889
                                                                              SIGNED)



              I am a qualified mortuary technician and qualified in 1981 (000081) in

           Sheffield.      I have worked at the Northern General Since 1981 (000081).

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was at hone and as a result

           of the televisor) I became av»re that there was something happening at

           the Hillsborough football ground.       I telephoned the Northern General

          Hospital to see if I was required.        I spoke with tha telephone

          receptionist and as a result of what she said I decided to go to the
          hospital.

          I arrived at the hospital at approximately 3.35 pn (1535) and went to

          casualty.      I approached a matron whose name I don't know and she

          directed me to the orthopaedic plaster roan which was being used as a
          tanporaiy nortuary.

          As I entered the room I saw a number of bodies lying on trolleys

          talles and seme ware even on the floor - I can't be precise about how

          mary bodies were there.      There were no other persons present.

          I came out of the room and approached a police officer, I think he was

                  polic® liaison officer.   I introduced myself and then asked him if

          there was anyone who could assist me to document the bodies and
                                                    n*i   st~\ t   *~t * ' x k »'   .\




strip them.       I am not authorised to carry out this procedure without

the presence of a police officer.

Six police officers were given thB job of assisting me.                One of the

police officers a young fen&le was placed on the door to stop

unauthorised entry.

Tt>cether with the police officers/ we started to document and strip

each body.     A female officer made a record of the personal property

and a full description of each body, including approxjjnate age, height

arc distinguishing mark.      © » personal property was Jwpt with the

patienta and put into a brown envelop© and marked with the major

disaster plan nutter.

Once the system was running effectively, I left the police officers to

continue documenting and stripping the bodies.

I nacte ny way over to the hospital mortuary and opened up.                   I

contacted                  an unqualified nortuary technician, and asked

her to ccme to the hospital to assist.      I attainted to contact another

technician, but without success.

Mr Cliff 1AMB0URNE, the Chief MISO in histopathology, arrived at the

hospital.     I assessed the space in tho nortuary and asked Mr IAMBOURNE

to assist in the hospital mortuary.      Mr Stephen WESTBY who is an MLSO

also arrived at the hospital and I asked him to assist in the mortuary.

I *as concerned that the bodies that had arrived at the nortuary ewer

tte weekend did not beccroe confused with the bodies arriving from

Hi) lsbccrough.

I *«nt bock to the plaster room and continued to doconent and strip

the bodies.    As the bodies >rere stripped, each was catalogued and

documented as far as possible,      t then asked the porters, whose names

I con't Jokjw, I believe one of them was                      a move the

bodies from the plaster rocam to the mortuary.     Before they left the

                                                                                         37
                                                                            3


plaster room a leg of each body was marked in indelible ink with tho

major disaster plan nurber.     The clothing accompanied the bodies and

the personal property, cash, jewllery etc remained with the police.

This process continued until all the bodies in the plaster rocm had

been removed to the mortuary.     There was an additional body in a small

rocm across from the plaster roan.     This body wes documented and

stripped and then transferred to the mortuary.

One of the bodies, a female who I nor knew to be one of the HICKS'

girls, was identified.     A second body had a casualty card with a name

on it placed on his chest.     1 do not know where the name on the card

cane from and I cannot remember at this stage what the name was.

Tocether with Brian IBELL, the hospital administrator, the police

liaison officer and two (2) other police officers I went to the dining

rocm which was being used by the relatives of the injured Mr XBELL

stcod on a table and read out a list of the injured persons at the

hospital and a description of the bodies being held by the hospital

toeether with any distinguishing marks on each body.

Following the announcement a large itunfcer of people came towards

myself and the police officers asking for further information. We

assisted as far as possible I went back to the nortuary and was

accompanied by a police officer.    I was informed that sane relatives

vjere at the mortuary wanting to look at bodies with the view of

identfying them.   There was no way that I would allow anyone to look

at a body unless the description that they had given fitted the dead

person.

Upca my arrival back at the mortuary I discovered that one of the

HICKS' girls had been positively identified.

A decision was node by someone to move the bodies from the mortuary to

the Hillsborough ground.    I do not know who made this decision but
__________________________________                                                4

within a very short time it was reversed.          Approximately half an hour

later, received a telephone call from casualty to say that about six

 (6) ambulances had arrived to take the bodice back to the ground.

I nade my way across to casualty to try and find out what was

happening.    By   the   time I got   there the ambulances   had already   been
sert round to the mortuary.           I spoke with the police liaison officer

anc he confirmed that the bodies ware to be transferred to the

foctball ground on the Coroner's orders.

I returned to the mortuary and informed the staff that the bodies were

to be removed,     lhere were a large number of people in the mortuary

including ambulance drivers, police officers, mortuary staff and soma

social workers who had arrived from the main part of the hospital.

Three (3) or four (4) of the bodies were placed in the first

amfculance, I can't remember the Major Disaster Plan number allocated

to these bodies . I travelled In the ambulance with these bodies.

Upcn arrival a senior police officer asked me where the police

corstables were.     I said that I didn't knew which officers he was

talking about.     He informed me that a number of police officers had

been cent to the hospital to accompany one body each, to the ground.

I eaid that I was not aware of those officers and attempts were then

mace to contact them by radio.          Eventually they were contacted and

three (3) or four (4) of them returned to the ground to take

responsibility for the bodies that I had accompanied in the first

anfculance.

I vould say that it was approximately 1 hour later that the next

amiulance arrived with any of the bodies and they were acccnpanied by

the pojioe officers.      As each body arrived I informed the officer of

it's major disaster plan number which would have been written on the

lec and that officer then became responsible as far as I was concerned
                                                         m   xr***   u j * iu ' j t       A-J >JU       1 VI •




                                                                                                    5

        for that body.    Each body was accarqpanied with the property bag

        curtaining the clothing and MDP (Major Disaster Plan) records in

        several cases there was nothing or very little written on the notes.

        Wren all of the bodies had arrived at the ground which I believe was

        axxund 9 pm (2100) my girlfriend arrived and took me back to the

        hospital.

        I went to ths mortuary and it was then that I found out that there was

        a tody still on the GITTJ waiting to be transferred to the ground.

        Arrangements were already in hand for this body to be collected by

        ambulance.    At no stage did I ever Bee that body. I was told by the

        staff that everything was in order and that there was little else that

        cocld be done.    I therefore left the hospital and went home.                I

        fir ished vork at 10 pm (2200).

                                                                                      SIGHED

STMEMEOT 7AKEN
         PLACE:

          ItMEs             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:       J APPLETON PS7844




                                                                                                                 40
