    INQUIRY     INTO        THE         hi
                                                                 21
                                             I L,L,S B O R O U G H

           STADIUM                 DISASTER




                         Before


                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


•                      ------------

                     MR. B. JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                            and

                    PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                       (ASSESSORS)




                            At

                     The Town H a l l ,

                       Sheffield,

                              on

               Wednesday,   14th June,        1989.




                TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                   (Morning        Session)



          From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
               Official Shorthand Writers,
           55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                          (MORNING SESSION)
                                              Page
RANDOLPH SAYNOR, called

    Examined by MR. PHILLIPS                   2
    Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER               5
    Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD             7

STEPHEN MICHAEL COPELAND, called

    Examined by MR. GOLDSACK                    9
    Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON              12
    Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD             14
    Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW              14

ALBERT RHODES, called

     Examined by MR. PHILLIPS                  17
     Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW             21
     By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR                    22

STEVEN CHARLES RHODES, called

     Examined by MR. GOLDSACK                  23

WAYNE AUSTIN HALL, called

     Examined by MR. PHILLIPS                 24
     Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW            25
     By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR                   26
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW    27
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD   27

ALLAN JOHN HASKINS, called

     Examined by MR. GOLDSACK                  28
     Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW             28

STUART ROLAND THORPE, called

     Examined by MR. GOLDSACK                  29
     Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER              56
     Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON             59
     Cross-Examined by MR. ROBERTSON           61
     Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL             65
     Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS          68
     Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD            69
            TWENTY-FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

              WEDNESDAY, 14th JUNE. 1989

                  (MORNING    SESSION)


     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Mr. Phillips, yes.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   Sir, may I make a correction to
something that I put yesterday to Miss Davies when I
was examining her? I miscalculated the time that the
telephone conversation took between the Fire Service
and the Police Service.  So I have had distributed in
fact transcripts of the actual call and you will see
that the time when the call started was 15.13.45 and
it finished at 15.14.58.   I said it took a minute-and-
three-quarters. I meant to say a minute-and-a-quarter.
I apologise for that, sir.   It was a miscalculation.
Perhaps I can just put the record straight in that
respect.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes. Thank you. Well,
I notice that at least one newspaper today managed
to expand it to two minutes.

     MR. MULLER:   Sir, may I just say a word about it
because I feel a bit conscious of Miss Davies' position?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     MR. MULLER:   The position is that I think some
parts of the media have thought to give the impression
that she was responsible for the whole of the delay in
the cutting equipment being brought to the ground. For
the record I think it should be said the position is
that the ambulance was called - the fleet of ambulances
were called at 8-minutes-past-3. It appears about 13-
minutes-past-3 the call was made by Mr. Bichard from the
Hillsborough control room and saying specifically that
the Fire Service was urgently required at Leppings Lane.
That was taken up at Snig Hill and Snig Hill said yes,
Leppings Lane, you want them at Leppings Lane in effect,
and then some other Officer whom we have not yet
discovered then dealt with that call and rang the Fire
Brigade. That call was received at almost 14 minutes
past, 15 seconds short of 14-minutes-pa&fe-3, and the
information was never relayed to her about Leppings Lane
at all and of course that was why she had to make
enquiry. Ultimately the information about Penistoni
Road did not come from the Police at all, it came from
the Fire Brigade, and the position is, as I am instructed,
that in the Hillsborough area there are at least three
other football grounds, one being the Sheffield Wednesday
training ground at Middlewood Road, there is a rugby
ft7!
                                  2


                                                         R, SAYNOR

         football ground at Owlerton Stadium and there is another
         place where the public play football at Hillsborough Park.
         And so in those circumstances it was perjaaps appropriate
         she should be ascertaining precisely which ground it was
         and had the Police passed ontkfee message which the
         emergency procedure provided that they should, that it
         was Leppings Lane, there would have been no problem at
         all because the computer would immediately have picked
         up Hillsborough, Leppings Lane.   I thought it right to
         make that ....

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Mr. Muller.     Yes.

               MR. PHILLIPS:   May I call Mr. Saynor, please?

                          RANDOLPH SAYNOR Called

                         Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

       Q. Are you Randolph Saynor? - A. That is right.

       Q. Are you a retired man but a part-time turnstile operator
          at Sheffield Wednesday? - A. Yes.

       Q. How long have you been a turnstile operator there? - A.
          25 years at least.

       Q. And do you regularly attend at League and Cup matches?
          - A. Every match, yes.

       Q. On this occasion you were engaged on turnstile No. 10.
          Is that right? - A. That is right.

       Q. What area of the ground did you understand that that was
          to serve? - A. That was to serve the cantilever stand,
          the last one, before you come to the West Stand ticket
          turnstile.

       Q. By the cantilever stand you mean the North Stand? - A.
          The North Stand, yes.

       Q. Yes. Was that the situation during the whole of the
          period up to the start of the match? - A. Well, that
          was supposed to be the situation as I was taking
          tickets for the cantilever stand but it did not work
          out that way.

       Q. You see, Mr.Saynor, there was some evidence that originally
          9 and 10 were to serve the West Stand then by .... - A.
          That is true. That was early on. That was very early on,
          that. Then they changed it to the cantilever stand. They
          altered the barrier.

       Q. Can you tell us, please, at what time theycchanged the
          area which you were serving from the West to the North
                                                1. SAYNOR

Stand? - A. It would be 1 o'clock-ish, I should say.

And who did that?    How did you know about that?- A. Pardon

How did you know about the change? - A. Because we
reported it. We feported we were not getting anybody
coming through oar gates, so we happened to look outside
and see - got the wrong tickets coming through, you know,
so they told the stewards and Mr. Child®§ came round and
they altered it round.

So you ended up from 1 o'clock onwards dealing with people
going to the North Stand? - A. Yes.

Yes. Now, did you get from that time onwards everybody
presenting the right kind of ticket to you? - A. Up to
about quarter-past- 2*7 yes.

Up to quarter-past-2? - A. Yes.

You were getting North Stand tickets? - A. Yes.

Did you have anybody trying to get in without a ticket
until that time? - A. Oh, yes, there is numerous do it,
yes. They do it every match any way.

Do they? - A. Yes.

What did you do with those people on this occasion before
quarter-past-2? -A. Just knocked on the window and told the
Police. They just took them, sent them back or took them
somewhere else. I do not know.

So they came through the turnstile, did they, and then
went out through the gates?-A. Possibly, yes, or he made
them jump back over.  If they had jumped over the Policeman
made them go back the same way they came.

Yes. When people came without tickets did they offer you
anything at all? - A. No, no.

Did they not offer you money? - A. No,   they did not offer
me money, no.

Were you offered tickets for the wrong part oftheground
until this time? -A, Iwas after quarter-past-2 but not up
to quarter-past-2.




                      / Q. Now, after quarter-past-2
                                      R. SAYNOR


Q. After quarter-past-2 then how did things change for you? -
   A. Well everything seemed to congregate.   Crowds started
   gathering and they started bringing West Stand tickets
   in and I weren't allowed to take them, so I tried to send
   then out and we were sending them back out, you know they
   were pushing away and they could not get back out in the
   finish. When it got to 20-to-3 they could not get back
   out.   They were getting in and on top of that when you got
   one ticket, genuine ticket, you had got two of them following
   on without tickets squeezing their way in and it was just
   chaotic.

Q. What did you do about these people? - A. Well we kept
   reporting it to Police and they kept doing their best
   till it finally got out of hand.

Q. Have you any idea how many people came through your turn­
   stile without a ticket? - A. Oh I should say at least 50.

Q.    Have you any idea how many people came through with the
     wrong type of ticket? - A. With the West Stand tickets,
     you mean?

Q. Yes? - A. Well the Police told us to take them at finish
   because they could not get back into the crowd.  They could
   not get back through so they told us to take them, so
   quite a few but I would not say how many.

Q. When was this instruction given to you? - A. Oh after
   half-past-2, 20-to-3 I should say.

Q. Can you say which Policeman gave you that instruction?
   - A. I could not because they kept changing outside and
   Stewards kept coining round as well trying to help out.

Q.   What was your  instruction, was it just to take any type
     of ticket? - A. My instructions are on my sheet what I
     get to take that lettered ticket.

Q. I understand that. The instruction you were given by
   the Police, was it to take any kind of ticket or to
   let people through? - A. If they had got their    tickets
   to let them in, yes.

Q. If they had got a ticket let them in? - A. And what the
   Police did, they removed a barrier what they had put in
   so that they could go into the West Stand as well as to
   go into the North.

 Q. Did you see that outside your turnstile? - A. I saw them
    remove it, yes. Well I heard them.

 Q. So people coming through your turnstile could go either
    way? - A. They could go either way then, yes.

 Q. Were you given any instructions about people who had no
    tickets at all? - A. We are always instructed before we
    go out, if that is what you mean.
                             5

                                     R. SAYNOR


Q. No, no, I mean by the Police after half-past-2? - A. Oh
   no, I don't let them in without a ticket.  Our instructions
   are from the office.  We don't let them in without a ticket.

Q. Did you get any people with Spion Kop tickets? - A. An odd
   one but I send them out but not at the time when the crush
   was on, I got either West Stand tickets or the normal North
   Stand tickets plus the ones what was doubling up with them
   what knew, mates coming together like, and they double up
   and they just follow round with them.

Q. Did there come a time really when you could not basically
   do anything at all? - A. Well you could not do a thing
   about it. You just could not do a thing about it.

Q. Did people have any difficulty getting through your turnstile
   apart from the crush of getting in? - A. Because they were
   all together, yes.  They had a lot of difficulty getting
   in.  In fact it got to a time where I just felt like
   chucking sponge in and shutting door and letting them sort
   it out outside because I could tell there were plenty
   inside in any case, you know.   They were well over the
   amount then inside what had been before at semi-finals.

Q. In all your 25 years' experience as a turnstile operator
   have you experienced anything like this before? - A. Oh no,
   nothing on that scale.  I have experienced them pushing
   through the doors when a person has opened it but not to
   that extent of probably about 100, 200 got in before the
   Police took control over it. This time even before they
   opened the doors the Police had no control over the crowd
   inside.

Q. So you were getting the crush outside your particular
   turnstile in a way you had not experienced before.  Is
   that what you are telling us? - A. Oh yes.

         MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, thank you very much.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q. Yes, there are just two things you said, Mr. Saynor, that
   I would just like you to expand on if you will to see if
   you really meant what you said.

         You said you might have shut the gates and it would
   not have made any difference because there were more inside
   than there usually were anyway? - A. Yes.

Q. How could you tell that before Gate C was opened the ground
   as it were was full.  Is that just a guess on your part?
   - A. It is a guess for the simple reason they were all
   milling just at the back of the terrace where they should
   be watching the game and the game was due to be played
   which it is obvious they have come to watch a semi-final,
   they would have been in the ground watching and they could
                            6

                                    R. SAYNOR


   not get in.  I have seen that happen before.  They just
   could not get there so what they are doing, they are just
   doing the best way is hanging about hoping Police would
   probably put them in a better place on front of ground,
   somewhere like that.  That has happened before.

Q. Can you just take this slowly.  Before Gate C was open you
   say there were a lot of people milling about in the concourse
   between the turnstiles and the Stand wall? - A. Yes, yes.

Q. How do you know they weren't just standing there waiting
   for friends to come through? - A. I don't know, but through
   past experience I have a good idea they wasn't, they just
   could not get in.

Q. You have seen that before have you? - A. Oh I have seen it
   before, yes.

Q. Is that because the two central pens get full and they don't
   know where to go? - A. They just can't push their way in
   from the back, you know. Once they start getting in from
   the back they are not too bad, but the first five or ten
   people in at the back seem to hold everything out you see
   and if they have not got the push, not a young man or
   anything like that, well they just have not got no chance.

Q. Have you ever seen in the past on similar games when it
   has been like that, Stewards or Policemen sending them
   off to the wing pens, the side pens? - A. They do try to
   distribute them round where they can get in.

Q. You have seen that done before, have you? - A. Yes, I have
   seen that done before, yes.

Q. Was it being done on that day? - A. I could not tell you.
   I don't know, I was not able to see anything like that.

Q. Another thing you have said which sounds a bit dramatic
   and I want to see how far you mean it, is that"the Police
   had lost control of the crowd inside the ground"? - A. Yes,
   well you see there was that many.  There was that many
   jumping over.

Q. This is before Gate C is open, we are talking about? - A.
   Yes, because I was finished before that opened, yes.
   I am talking about before Gate C.

Q. You are talking about before the gates open? - A. Yes.

Q. You say they had "lost control".  In what way? - A. They
   were out-numbered.  Every time somebody came in without
   a ticket, which was every other one practically that were
   trying to get in, I was banging on window for them to
   pick them up as they went through which they were taking
   them as best they could but they were coming in too fast
   for them to take them and stop them.
                                    R. SAYNOR


Q. What you are talking about is the Police   were not able to
   control the number of the fans coming in   without tickets.
   It was not there was any disorder inside   the ground that
   the Police weren't able to control? - A.   Well I don't know,
   I was only interested in my turnstile.

Q. It is just the non-ticket holders you are talking about?
   - A. Yes.

         MR. HYTNER:   Thank you.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD;

Q. Mr. Saynor, you have been on the turnstiles time in and time
   out over the years? - A. Yes.

Q. And on this day amongst the things that were happening,
   there were a lot of people coming through following close
   behind people who had got tickets? - A. That is a regular
   occurrence with them even on normal matches.

Q. But this was somewhat different on this day, wasn't it? -
   A. Well they are better organised such teams as Liverpool
   and Manchester United who take quite a vast number away
   with them, you know, they know all these tricks and you
   have got to watch out for them.

Q. Who is better organised? - A. Such as Liverpool supporters,
   Manchester United, they take more away with them, you know.
   They know all these tricks of trade, sort of thing.

Q. So this crowd was an experienced crowd, is that what you
   are saying? - A. True, yes.

Q. And they were wise? - A. Oh, they was wise, they know the
   ropes which way to get in and which not, you know.

Q. And one of the ways they adopt is those who have not got
   a ticket get close in behind someone who has, and are you
   saying at times three people were managing to come through?
   - A. No, not three.  Three could not get through but two
   would.

Q. Two on a ticket? - A. Yes, but they would know how to do
   it you see, they push in and make sure.  If the one in
   front was his mate as well who had got a ticket well it
   was quite easily done.

Q. They would have to be organised to do that? - A. Not
   necessarily.  I mean I could walk through with a ticket
   and find out there is somebody following me at back, you
   know what I mean, but I was interested in getting in
   myself so the one at the back has followed me in before
   you know where you are if you don't watch out for it.


                                    /Q. Are you saying
                                 8


                                                  R. SAYNOR

Q. Are you saying on this day it was happening time and time
   again? A. True, yes, and when you were trying to stop
   it and argue with them that you hadn't a leg to stand on,
   before you know where you are they were jumping over.

Q. And this happened time and time again, people jumping
   over?   A. Oh yes, the last quarter of an hour of it
   being open, yes.

Q. So obviously you are not able to say how many did it,
   but many jumped over?   A. Many, yes.

Q. You see, you were on Gate No. 10, were you not?          A. Yes.

Q. According to the electronic count - page 167 - only one
   jumper came through your turnstile?   A. True. What
   do you mean, only one jumper? It can't stamp how many
   do jump over.

Q. It misses them?   A. If they don't -- yes, if they don't
   register on the electronics.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I do not understand this. I
     thought the whole point of this presumably expensive
     device was to catch people who did just this? Is that
     that right?

Q.        Mr. WOODWARD: According to the record, which says
     that just one jumped over --    Are you saying that that
     is not right?    A. I'm definitely saying it's not right.

Q. And is the situation that you intend to describe this:
   that because of the great number that were coming through
   either by squeezing up behind someone without a ticket
   or leaping through because you have been distracted or
    whatever, it was that that the Police were having great
   difficulty in dealing with? A. Yes, because they was
   out-numbered.   There were more getting over that way,
   you know, in a short time than the Police could deal with

Q. And this seemed to be happening to a greater degree and
   much more frequently, after about quarter-to-three?
   A. Between half-past-two and 3 o'clock.

Q. And you have said that the situation was such that you
   felt like throwing the sponge in?   A. Oh, yes. You
   just couldn't deal with it. You had no chance.

Q. And when you told the Inquiry that you had never seen
   anything like this in 25 years, that is what you are
   intending to describe?   A. Yes.

          M r . WOODWARD:   Thank you.

          Mr. GLASGOW:      Thank you, no questions, sir.
                                 9


                                                      S. M. COPELAND

          Mr. GOLDSACK: Mr. Copeland, please.   Sir, Mr. Milton,
     who is No. 3 on the list, is not presently available.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

                 STEPHEN MICHAEL COPELAND, Called
                    Examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

Q.   Mr. Copeland, I think the season that has just ended has
     been the fourth season that you have worked as a turnstile
     operator?    A. That's right.

Q. And on the semi-final day you were given Turnstile F?
   A. That's right, yes.

Q. Which means that you should have been receiving tickets for
   the Leppings Lane Terrace?   A. That's right.

Q.    Can I ask you please about other tickets that you may have
     received? Did you during the course of the day let people
     through your turnstile with tickets for the Spion Kop?
     A.    I did, yes.

Q. Who told you to do that?          A.     A police officer told me to
   do it, sir.

Q. Do you know which one?   A. I don't know his name, sir, but
   he was an high rank because other constables were calling
   him sir.

Q. Anything noticeable about his appearance?           A. Yes, he was
   a well-built fellow with a bushy beard.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Is that likely to be Inspector
     White?

          Mr. GOLDSACK:   Inspector White.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   When did he tell you to let those people
     in?   A. Very early on. It might have been any time between
     12 and 1 o'clock.

Q. And did he just come to your turnstile and tell you to do
   that?   A. What actually happened was we had got one or
   two people coming, wanting to get in, and we sent them away.
   We told a police officer, and about five minutes later this
   officer came and he walked into my turnstile and told the
   officer outside and also myself, and I passed it down the
   line and told everybody else.

Q. I see. Following that instruction, can you estimate how
   many people you let through with Spion Kop tickets? A. I
   would say in the region of probably 50 to 150.

Q. That is a fairly wide bracket, is it not?             A.   Yes.
                                   10


                                                     S. M. COPELAND

Q. 50 to 150.    Can you be any more precise?            A.   About 100.

Q. As far as you were concerned, did a time come when you were
   told not to take Spion Kop tickets?   A. No, we took
   them right up to closing time.

Q.    When the crush which we all know     so much about by now
     built up, were there people going through your turnstile
     without tickets at all?    A. Yes, a lot of people.

Q. A lot. How were they achieving that?             A.    They were mainly
   coming through two at a time.

Q.   Doubling up?    A. Yes, and    they were also jumping over.

Q.    Can we take those one by one?  When they were doubling up,
     would it normally be a case of the first one having a ticket
     and the one behind him not having a ticket?   A. Yes, that's
     right.

Q.    Can you give us some idea of how many got in that way
     without tickets? A. I would say going through two at a
     time and jumping over, once again probably about 100 people.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:Just tell me the mechanics of
     two going through at once.    You can actually get two people
     through on one click of the turnstile, can you?     A. Yes.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:  They really have to be chest-to-back,
     do they?   A. On the old turnstiles you do have to be sort
     of together, but the new turnstiles that they have on the
     Kop you have great difficulty getting through two at a
     time, because they are a different design to the old
      turnstiles.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          And these are the old ones at
     A to F?    A. Yes.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Because of the sensor that we know
     should catch people who are jumping, exactly what do you
     mean by jumping?   A. Where you walk through the turnstile
     you have got two wooden plates at the side.

Q. Let's try and find that in the bundle of photographs. Will'
   you look at photograph 8 in the bundle 'West Midlands 2',
   and photograph 9?    Does that help at all? I think they
   show the one that you are on, do they not?    A. Yes. On
   the right-hand side you've got like a wooden post and on
   the left-hand side you've got the turnstile where there's
   the hole where you put your ticket in. They put their
   hands on there and just lift their feet over. Their head
   doesn't really go much higher;   it's just their legs that
   go over. They don't climb over the turnstile;   they just
   lift themselves over.

Q. So their head goes through at very much the height they
   would go through if they are going through properly? A. Yes.
   You would have to be very tall to get the sensor. You see,
                                         S. M. COPELAND

if someone did climb over, that's the only way you would
get it on the sensor.

If they put their foot on the top of the turnstile and got
over that way?   A. That way, yes.




                          /Q.   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                                    12


                                                       S.   M.   COPELAND



Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What is the height of the
     top bit of tubular  steel there?    A.  I would say 2 ft.
     to 3 ft.   Not very high at all.

Q.   You can   stand over it on tip-toes, can you?    A.    Yes.
     I would   be able to climb over it without struggling.

            MR. GOLDSACK:   That may have solved one problem,
     Mr.   Copeland.   Thank you very much.

                     Cross-e xa mi ne d    by MR.   JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Copeland,     when did you first realise your turnstile
   had sensors?       A.   Last season I think they installed
   them.

Q.   I am sorry?     A.     I think they installed them last season.
     That was the   first   time I knew about them.

Q.   May I make it very clear I am not talking about you or
     anyone at Sheffield Wednesday but my Lord has asked some
     questions about why it is there has been evidence of people
     jumping over and going through without tickets but yet
     there is no evidence of the sensors catching them.    I
     again emphasise, I am not talking about you.    It is
     clear, is it not, that the fans who were climbing over
     would not know about the sensor?    A.   No, they wouldn't.

Q.   It is quite clear that a fan who wanted to get in would
     not be terribly careful about wheiire his head was as he
     went over the barrier.   A.   That's right.

Q.   But there would be one person who would be very careful
     about where the fanfe head was when he went over the barrier
     if he did not want him to be recorded, and that is a
     steward who was taking money for people going in without
     tickets.   A.   Yes.

Q.    It does not take too much working out, does it, because
     at the end of the day you have to provide to the Club a
     number of tickets.     A.   Yes.

Q.   And that has got to account          for the people going      through.
     A.  Yes.

Q.   If there is a video on your turnstile, you have to explain                --
     not you p ar ticularly but a steward has to explain why
     it is 250 people went through on the video and only 200
     went through his turnstile and 2 tn the sensor.    A.   Yes.

Q.   I would like you to look at Photograph No. 8.   We know
     that there are certain situations where Police Officers
     could not possibly stem the flow of hundreds of people.
     Is that your turnstile on the right?   A.   Yes, it is.

Q.    You say all these people went through in twos.    Would
     it not have been very, very simple for Police Officers to
     prevent that by standing there?     A.   There were Police
                                    13


                                                 S.   M.   COPELAND



     Officers   standing   there.

Q. Yes, I appreciate they were standing there but we understand
   that they were searching sometimes on the front and on the
   back of the turnstiles.   A.   Yes.

Q. A Police Officer stood there could prevent anyone coming
   through in twos, could they not?   A.   They could do, yes.

Q.   At some stage, why did you not say to the Sergeant or the
     Inspector or to any of the Police Officers or any of the
     stewards, "Would you stand there, please."    A.  Right
     from when I got there there was Police Officers outside
     and inside and they were searching people when they came
     in but after 2 o'clock it was totally impossible to do
     this.

Q. Mr. Copeland, it is my fault.   One of the tasks is to prevent
   people getting in without tickets.   A.   Yes.

Q. But that is a Horatio on the bridge situation - one man could
   stem the whole flow, could he not, quite simply?   A.   No,
   he couldn't.

Q.    Look at Photograph No. 8, Turnstile F,  a Policeman stood
     in the doorway with a door that closes could quite easily
     make sure that everybody who came in had a ticket.
     A.    Well, you can see there are two turnstiles there
     and he would have to be very quick to look at both
     people coming through.

Q.    Mr. Copeland, I do not want to appear to be rude - I really
     did mean one Officer per turnstile, one for F and one for G.
     A.     It would be possible to do that, yes.

Q.    Not "possible" - very easy.    Can you throw any light on
     this question:    why do you think the Liverpool fans went
     very carefully through in twos, not to attract the sensor?
     A.    They went through in twos because it is the easiest way
     of getting through.     To climb over, they are recognised
     by the Police Officers outside.

Q.   So that they were doing it so carefully and deliberately
     and quietly so that a Police Officer would not notice them?
     A.   Or in other words, climbing over is a harder way than
     going through in twos.

Q. Finally, Mr. Copeland, could you assist on this:    You will
   have handed your tickets for the Spion, Kcp in with your
   bundle, will you not?   A.   Yes.

Q.   So we can, in fact, possibly check exactly how many      Spion
     Kop tickets you had?   A.   You could do that, yes.
                                     14


                                                    S.   M.   COPELAND



                    C ro ss-e xa mi ne d   by MR.   WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Copeland, if someone does try to get through, you
   obviously will do your very best to prevent him getting
   through if he has not got a ticket.  A.   I would do,yes.

Q. And apart from c om municating with him and telling him to
   go back, if he does not co-operate with you, you would
   endeavour to attract the attention of a Police Officer?
   A.   Yes, I did do.

Q.   Are you sitting down at the turnstile?                 Have you got
     a seat?    A.No, standing up constantly             throughout the
     game, t hroughout the working.

Q.   Of course,   you have to watch people coming               in.      A.   Yes.

Q.   If you want to attract the attention of the Police Officer,
     what do you do?   Do you reach over and tap on the window?
     A.   No, what I actually did is - the Police Officer outside
     my turnstile, I could see him and if anybody jumped over
     or went through two together I gave him a nod to let him
     know there was somebody coming through without a ticket.

Q.   And that was a system which you had used in the past?
     A.     No, it is just something that we did for that match.
     It is something we have not needed to do because people
     coming through, it is a constant flow and the Police
     Of fi cers there can see what is happening, whereas at that
     match you couldn't because there were that many people.

Q. And the situation was that the method you had got of
   c om mu ni ca ti ng with the Policeman worked to start with,
   did it?        A.     It did, yes,up to about quarter past two.

Q.    But even then people were still coming through and the
     Pol iceman was doing his best to deal with them.   A.   Yes.

                    Cr oss -e xa mi ne d   by MR.    GLASGOW:

Q.Mr. Copeland, I wonder if you could help us about the
   machinery, to save us having to call somebody else, and I
   am sorry to put the questions to you.   Do you know
   the way in which this sensor works?    A.   All I know
   is that if people go through the sensor it clicks on a
   computer somewhere in the office.

Q. Did you know that if somebody on, may I just say, a
   normal day were to come up to your turnstile and jump
   over the turnstile without the turnstile operating ---
   A.   Yes.

Q. And break the beam above                   A.     Yes.

Q.   That would trigger the digital counter within the computer.
     A.   Yes, it would do.
j>u )>
  t      *



                                                15


                                                                         S.   M.   COPELAND



             Q.   But if the situation is as it was on this day, that the
                  turnstile is turning all the time at the same time as
                  people are climbing over the top ---   A.   Yes.

             Q. Did you know that the machinery was set so that the
                turnstile turning cancelled out the electric eye above
                it?   A.   I didn't know that, no.

             Q.   Perhaps it is a matter of commonsense.    If it did not
                  operate in that way anybody who was very tall or was
                  carrying anything at all who went through there would
                  break the beam even if they had legitimately given you
                  their ticket, would they not?    A.   That's right, yes.

             Q.   You u nderstood that?    A.        Yes.

             Q.   I should say you understand it now but did you understand
                  it at the time?    A.  I didn't understand it before but
                  I u nderstand it now.

             Q.   The only people who the electric eye is going to catch
                  and designed to catch are people who climb over at a time
                  when the turnstile is not revolving?   A.   Yes.

             Q. And is it your recollection that at the tim e when people
                were climbing over was at a time when, within a ma tt er of
                seconds, the turnstile itself was o pe rating as well?
                A.   Yes.

                        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not entirely follow that.
                  It would be difficult for anybody to climb over the
                  t urnstile while somebody else was physically qoinq throuqh
                  it, would it not?

                       MR. GLASGOW:   The difficulty, and I may have to call
                  We are trying to save as much time and be as helpful as
                  possible and I wonder if I could give you the explanation
                  and if anybody needs it, they can ---

                       LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:        Yes,   thank you.

                         MR. GLASGOW:   Our undersfeSBding* sir, of the position
                  is that there is a device set and it is really a matter of
                  timing that if the beam is broken within a matter of a few
                  seconds, and I cannot tell ypu how many, of the turnstile
                  operating, the turnstile revolution will cancel that out
                  in order not to give the false reading of the person who
                  j u ^ happens to be too tall, and what it is designed to
                  catch is the person who runs or climbs over the apparently
                  free and u nrevolving turnstile.     It is not perfect but
                  it is thought to be better than a system which gave a
                  false alarm every time anybody came through at the time
                  when the mach in e was turning.

                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.   Can you just
                  complete this?   Does the turnstile operator know when the
                  sensor has been activated?
                                   16



                                                         S.   M.   COPELAND



          THE WITNESS:      I don't,         my Lord,   no.

          MR.   GLASGOW:    So,

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   S b Mr. Jackson's point about
     some turnstile operator taking money and saying, ?*Keep your
     head down" - he would not actually know whether that had
     been successful or it had not;   is that right?

Q.        MR. GLASGOW:    Did you get any warning at all of when
     that beam is broken?    A.   No, I have no idea.  All I
     know is that if you are tall or you do climb over the
     turnstile it will be broken.    But the point I would like
     to make about taking money is that there were Police there;
     it would be impossible to take money or to arrange to
     take money.   It wouldn't be possible for a steward there
     to organise people climbing over under the beam to take
     money.

Q.   I do not want to belittle that;     I accept that and I am sure
     others do in your case, Mr. Copeland, but could we look
     together at Photograph No. 2 in the bundle.      Did you
     realise that the sensitive piece of machinery, which is
     rather like a little burglar detector, is it not, the
     little thing with the red winking eye, that little piece
     of m ac hinery is set actually on the wall at quite a
     hitji height where it is unlikely to be physically knocked
     by anyboc^ who gets in the way of it.     A.   Yes, I did
     know.

Q.   It is above   head height.         A.      Yes.

Q. But despite the fact that, like a burglar alarm, it is set
   above head height, of course it has a little beam that
   can be adjusted to be turned down.   A.   Yes.

Q. A ccording   to the desires    of the engineer who is setting                 it
   up.    A.     Yes.

Q. And that is something which is adjustable?                      A.     Yes.

Q.   And you have had e xperience in the past, I think, with
     the alarm going off u nn ecessarily and people coming out
     from the Club Control Box to find out what is going on?
     A.   Yes.    I don't think that has happened to myself but
     I do hear; of stories where that has happened to other
     people.

Q.   You knew that that had happened?              A.     Yes.

Q. And there have been attempts by the control of the setting
   of the beam and the timing of its coincidence with the
   revolution of the turnstile to get it to the optimum
   p osition over the past season;  did you know that they
   were playing around with it to try and get the setting
   best?    A.   No, I didn't know that.

Q.   Alright.      While we are looking at Photograph               No.   2 -
j )>$?
                                              17



                                                                       S.    M.    COPELAND



              and again I am not suggesting this is your turnstile -
              it is obvious there that somebody has simply physically
              cut through the wire, is it not?   A.   Yes, I have
              noticed on a lot of turnstiles that there did seem to be
              a lot of cut wires.

         Q.   Perhaps I ought to ask you, lest the suggestion is made,
              have you ever heard of a turnstile operator cutting
              through the wire on his own sensor in order to let people
              through for bribes?    A.   No, none at all.

         Q.   It may be that will have to be put to somebody                        else.
              Thank you very much.   A.   Thank you.

                                    ALBERT    RHODES,    called

                                Examined      by MR.    PHILLIPS:

         Q.   You are Albert   Rhodes,      are you?     A.         Yes.

         Q.   And you are a t urnstile operator at Sheffield Wednesday
              Ground?    A.   That is correct.

         Q. And have been,     I think,      for about 9 years;             is that
            right?     A.      Yes.

         Q.   On this day, you were        the turnstile      operator on Turnstile C.
              A.   That is right.

         Q.   And concerned therefore with tickets             for the standing             Leppings
              Lane terrace.   A.That is correct,               yes.

         Q.    Would you look, please, at the bundle of photog ra ph s that
              you have before you, West Midlands bundle 2, the larger
              bundle.    A.   Yes.

         Q.   Look at the   first   one,    will   you please?         A.         Yes.

         Q.   Is that, in   fact,   the back of your turnstile               letter C?
              A.   Yes.

         Q. And that is,     of course,      taken   from the yard looking               in.
            A.   Yes.

         Q.   We see there there is a window which appears                   to be cracked.
              A.   Yes.

         Q. Was it like that on the day, before               you    started?
            A.   Not before we started, no.

         Q.   Is that a window through which you can see?   A.  No, it
              is a frosted glass, that.   Some of them are clear but that
              one was frosted.

         Q. How, then, do you get in touch with anybody out in the
            yard?   A.  We have got to open that inner gate, and either
            look round it or bring it back again to look out.
3/?
                                    18


                                                       A.   RHODES



      Q.   You have got to actually poke your head through the doorway,
           do you mean?   A.   Yes.

      Q.   Look, will you please, at the next two pictures.      Do you see
           there the infra-red beam in your turnstile?   A.      Yes.

      Q.   You can see quite plainly that the wire to that has been
           cut?   A.   Yes.




                                           /Can   you tell us,   first
SWnL   ,
Vj
                                          19


                                                                  A. RHODES

           Q.    Can you tell us, first of all, whether the wire was in
                that condition before you started ___ - A. I have no
                idea.

           Q.    .... your tour?   You have no idea. Did you not look at
                it when you went   into the turnstile? - A. Not really, no.

           Q. You cannot help then as to when that might have happened?
              - A. No.

           Q. Did you see anybody with a knife? - A. No.

           Q. You did not. -A. No.

           Q. All right. Thank you very much. Ndw, can I just ask you
              a bit about the people who were coming through your
              turnstile? Your job, of course, was to take the tickets
              which were standing tickets? - A. Yes, B tickets.

           Q. Did you get any different instructions at any time? - A.
              We were instructed before we went out to take some Forest
              tickets, Kop tickets, but if they got too many that they
              had a segregated part on the Spion Kop for Liverpool fans.
              We were told that by ....

           Q. Who gave you that instruction? - A. Roger Childs.

           Q. Roger Childs.  That was before you started your .... - A.
              That was at the briefing before we went out, yes.

           Q. You had to take some Kop tickets? -A. Yes.

           Q. Did he specify any limit or number? - A. No.

           Q. Well, how would you know when you had got to the point of
              having too many?- A. Well, like has been said, when we got
              there a Police Officer later gave us instructions. He
              told me take half, half and half.

           Q.   Take half and half? -A. And then - yes - turn half    away.

           Q.   Who was this Police Officer? - A. The Officer with    the
                beard.

           Q. Yes. And when was that instruction given? - A. Early on,
              about 2 o'clock^

           Q. Early on, about 2 o'clock. Now, altogether before you
              closed the turnstile can you give us any idea how many
              people came through with Kop tickets? -0A. Not very many,

           Q.   Not very many. - A. No.   I should say 5 to 10.

           Q.   Did you send any of them back or let them all through?
                - A. I tried to send some back, yes.
                                 20


                                                          A. RHODES

Q. What happened? -A. I got a bit of abuse so I let them in.
   There weren!to that;many any way.

Q. All right. Now, what about people who had tickets for,
   say, the North Stand or the West Stand? - A. I think I
   took one West Stand.

Q. What about people who had no tickets at all? - A. Yes,
   got a few ....

Q. How many people came through like that, would you say?
   - A. At the beginning I caught a few, I got a few.

Q.   You say you caught a few?        - A. Well, stopped them, tried
     to stop them.

Q.   What did you do with them when you stopped them? - A. Like
     I say, I had to open that gate and go round to shout the
     Police Officer outside.  I got one or two like that.

Q. Is that a Police Officer in the courtyard? - A. In the
   compound, yes.

Q.    Yes.  So you would let them through and then they would
     be taken out? - A. Yes.

Q. Now, what happened afterwards? - A. Well, when it got
   really bad they could not get out any way and I could
   not get in contact with the Officer.

Q.   And people were just coming through with        or without
     tickets, were they? - A. Well, yes.

Q.   Did you get offered any money? -A. Yes, got offered money.

Q.   How many times did that happen? -A. Said        in my statement
     about 6 to 8 times.

Q. Yes.    Is that about right? - A. Yes.

Q. What sort of sums were you offered?- A. Five, ten.

Q. And what did you do? - A. Turned them back.

Q.    Were these people who came before about 2.30 or afterwards?
     - A. Mostly before, I should say.

Q.    Yes.  Now, altogether have you any clue as to the number of
     people who came through your turnstile without tickets? -
     A. Again, I said in my statement about 25. Probably 25
     to 30.

Q. Is that right? - A. I would say so, yes.

Q. That is about right, is it?          All right.   Now, was there
                                 21



                                                        A. RHODES

     anything you could do about this? - A. Not at that time
     after quarter-to-3, no.

Q. After quarter-to-3. - A. It was impossible.

Q. Is that the time when you regarded things as becoming
   impossible? - A. Yes. After that, yes.

Q. Had you received any particular instructions at that
   time what to do from anybodf?- A. Only - no, not really, no.

Q. No different instructions from what you got before? - A.
   No.

          MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes.        Yes, thank you.

                 Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. Rhodes, one matter.  You were told you would have
   to admit some people with Kop tickets on this occasion,
   I think? - A. Yes.

Q. It is just a question of your recollection of who told
   you that. - A. I think it was at the briefing before we
   went out.

Q. You think it was at the briefing. - A. Yes.

Q. Can yo& remember who that was with? -A. It was Roger,
   Roger Childs, I think.

Q.   Roger Childs. - A. Yes.     He ....

Q.   Forgive me. You do not seem very sure and I .... - A.
     I am not actually, no.

Q. You are not. Well, perhaps you would like to look at
   your statement, would you? Have you got your statement
   there? - A. Yes.

Q. You made two statements, I think. One to the Police
   Officer who came with the questionnaire? - A. Yes.

Q.   And one to a solicitor.     Do you remember? - A. Yes.

Q.   I do not think you deal with it at all - that is not a
     criticism - you were not asked about it by the Police
     Officer with the questionnaire? - A. No.

Q. But you were asked about it by the solicitor? -A. I
   think so, yes.

Q. Go to the second, rather longer statement, would you,
   and, first of all, perhaps you would just look at page
   2? I think in fact you recalled when you made your statement in the
t v
                                          22


                                                                  A. RHODES

           top three lines that you reported to the stiles room
           located near the players' entrance and you in fact
           reported to a Mr. Jones? - A. Well, I said that then,
           yes. He is in charge, yes.

      Q.   He is in charge. - A. Several people behind that desk.

      Q.   Does that help you  to recall who in fact spoke to youwhen
           you arrived for work that day? Was it Mr. Jones or Mr.
           Childs? -A. No, I do not think it -no.

      Q. Well, let's go on to the next page, the third paragraph
         in the middle of the page about four lines down.   Well,
         I had better give you the whole paragraph. Did you say,
         "Last year we had been told that we could accept tickets
         from the wrong end  of the ground. This year we were
         told that there was a segregated section at the Kop ...."
         - A. Yes.

      Q. ".... for Liverpool fans. We were told to allow some
         supporters through with Nottingham Forest tickets and
         to send some back.  It was thePttlice Officer who issued
         those instructions.  I do not know the identitycof fehe
         Police Officer but I noticed that he had a beard and
         was wearing a flat cap"? - A. Correct,

      Q. And again, I am not doubting at all your honesty, Mr.
         Rhodes, butc does that help you to recall who it was who
         told you to do that? - A. Well, we only had that one
         briefing from Roger Childs, so ....

      Q. Well, do you think what is in your statement is right?
         - A. Yes, that Police Officer did say that,yes, he did,
         when we got on to the gates.

      Q.   When     you got on to the gates. -A.         Yes.

      Q.   Are you saying that you think either Mr.Childs .... -A.
           I think.  I cannot be certain.

      Q           had also told you? - A. Yes.

                  MR. GLASGOW:   I see.        Thank you very much.

                             By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR?

      Q. Just before you go.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            Just above the passage you
           quoted, Mr. Glasgow:

      Q. "All ticket match I had been told to take B tickets.
         Standing only. As far as I can remember these were
         blue and mauve for Liverpool supporters and yellow
                                                  A. RHODES

and brown for Nottingham Forest." Is that right?
I thought the brown was for the North Stand and the ....

     MR. GLASGOW:   Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR ___ the red was for the West
Stand and the mauve was for the terraces, nothing to do
with Nottingham Forest.

      MR. GLASGOW:  I did not know this.  I am the one
with previous convictions for colour blindness in this
case.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I thought you were an expert
on that now.

     MR. GLASGOW:   I have to have reminders provided by
my clients to know the difference between brown and
yellow, sir, so I am the last to criticise anybody else.

     THE WITNESS:   I am colour blind as well.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Are you? - A. Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR::   Well, we will not pursue it.
Thank you very much.

             STEVEN CHARLES RHODES Called

               Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Mr. Rhodes, you, I think were on turnstile 15? - A. Yes,
that is right.

Which means that you should have been taking tickets for
the West Stand? - A. That is correct, yes.

Did you during the course of the day have anyone come
to your turnstile with tickets for the Nottingham end
of the match? -A. Not for the Nottingham end, no.

As the crush developed did you have people coming through
for other parts of the West end? - A. I had them coming
through with terrace tickets for the Liverpool end, yes.

What I would like you in particular to deal with, please,
is anyone who came through without tickets at all. Did
you have some? - A. Yes.

From about what time? -A. I estimate from about 2, 2.15.

Using the methods we have heard others describe this
morning already? - A. Exactly the same, yes.
<W\Q>
                                         24



                                                                S.C. RHODES

        Q. And again can you give us your best Estimate of the number
           who went through yours without tickets? -A. I think in the
           statement I put about 30 to 40 but thinking about it after -
           it is round about the same - I would up it to about 40 to
           50 but I would not think more than 50 people.

        Q.   Up to 50 people. - A. Up to 50 people.

                  MR. GOLDSAGK:   Thank you very much.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you very much, Mr. Rhodes.
             That is all.

                            WAYNE AUSTIN HALL Called

                            Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

        Q. Mr. Hall, you are a part-time turnstile operator.         Is
           that right? - A. That is right, yes.

        Q.   You have been doing this for about 11 years? -A. That
             is correct.

        Q. On the day in question you were on turnstile 2? - A.
           That is right, yes.

        Q. You expected therefore to have people going into the
           North Stand? - A. Yes, that is correct.

        Q. Did it work out like that? - A. Yes, it did.

        Q. Did everybody who came through your turnstile have a
           ticket for the North Stand? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you have anybody present any ticket for any other
           part of the ground at any stage? - A. WesttStand, three
           people.

        Q. Three people for the West Stand.         Can you say when that
           was? - A. About 20-to-3.

        Q. What did you do with them? - A. I put them on to a Police
           Officer that was stood in the ground.

        Q.    Were you offered any money by anybody? - A. No, I was not,
             no.

        Q.   Did you see any forged tickets? - A. No.

        Q.   Did any people go through your turnstile withouttickets
             at all? - A. No.

        Q. At any stage? - A.At any stage.

                  MR. PHILLIPS:   Thank you very much.
                                   25


                                                                W.A. HALL

                   Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr, Hall, I think that you on this occasion actually
   counted the number of people that you were admitting
   at one stage? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. There is just one matter on that. You actually counted up
   between 2.15 and the time you closed your turnstile? - A.
   Well, from opening up to 2.15.

Q. You counted from up to 2.15 and I think you only had a
   very few people in? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Veryquiet in the early stages. - A.            150.

Q.   Yes.   In the next hour after that do you remember how
     many you counted? - A. 920.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        How many?

            MR. GLASGOW:   920:

Q. Between 2.15 and .... -A. 10-past-3.

Q.   and 10-past-3 when you shut your gate. - A.              920.

Q.   In the 55 minutes. And is it right to say after 3o'clock
     there really was just a dribble of a few people coming in?
     - A. Paul Bentley was working opposite me and he had to
     keep opening and shutting doors but there was only about
     three or four people came in after we closed up.

Q.   Yes.   So the 950 people allowing for a handful all came
     through your turnstile in the period between 2.15 and 3
     o'clock? - A. That is right, yes.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        920 was it?

            MR. GLASGOW:   950.     920, My Lord.          I am so sorry.
     920:

Q.   And was that a fairly typical rate of flow for an all              ticket
     game? - A. For an all ticket game, no.

Q. Normally work faster than that or slower? - A. Slower.

Q. Slower. - A. Are we talking about an all ticket semi­
   final?

Q. Yes. - A. Well, I worked in 1988 and I took about 700
   and they all came through in an orderly fashion.

Q. Yes. In fact we have got your figures. Your own count,
   I think, was a physical one, was net it?      actually
                            26


                                                     W.A, HALL

   counted the tickets? -A. Yes.

Q. And then checked it against the read.... - A. Yes.

Q. You have been there for 11 years, have not you, Hr. Hall?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Had you ever seen anything like this before? - A. Never.

        MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you.

                   By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. I am afraid I have not followed this. You say in 1988
   in the same period, an hour, you got 708 through? - A. Yes.
   That was at the same end.

Q. So when you say you had never seen anything like this you
   are just talking about never seen so many come so late.
   Is that it? - A. That is it, yes.

Q. What I am interested in is this. We have heard suggestions
   that because a lot came late and there was a crush that
   actually impaired the efficiency of the people going
   through the turnstile, leaving aside people trying to
   jump over, because of pressure and people all getting
   squashed and not getting into the turnstiles easily
   and so on? - A. Tempers were frayed.




                                 / Q. Can you help
                                  W. HALL


Can you help about that.  You seem to have got them through
at a good rate? - A. Well what I kept shouting to them is:
"If you don't want to be crushed, please tear your stub and
just thrown it in" and as they were throwing it in I were
checking it and just throwing it to one side.

So you did not get people wedged in the doorway and that
sort of thing? - A. The reason why I did this I was seeing
children being passed over the tops of adults.

Passed over through the turnstiles? - A. Yes, and then
obviously the adult or parent, whoever he was or she was,
came through later with the child's ticket already torn
to throw in. That is the reason why I took that action
to have the tickets torn and allow them through quicker
to stop being literally crushed against the paddles in
the turnstile.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.

      MR. GLASGOW:   Might I ask one question on that, sir?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, certainly.


          Further Cross-Examined by M R . GLASGOW:

I wonder if you were aware, and I will give you the figures
to save you looking it up, that all your colleagues in
area we have on page 166 sir at Turnstiles, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and 6 all admitted either just over or just under 1,000
people? - A. Yes, I was aware of that, yes.

So everybody was working at your speed, approximately?
- A. Approximately, yes.

And for reasons that the inquiry may hear from other witnesses,
those at for example Turnstiles A-G were having a lot more
difficulties? - A. Yes.

      MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you.


          Further Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

There was a time when children were being passed over the
heads of people waiting to go through the turnstiles? - A.
That is correct.
 So they would have to be passed through carefully by the
 individuals and passed over the gate, over the turnstile
 gate? - A. Yes.
 Quite high   up above the heads of everybody? - A. Yes.
                            28

                                    W. HALL


Q. Do you know whether the sensor was working in your turnstile?
   - A. I don't know.

Q. Because according to that nobody had got to that sort of
   height certainly when the gate was stationary? - A. Well they
   were being dropped below the sensor just in front of the
   paddle so they could go away.

Q. In front of the paddle on the ground side? - A. As the
   sensors look there is like drill holes, isn't there, in the
   gates where the sensor tracks through. Well the children
   were being dropped in front of the paddle.

Q. It may not be important about the mechanics of it, but what
   was happening was that people were being passed through
   fairly high and then being put down on the ground side of
   the turnstile? - A. That is right, yes.


                    ALLAH JOHN HASKINS Called

                    Examined bv MR. GOLDSACK:

Q. Mr. Haskins, you I think were on Turnstile No. 4? -0A. I
   was, yes.

Q. So quite near to the last witness Mr. Hall? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q. Can I simply ask you please about the numbers if there were
   any, of people who went through your turnstile without
   tickets at all? - A. I would estimate between 80 and 100.
   I said in my statement between 50 and 80.  80 and 100 I
   would estimate now.

Q. Did you also have some who went through with the wrong
   ticket for the right end of the ground? - A. I would say
   the total of people coming through without tickets and
   wrong tickets would be between 80 and 100.

Q. And of that number what proportion had no ticket at all? -
   A. 60-70%.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. Haskins, I think you too make a calculation of the
   number of people you admitted in the last half-hour? — A.
   I did, yes.

Q. Between 2.40 and 3.10 and do you too agree that in the last
   ten minutes practically nobody came in? — A. From between ....

Q. The last ten minutes, in other words after kick-off? - A.
   After 10-past-3 nobody came in at all.  Between 3 and 10-past
   it just went dead.
                                   A.J. HASKINS


So your count of the number that you had between 2.40 and
3.10, the vast majority are in the 20 minute period from
2.40 and I think you calculated that at 600? - A. 600.

      MR. GLASGOW:    Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  YOu do that simply by putting
the tickets over that period in a pile and then counting
them or are you doing a running count in your head, or what?
- A. No by taking the tickets.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No other questions.   Thank you
very much.

      MR. GOLDSACK:    Sir, we now move on to Stewards.
Mr. Thorpe, please.


                STUART ROLAND THORPE Called

                 Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Mr. Stuart Roland Thorpe, is that right? - A. That is correct.

Mr. Thorpe, I think for some 15 years now you have been Chief
Steward for the West Stand area? - A. That is quite correct.

And altogether you have been a Steward at Sheffield Wednesday
for over 20 years? - A. Yes, that is correct.

In recent years how many Stewards have you had under your
control on normal league matches? - A. 26.

And how many do you have under your control for a semi-final?
- A . 33. I have ten extra Stewards.

Who arranges for those extra Stewards? - A. The Club.  I
notify the Club.  I get the extra Stewards and then I let
the Club know I have got the extra Stewards.

So you personally recruit them? - A. Tllat is right.

Will they all be people who have stewarded before? - A. This
year I had just one new one.  The rest of them have stewarded
before.

Was the new one Mr. Cardwell? - A. That is correct.

He had never stewarded before that particular match?      A. NO.

Now again in recent years I think there has been an annual
meeting sometime during the closed season for Stewards? -
A. That is quite correct.

Have you attended all of those? - A. I have.
                              30



                                      S. THORPE


Q. Are they voluntary? - A. They are voluntary, yes.

Q. Are you paid for attending? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Have you been paid for attending since they came in or were
   they originally unpaid? - A. They were paid after the first
   league match they paid us for attending the meetings.

Q. What proportion of the Stewards do in fact go to that
   meeting? - A. The turnstiles and the ground go to one day
   and the set meeting is all the seating, North Stand, South
   Stand, West Stand go to it.

Q. So there are two separate meetings? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you attend both? - A. No, I only attend the one meeting.

Q. Now who is invited?  Is it just the 26 regulars or are
   there temporary Stewards also invited? - A. They are all
   invited to the meeting.

Q. So of the 33 or so that you may have under your control how
   many of those usually come to the Annual Meeting? - A. They
   all come to the Annual Meeting.  They have got to do because
   they get their passes and you have got to take two photos,
   for the identity card you wear.

Q. I think it is at that meeting that you are also issued with
   the Ground Instructions.  Is that right? - A. That is rjr#ht.

Q. We will perhaps come on to those in a little while.  Do
   you also receive at that meeting a talk from a member of
   the Club? - A. Yes.

Q. Who normally gives that? - A. Doug Lock.

Q. From a Police Officer? - A. And a Police Officer gives us
   a lecture; also the Fire Brigade and the St. John's Ambulance
   Brigade.  The Fire Brigade demonstrate the fire extinguishers,
   all the types of fire extinguishers and they always ask the
   Stewards where the fire points are in my Stand and I always
   tell them where they are and show them where they are and
   the Fireman generally asks what type the fire extinguishers
   are and he always demonstrates them to as.

Q. Does the Fire Brigade representative also deal with the
   emergency evacuation procedure? - A. Yes.

Q. Now as the Chief Steward for the West Stand is the Leppings
   Lane terrace under your control? - A. No.

Q. Under which Steward is    that? - A. There are no Stewards in
   charge of the stafiding   area, the Leppings Lane.  I am just
   in charge of eight men    on C gate and B gate.  There is
   three men on each gate    and I am in charge of the West Stand
   only.
                                  S. THORPE


In the event of a fire or some other emergency in the West
Stand, do you have a procedure whereby your Stewards
know what position to take up to get people out quickly?
- A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You have left me behind slightly.
You dealt with the Annual Meeting at which various things
happened.  You said there were two meetings.  Is that right?

      MR. GOLDSACK:  What the witness said was that one
of the meetings was for the Stewards and there was a separate
meeting for the turnstile attendants, as I understood it.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I see.

      MR. GOLDSACK:  So do we understand this to be the
position, Mr. Thorpe, that there is no one from the Club
who assists with the evacuation from the standing area in
the event of an emergency? - A. No, the Police always do it.
Th^rcall a name over the Tannoy, we all know what it is.
It is in the South Yorkshire, all Clubs in South Yorkshire
come under it. 1 just forget the name.  My Stewards they
clear the gangways; go to the fire extinguishers and the
Police go to the gates. We open all the gates and the Police
opens everything, we stand on one side.  That is what we
do. That is what the procedure is.

Even though you say it is not part of your responsibility,
can I just see what your understanding is as the means
of evacuating the West end terrace if there is an emergency?
- A. Yes.

Where did you expect people to go? How were they going to
leave? - A. Go through C Gate and B Gate.

That is on the roadway? - A. Yes.

Sorry, how are they going to get off the terraces in the
first place? - A. Well they get off  the terraces, there is
the gate on the perimeter fence.  There is a Policeman
stood at the side of those gates and those gates are opened
onto the pitch.  There is always a Policeman stood at every
gate all the way round the pitch.

Some of course would be able to come back down the tunnel,
wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

But your understanding as Chief Steward of the West End
was that the main point of evacuation was the perimeter
gates onto the pitch? - A. That is right.

Which are manned by Police Officers not Stewards? ~ A.
Right throughout the game there is a Police Officer sat
in front of one of those.
                                   S. THORPE


Now you know of course that there are gates at the Stand
end of the radial fences? - A. Yes.

Have you ever considered they are any part of the emergency
evacuation procedure? - A. No, because they are nothing to
do with me whatsoever.  I have never been told by down­
stairs. All my interest is the West Stand.   I am in charge
of the West Stand and is my responsibility for anyone in
that West Stand to be cleared out.

I follow you say it is not part of your responsibility.
What I am wondering is whether as someone with 20 years'
experience as a Steward, you had ever appreciated that the
gates at the rear of the radial fences might be part of ^the
emergency evacuation procedure? - A. Well it could be sir
but the Police see to all that.

You certainly thought the main exits were the perimeter
gates? - A. Yes.

Was that just something you had picked up over the years
or had someone told you that? — A. Since the last three
years since the Bradford Disaster that is when it more
or less started procedure on the ground, fire and so forth.

I am not quite sure what you mean by that, Mr. Thorpe.
At your Annual Meetings has it actually been said in the
event of an emergency people on the terraces will leave
via the perimeter gates on to the pitch? - A. Yes, well
it is automatic, you see them opening the gates the Police
from out of my Stand.

Who has said    that at the Annual Meeting? - A. Mr.Lock.

That the way out from the terraces in      an emergency are
the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Has it been the same Police Officer who has attended the
Annual Meeting over the last two or three years? - A. Yes,
the last two years it has been.

 Who is that,   do you know? - A. I have   no idea.

 Mr. Sewell? - A. That is right.

 And before him was it Mr. Calvert? - A. Yes.

 I think he was there for several years? - A. Yes.

 Now what sort of things do the Police tell you at the
 Annual Meeting? - A. Well it is more or less instructions
 in the back of our passbook,"don't get involved .

, I wonder if we could just look at that then.  It is the
  Sheffield Wednesday file and begins at page 46.
                                  S. THORPE


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Whilst that is being found,
I have got a figure of 376Stewards from somewhere.  Is
that a complete nonsense?

      MR. MAXWELL:   I gave you that figure, sir.  It came
from past Police documentation.   I think it is their
background material.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I seem to remember reading
there   were 376 Stewards on duty on the day.

      MR. MAXWELL:   Yes.

       MR. GOLDSACK:  Sir, I will be corrected if I am
wrong.   I think that includes turnstile attendants and I
think when Mr. ffhorpe refers to 26 and 33, he is not
including turnstile attendants at the West End.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  There will only be about 78
turnstile operators, will there, all round the ground?

      MR. GOLDSACK:  I think we will hear, if it is
necessary, that there are many more Stewards at the Kop
end where of course Stewards are on the Kop itself.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This is what I was wondering,
whether this witness is only talking about one part of the
ground.

      MR. GOLDSACK:  Yes, he is only talking about the
West Stand and the immediate concourse.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Forgive me, are you the Chief
Steward or a Chief Steward? - A. A Chief Steward.

      MR. GOLDSACK:   That point having been raised,
Mr. Thorpe, can I just clarify for whom you are responsible.
You have responsibility for Stewards in the West Stand
itself? - A. That is quite correct.

For Stewards on B    Gate and C Gate? -A.That is quite
correct.

And for Stewards who man the stairways to the West Stand?
- A. That is quite correct.

Is there anyone else for whom you have responsibility?
- A. No.

We shall hear in due course that the Stewards in charge
of A Gate in fact  come under a different Chief Steward?
- A. That is quite correct.

Do you now have in front of you, Mr. Thorpe, page 46 of
that bundle? - A. That is right.
                                 S. THORPE


That is, I think, a three page document headed:     "Instructions
for Match Day Staff"? - A. Yes.

And you are all issued with that, are you, at the Annual
Meeting? - A. We are told about this at the Annual Meeting
and they give me copies to give to my Stewards at the start
of the season.  I give my Stewards one and I make them sign
for it to say that he has had the instructions, match day
instructions.

Is it the matters set out in that that the Police Officer goes
through? - A. Yes, more or less he goes through.

Can I take you back a few years,Mr. Thorpe, to about 1981.
There was a crushing incident in 1981? - A. Well it was not
really a crushing incident.   They were getting a lot outside.
The queues were getting long outside the ground. What they
did they opened C Gates about a yard.   I got my three
Stewards? they came from the office if we could let a few
through to take the congestion of the queues.    There was
about 50 came through the gates. We checked the tickets
and they came through orderly, there was no trouble.    What
they did, they put them up at the side of the wall, the
Police on horseback and they just came in about 50 to take
the congestion from the crowd outside and they started
coming in very steady.   We shut the gates after that.   There
was only dbout 50 what was allowed in and I remembeE it
because it was the last semi-final for a while because
Hillsborough District, round Hillsborough Football Ground,
a lot of people were complaining about semi-finals, crowds,
drunk people and things like that.   They got a petition up
and they did not get a semi-final until 1987 and I was
amazed we got a semi-final because the people around in the
houses round the Club were complaining:    "You will never
get a semi-final".   There was petitions and everything to
the M.P.s.




                           /Q. So you are telling
                                   35



                                                     S. THORPE

Q. So you are telling us, are you,Mr. Thorpe, that at the
   1981 semi-final, shortly before the kick-off, stewards on
   gate C opened that, in effect, as an additional turnstile?
   A. Yes.

Q. And people came in in an orderly fashion?            A. That's right.

Q. But was there not then an incidnet on the South end of the
   Terrace when people were injured?   A. No, not to my
   knowledge.  I can't remember it.

Q. 38 people injured?     A. No, I can't remember.          I can’t
   remember that.

Q. No recollection of that at all?           A. No recollection, I ’m
   sorry, sir.

Q. Does it follow, then, that that incident, if there was an
   incident, was never mentioned at any meeting that you
   attended?   A. No. I can't remember, if it was.

Q. All right.   Do you remember that in about 1981 there was
   either some confusion or disagreement between the stewards
   and the police as to what their specific responsibilities
   were?   A. Well, there was, yes.

Q. You remember that?         A.     I remember that.

Q. And do you recalll a particular meeting where a police officer
   came along to try and explain, "This is our job, this is
   your job"?   A. I can slightly remember it. I think it
   was in the Gymnasium.

Q.   Would it have been Mr. Galvert?          A. I just forget now.

Q.   But you have some recollection ---          A. I have some recollection
     of that.

Q. --    of such a meeting?        A. Yes.

Q.    Can you help as to what that policeman told you he thought
     the stewards' job was?    A. He said on the terracing, when
     I was with a few of my stewards, he said "It's nothing to
     do with us, because it's the West Stand, my Stand", and he
     was saying that the terracing was the Club's --

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry, I am not following
      this.   I thought it was the policeman who was speaking?
     A. The policeman spoke to a crowd of us in the Gym.,

Q. What did he say?   A. He says that the Club's job is to
   see to the terracing, the stewards to see to the terracing,
   the spectators on the terraces, and I thought to myself,
   "It's nothing to do with me, this, because I'm in charge
   of the seating accommodation", and I said "Well, it's
                                36



                                          S. THORPE

     ridiculous." When I walked away from it, some stewards
     objected to it, but I don't know who did, and when I walked
     away I said "It's silly to put a person, put a steward
     amongst away supporters for abuse and swearing that they
     get.    I said, "We get it in our Stand. They've only
     got to sit in the wrong seat and you go to them and you
     say 'You are in the wrong seat' and then you get abuse
     and swearing and you've got to fetch a policeman." I
     said, "God help anyone what goes on the terracing with
     away supporters.  I think it s disgusting."

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK: Mr. Thorpe, at this meeting, you were
     present and a number of the stewards under you were
     present?   A. Yes.

Q. Do you recall any senior Club officials being present?
   A. No, I can't remember.

Q. This, of course, was before Mr. Lock's appointment, was it
   not?   A. Yes.

Q. I think probably Mr. England was the Secretary in those
   days? A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember whether he was at the meeting?       A. No, I
   don't think he was.

Q. Can I be totally clear about this? The policeman was
   saying that the police considered it to be the stewards'
   job to make sure that things were all right on the
   terrace?   A. That's right.

Q. That is to say, the standing area?    A. That's right.

Q. You did not think that was any business of yours because
   you had responsibility for the West Stand?   A. That's
   quite correct.

Q. Were there any stewards who had responsibility at that
   stage for the terraces?   A. No.

Q. Did anyone tell the policeman that?     A. No.

Q. So might it be the position, Mr. Thorpe, that that policeman
   had given instructions and the stewards were then to
   steward the terrace, but in fact there were no stewards
   who could do that?   A. No.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is that the position?    A. That's
     the position.

Q.       Mr. GOLDSACK: After that meeting, did stewards go
     on to the terrace?   A. No, we didn't get stewards on the
     Kop until two or three years after. About three years
     ago they had stewards on the Kop.
                               37


                                                 S. THORPE

Q. Well, that is the other end, is it not?        A. Yes.

Q. Have there ever been Sheffield Wednesday stewards on the
   Leppings Lane Terraces?    A. No, not to my knowledge.

Q. Apart from the meeting that we have just been talking about,
   do you recall any other meeting where a police officer has
   asked for there to be stewards on the West End Terraces?
   A. No.

Q. So throughout your period, Mr. Thorpe, your understanding
   is that there has never been any steward with any
   responsibility for the Leppings Lane Terrace? A. No.

Q. When you had these annual meetings, after the various
   officials had given their little talk, are people invited
   to raise points or ask questions if they wish?   A. Yes.

Q.    We may well hear evidence in due course, Mr. Thorpe, that
     one of the things that has been raised at that stage of
     meetings is the lack of signposting for people coming in
     at the Leppings Lane end to tell them where to go to get
     on to the Terraces. Do you recall that being raised at
     meetings?    A. Yes.

Q. The suggestion may be that that has fallen on deaf ears.
   What do you say to that?  A. Well, no, not really, sir,
   because as you approach Leppings Lane end, you've got big
   notices, "Standing", and the turnstiles are below the
   "Standing".  To your left, as your are walking up, is for
   seating, and anyone coming on the road, as they get out
   of the coaches, they know which way to go and it is clearly
   marked for anyone, the supporters.  It's clearly marked
   outside.

Q. You mean this is on the turnstiles?       A. Yes,above the
   turnstiles.

Q.   Can we come in to the turnstiles? If people come in through
     turnstiles A to G with tickets for the Leppings Lane terrace,
     how do they know how to get on to the terrace?   A. Well,
     at the top it says "Standing".

Q.   That is the tunnel?   A. The tunnel.       To the right, there's
     a letter to the right, and you more or    less.— -

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, what do you mean by
     saying to the right there is a letter? A. To the South
     Stand, the South Terracing.

Q. What letter?     A. I think it's No. 1.     There's 1 and 2.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Would you pick up the Bundle ’West
     Midlands 2' and go perhaps to photograph 17? That is
     roughly the view that you would have when you came through
     turnstiles A to G, is it not? A. Yes, that's quite correct.
                                 38


                                                  S. THORPE

Q. And to someone who does not know the ground, if they look
   straight ahead, they do see "Standing over the tunnel?
   A. That's quite correct.

Q. Can you explain from that photograph what you mean by the
   lettering?   A. There's a letter 2 above 'Standing".

Q. Yes. A. It's not on the photo, but just past my steps,
   the West Stand steps, there is a letter 1.

Q. Is that Y to Z?     A.   Just past Y to Z.   It's not on the
   photo, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Try 14.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Just under the bottom, half way up the
     stairs.   Is that it, Mr. Thorpe? A. You can't see it.

Q. Are you saying that that can be seen as you come through
   the turnstiles?   A. Yes.

Q. What is the significance of the numbers 1 and 2?   A. It
   used to be on the tickets when you have all-ticket matches.
   There's numbers on them.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think when I look under there,
     what it says is "Refreshments'’, is it not?  A. Yes. There
     was a No. 1 on it, sir.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Can I be clearwhat you are saying about
     tickets and semi-finals? Are you saying that your
     understanding was that on semi-final tickets there was
     a number which identified the part of the terrace to which
     people should go?    A. There used to be, yes, sir.

Q. There used to be?   A.     But I don't know about this year,
   the '89 semi-final.

Q. Part of the responsibilities of the stewards on Gates C and
   B would be generally to assist people to find their way
   to the right part of the ground, would it not?   A. That's
   quite correct, yes.

Q. And to do that, of course, they would obviously need to
   know what the tickets said, would they not?    A. Well,
   I have stewards at the bottom of the steps and they have
   people coming to the bottom of the steps and my stewards
   always tell them, "Round that corner for standing."

Q. Regardless of what number is on the tickets? A. That's
   quite correct. They always come to my stewards at the^
   bottom of the steps and they always say, "This is seating.
   Standing is round there." There are six stewards at the
   bottom of those steps.
                               39


                                                   S. THORPE

Q. So your stewards do not need to see a ticket to find out
   where the person should be sent to stand?   A. Well, he
   shows the ticket.  Sometimes they come to him and say
   "it's full under there, under the tunnel.  Can we come
   upstairs?" and they say "Standing is round the corner,
   round the refreshment bar."

Q. The complaint at the annual meetings has been that there
   has been inadequate signposting inside the ground, has
   it not?   Do you agree that that complaint has been made?
   A. Yes, I agree with you.

Q. Were you the person who was responsible for looking into
   it and making improvements if necessary?   A. No, not me.

Q. Whose responsibility was that?     A.   It was the Club's
    respoonsibility.

Q. In practice, who does that mean - Mr. Lock or Mr. Mackrell?
   A. I should say Mr. Lock, for security reasons, and
   safety.

Q. Mr.Lock.   So is this something that --

Q.      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is this minuted?

        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Not that I am aware of, sir.

Q. Is it a matter that you have ever given any thought to,
   Mr. Thorpe?   A. No,not really, no, because they filter
   through themselves.

Q. They filter through?    A. They stand in that courtyard
   waiting for their friends to come in. There's a snack
   bar and the toilets and they stand outside talking in
   groups, a lot of the supporters, when they come in. I have
   stood by *C ' Gate with my stewards to see if they were
   all right, and when people have come in, I've always told
   them, Go that way to 'Standing' please.    Can we clear
   this area?"    I've just had a lot of abuse, and even the
   police have had abuse.   It's just that they don't want to
   go on to the terraces till the kick-off, some of them;
   they just stand about chatting - long-lost friends or
   something.

Q. Where you send them is towards the South Stand entrance
   to the terracing?   A. Yes.

Q. It is right, is it not, that one of the largest areas of
   standing is next to the North Stand?   A. That's quite
   correct.

Q. Anyone coming in through turnstiles A to G needs to go
   through the gate in the wall to get there? A. That'S
   quite correct.
                                 40



                                                 S. THORPE

Q. Is there any provision made by stewards under your control
   to make sure that people know they can go through there?
   A. No, because it s locked.    I have a steward standing
   on there and the bolt is across. No-one can go through
   there till they make sure that under the tunnel Pens 1 and
   2 are full, and then they filter them through there to the
   North Stand area - you know, the terracing on the north
   side.

Q. Can we just deal specifically with that point so far as the
   semi-final this year was concerned? That gate in the wall
   was open, was it not?   A. Yes.

Q. All day, fastened back?       A. Yes.

Q. Because at an all-ticket match the fans coming in at the
   Leppings Lane entrance could have the whole of the terrace
   area?   A. That's correct.

Q. Did you have any stewards at all on duty near to that gateway
   so that a proportion of the fans were stewarded towards the
   North Stand end?   A. Yes, I had a steward standing there.
   I had a steward there from B Gate.

Q. So one of the stewards from B Gate was on the semi-final
   positioned in that gateway in the wall?    A. Yes, he was.
   Well, it's only about six or seven yards away from B Gate.

Q.   That is right. Did he have specific instructions to try
     and --   A. No, he just kept telling them "That way",
     like, you know, just pointing which way to go.

Q.   Do you know who that was?        A.   No.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The question was not what he
     did but whether he had any instructions to do anything?
     A. No, he didn't have any instructions whatsoever.

Q. Pardon? A. He didn't have any instructions. More or less,
   he stood there and used his common sense to tell them
   himself.

Q        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Does it come to this, Mr. Thorpe:
     That at the semi-final the only way people were likely
     to get on to the North standing area was if they happened
     to see the steward you have just described pointing
     A. Yes.

Q. -- or by going through the tunnel, on to the centre pens
   and then filtering along?  A. That's right.

Q. Can I now ask you a few specific questions about the
   1988 semi-final? Were there any Liverpool stewards on
   duty at that match?  A.   Yes, they came and helped me
   out.
                                41



                                                        S. THORPE

Q. How many?      A.   About half a dozen.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How many?         A.    About six.

Q-       Mr. GOLDSACK: Do you know the names of any of them?
     A. I am certain it was the Lloyd brothers.    There were
     six of them. There were the Lloyd brothers and there were
     one called Jimmy.  I've seen them year in and year out,
     all these stewards what come. He said, "Can we help you
     out?" and I said "If you will, please.  Stand by the
     terracing."

Q. Do we take it from that last answer, Mr. Thorpe, that no
   arrangement had been made prior to the match for them to
   come?   A. No.

Q. They just turned up and offered their services?             A. Yes.

Q. Which you accepted? A. Oh, excuse me, sir. When I think
   back now, I did get a letter from the Club. There were
   some stewards who were coming down and they gave me a list.
   I don't know if it was for the League match or for the
   semi-final.

Q. We are talking about 1988, are we?   A. 1988. They gave
   me a list of stewards what was coming down, to be stewarded.

Q. And this is either the Liverpool League match or last
   years's semi-final?   A. Yes, or the semi-final.

Q.    Do you know who wrote the letter?      Was it a steward or ---
     A. It came from Liverpool.

Q.   But do you know who at Liverpool?        A.    I have no idea,
     sir.

Q. Did it come addressed personally to you?             A. No,to the Club.

Q. Did you see the letter yourself?         A. Yes, I was given the
   letter. I was shown the letter.




                                      /Q.    Who at the Club gave you.
rt'.1)0
                                                42



                                                                       S.    T H OR PE



          Q.   Who at the Club gave you the letter?              A.    Basil Jones.
               I think it was Basil Jones.   I will            not be certain
               who showed me the letter, "There are            some stew ar ds coming
               down and if you will come round and,            you know, pick them
               up, they will be coming round to the            players' entrance
               round the back of the South Stand."

          Q.   Now, was that common      for visitin g teams to bring their
               own s t e wa rd s? A.     No.

          Q. Was this o ccasion when Live rp oo l did it the first time you
             were aware of it happ en i ng ?  A.    The first time Live rp oo l
             has ever done it.

          Q. Can you jjst think very c ar e fu l ly beca us e it may be i mp or t an t -
             was it the League match or was it the S em i- F in a l?       A.     I
             think it was the Semi-Final, sir.         I think it was the Semi-
             Final.

          Q.   The 1988   Semi-Final.      A.        Yes.

          Q.   You had bad a list    of steward s to expect.                 A.        Yes.

          Q. And then you say six did turn             up and you think the Lloyds
             were amongst those six?   A.               Yes.

          Q. Did they wear     stewards' bibs at 1988?            A.         L i ve rp oo l bibs.

          Q.   P resumably they b rough t them with them?               A.        They brou gh t
               their own bibs.

          Q. Where did you ask them to go in 1988?       A.   Well, I had
             two of them upstairs with me in the Stand and the rest of
             them stopped on the South West side of the t e r r ac i ng at the
             top and as the supp or te r s were coming in they were telling
             them to, "Move down, lads."

          Q.   That would be some wh er e fairly near the Police Control                        Box?
               A.   Yes, where the mounted Police stand as well.

          Q.   That would be about      four Liver po ol    s t ew ar ds ?        A.     Yes.

          Q. Did they spend the whole game there as               far as you know?
             A.   As far as I know they did.

          Q. Was it your sugge st io n that they take up that p os i ti o n?
             A.   Yes, it was my s uggest io n they took that position.

          Q. Why did you put them there?      A.    Well, I would not like
             to put my own s tewards on the terr ac in g b e ca us e in the
             Stand, as I said before, if a s u pp or te r - L i ve rp oo l supporters,
             any supporter, really - is in the wrong seat you go to him,
             you get a lot of abuse, "I am s to p pi n g here."       We have got
             to fetch the Police b ecaus e I have stated to my stewards,
             "Never get involved.      If anyone is in t]he wrong seat, fetch
             a P ol iceman."    We get that abuse and swearing, "What are
             you -- going to sit here."      We have got to fetch the Police
             and I wou ld n' t like to put my stew ar ds amon gs t a c rowd like
             that on his own.
                                           43




                                                                 S.    THORPE



Q. Was it any part of your thin ki ng in 1988 that/you wanted
   the L iver pool s tewa rd s to make sure that the terraces
   filled up evenly?        A.   Well, it was really but I was
   more i nt er es te d in my West Stand and the people in the
   West Stand.

Q•        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Why did you ask these Live rp oo l
     stewards to go in to the t erracing by the P&lice Control
     Box?    That was not likely to be the most c on g es t ed part,
     was it?     A. Well,  it can be, sir, yes.

Q.   Can it?      A.        Yes.

Q.   Is not the most popular bit, we have been told, behind the
     goal?      A. Yes, it is at the back of the goal aswell and
     that corner.    They seem to all run to that corner.    You
     seem to get a cong es te d area on that corner; they do sometimes.

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   Well, that is the 1988 Semi-Final.
     Now, coming to 1989, on the m o rn in g of the m atch did the
     stewards under your control receive a b ri e fi n g?   A.   That
     is quite correct, yes.

Q. From whom?          A.      Inspector Knight.

Q.   Knight    or White?           A.    White, I am sorry.

Q. G e n tl em an with      a beard?        A.     That is quite correct.

Q.   He is a regular         at that      end of the ground.           A.     Yes.

Q. Did that br ie fi ng        inclu de all the 33 people             under   you?
   A.  Yes.

Q.    What did he tell them?           A.   Well, more or less what is
     on his i n s t r u ct io ns - don't get involved with any crowd
     trouble - and he showed us the tickets, the c ol ours of the
     tickets, you know, so that my stew ar ds can have a look
     what colour they was becau se my stewards tear a corner
     off the ticket when they come to the b ottom of the steps
     b efore they go up the stairs to stop people dropp in g
     tickets down so they can be used again.

Q. Was the e v ac ua ti on pro c ed u re m en t io n ed      at the b ri ef in g?
   A.   Yes.

Q.   In what terms?           A.        I can't   remember   now.

Q. Did he simply say, "You have all got i ns tr uctions,                        make
   sure you have read them"?   A.   Yes.

Q.   Or did he a ctually go through what the e va cu a ti o n                 proc ed ur e
     was?   A.    No, no.

Q. Which?   The former?    "You have got it w ri tt en                      down,    make
   sure you have read it"?    A.   Yes.
Cifi,
                                            44


                                                                 S.   THORPE



        Q. Does it follow from that that no spec if ic m en ti on was
           made at the briefing of the L e pp in gs Lane t e rr ac es ?
           A.   No.

        Q. Was anything said by the Inspector at the brie fi ng about
           the p o s s i b il it y of L iverpool fans coming to the Leppings
           Lane t u rn st il es with tickets for the Spion Kop end?
           A.    I can't remember if he has said that, because they
           have not hing to do with tickets for the s ea ti ng area, the
           Spion Kop;         they are d if fe re nt tick et s altogether.

        Q.   That is right but, you see, we have heard e vi de nc e - you
             may have heard some you r se l f yest er da y and today - that for
             some time at least on the day Live rp oo l s u p po r te r s with
             Spion Kop t ickets were being let in at the L e pp in gs Lane
             turnstiles.   A.  The s ta nd in g area?

        Q. Yes.     Did you know that was going to happ en ?          A.       No.

        Q. Do you think as chief steward of that end of the ground
           you should have done?   A.   Yes.

        Q. What would you have done if you had been told?      A.   I
           would have w arned my stew ar ds at the bottom of the steps,
           "Watch out for tickets what should be for the Kop, don't
           let them up, they are for s ta n di n g only."

        Q. Where would you expect your stew ar ds to direct those
           people to?   A.  it is a stan di ng area;  once they are
           in, they cannot get back out of the ground.

        Q.   So they would go to somewhe re on the Lepp in gs          Lane terrace?
             A.   Yes, that is quite correct.

        Q.   If you had heard a Policeman t el ling t u rn st il e a tt en d an t s
             to let people in at Leppings Lane end with Spion            Kop
             tickets, w ould you have brought that to the a t t e n ti o n of
             Mr. Lock?    A.   Not really.

        Q. Why not?      A.   Because      someone will have told him
           a n ythin g like that.

        Q.   You would assume that the Poli ce me n would have d i sc us se d
             it with Mr. Lock?   A.   Yes.

        Q.   I follow that.    Would it have o cc ur re d to you, if you
             had been aware that that i ns tr u ct i on had been given,
             that that might lead to o v e r c r o wd i ng on the Leppi ng s Lane
             t er race s? A.  Yes, I would think so.

        Q. What, if anything, would you have done about that?
           A.   Well, I would have noti fi ed Doug Lock.

        Q.   You mean that you were not happy with that a r ra n ge m en t ?
             A.   I wer en't happy, really.

        Q. Did you know of it?       A.    I didn't get to know while
           y e st er day in the questions.    I didn't know there was people
           coming in.
                                              S.   T H OR P E



You had no idea on the day that people with Spion Kop tickets
were being let in to Leppings Lane t e rr ac es ?  A.    No.
At 12 o'clock I was outside the ground.       There were people
coming up with tickets and they were saying, "This is f o r     -
We are Liverpool supporters.    We have got tick et s for the
Spion Kop."    I said, "You will have to go round to the
Spion Kop.    There is a part of the Spion Kop a l lo ca te d
to you."    That was round about 12 o'clock.

Was that s o m et hi ng you had been told at the brie fi ng ?
A.   No.

How did you know that there was a part of the Spion Kop
set aside for Liverpool s up po r te r s? A. It was one of
my stewards what told me.

Are you surp ri se d you were not told that d ir ec tl y?
A.   I was surprised.      You could see it from my Stand,
they had got a tape round, a red and white tape, and
there was P olicemen stood.

Well now, prior to the 15th April, had any a r r a n g e me n t been
made for L iverpool stew ar ds to come this year as stew ar ds ?
A.  No, not to me until the c hief steward in the North Stand
got on to my i ntercom to tell me that there were two stew ar ds -
there was some stewards coming down, the Lloyd brothers,
and some more stewards was coming down.

The c h ie f steward   of the North Stand is Ken Castley.
A.    Yes.

So if he had made some prior a rr an g em e nt with Liverpool,
you did not know a nyt hi ng about that?      A.   No, until
the match day.

But some time match dsy mo r ni n g he came through on the
in terco m to say there were some L iverpool s te wa rd s ---
A.    Yes, and he came down.       He came to see me as well,
to explain.

What sort   of time was that?      A.   Just after    12 o'clock.

How many Liverpool      stewa rd s did he tell you to expect?
A.   About eight.        Eight or nine stewards.

Is it right that at about quarter past one or so the
Lloyd brothers turned up?   A.   That's quite correct.

From what you have to]d ius, you r e co gn is ed   them?        A.   Yes.

Were there any other stewa rd s with them when they turned
up?   A.   No.

Did you have a d i s cu ss io n with them when they arri ve d?
A.   Yes, I spoke to them.         They told me about Ken, that
he had a rranged it - Ken Castley.
                                    46



                                                       S.    T H OR PE



Q.   That Ken Castley had a rrange d them coming.                    A.     Yes.

Q. Did you have a general d is cu s si o n with the Lloyd brot he rs
   about your hopes or e xp ec ta t io n s for the match and the
   day?    A.   Yes, I spoke to them at the b ot to m of the
   steps because there was some more Live rp oo l s up po r te r s
   came in and I had known them as stewards and we were all
   t alking together.

Q. Did they tell you an yt h in g about what they expected
   so far as the Liverpool end was c on ce r ne d ?    A.   He
   said, "There's a lot coming."         We were all talking and
   he said, "There's a lot coming.         There's a lot coming
   w i thout tickets and you can expect a bit of t rouble."
   I said, "Oh we get that."         I says, "We get that.   The
   Police can cope here.      We get a lot c oming with ou t
   tickets."     He said, "There will be a lot more coming
   b e cause last year the St. Leger was run and a lot of
   people went up;,:to see the St. Leger."       I said, "I
   thought they liked football."         He said, "Some of them
   are having videos or s o m e th i ng of the match."

Q. Are you a racing man at all,           Mr.   Thorpe?         A.        No.

Q. Do you know which of the Lloyd brot he rs                told you this?
   A.  I just forget.

Q. But it was one of them?           A.     Yes,   one of them.                 Yes.

Q. What they were t elling you then was that                 there were going
   to be more than usual w it ho ut tick et s?               A.  That is quite
   correct, yes.

Q.   Based on your pr ev io us experience, how many did you expect
     before this c on v e r s a t i o n would turn up w it h ou t ticke ts ?
     A.   Quite a few.

Q. By that do you mean dozens, hundreds,               t h ou sa nd s?
   A.   Well, a couple of hundred.

Q.   Perhaps a couple of hundred.   Was that your feeling of
     the number who had turned up in 1988 w i th ou t tick et s?
     A.   Yes.

Q.    And as far as you were concerned, the Police had coped
     w ithout any undue difficulty, had they?   A.    Yes.

Q.   Well now, you are then told, "No, there is going to be
     a lot more than that this year w i th ou t t i ck et s. " A.                      He
     didn't say ---   Hesaid, "There are going to be a lot
     more coming down w ithout tickets."

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Did he actu al ly say, "A lot
     more" or just, "There's a lot"?   A.   A lot    more.

Q.   A lot more than last year?           A.    Yes.

Q.        MR.   GOLDSACK:      Did you realise         that that was going
                                     47



                                                             S.    THORPE



     to add to the problems that the Police would have outside?
     A.      Well, not really, sir, beca us e they have always coped
     at the Leppings Lane end, have the Police.              They have done
     a m a r ve ll ou s job, the South Y o rk sh ir e Police at Leppings
     Lane end.

Q. But you; were e ff ec t i v e l y being told, were you not, "There
   is a new s it u a t i o n . " ?  You were being told, "There is
   a new situation;          there's going to be more."    A.   Yes,
   but they have always coped.

Q. Would you agree, Mr. Thorpe, it is often easier                    to cope
   if you know what to expect?  A.  Yes.

Q.   Did it not cross     your mind to pass this i n fo r m a t i o n       on
     to anyone?    A.       No, not really.

Q.   You say that in this c o n v e r s at i on   it was also m en ti o ne d
     that there would be trouble.            A.     There could be a bit
     of trouble.

Q. Did you u nd er s t a n d that what you were b eing told was rather
   more trouble than usual?          A.   No, not really.    No.

Q.   So although there were likely to be more p eo pl e w it ho ut
     tickets, you did not think that would add to the p ro bl em s
     or the t rouble?  A.   No.

Q.    And is it right that you did not pass that i nf or m at i on
     on to anyone?     A.   That is quite correct.

Q.   Neither   Club o fficial    nor Police?        A.      No.

Q.    Well now, what did you ask the Lloyd brot he rs to do at
     this year's S e mi -F in al ? A.    One was u ps ta ir s and the
     other brother, he put a jacket on and he was with me quite
     a while and he went dow ns t ai r s and he went on to the
     C Gate, helped on the C Gate a while.          That is the last
     1 saw of him until nearly the end of the match.

Q. Well now, you had been told by Mr. C as tley that there
   would be other L iverpo ol stew ar ds t ur ni ng up as well.
   A.   Yes.

Q.   Did you see them at any stage?     A.                Yes,    a steward
     bro ught them over, a steward from the              North    Stand.

Q.    Can you help us as to the time?  A.     It is round about
     2 o'clock, just after 2, I should think.     I am not
     p a r t i cu l a r l y ---

Q.   Did they have L iverpoo l      stewards'     bibs with them?           A.   No.

Q.    I should have asked you, had the Lloyd brot he rs              had L iverpool
     stewards' bibs?    A.   Yes.

Q.   Just the two for t h e ms el ve s or did they have some spares?
     A.   They had a bag full of spares.
l>>
                                              48



                                                                     S.    T H OR P E



      Q.   What h appened to those?  A.      They were put in a
           locker at the back of the r ef re s hm e nt bar.

      Q.   When these other Liverpo ol stewards were brought to
           you, what did you ask them to do?    A.   I said to them,
           "I have got no jobs up here for you, I am sorry."     I
           said, "You can go downstairs, if you like, on the t e rr ac in g
           because with you being L iverpool people you can mix with
           your own fans;  I think it would be alri gh t. "  He said,
           "Okay" and they went downstairs.

      Q.   How many of them were        there?           A.    About half a dozen,
           about six.

      Q.   Can you help   us to identi fy any of them?                     A.         No.

      Q.   You do not   even   know C h r i s t i a n    names?      A.         No.

      Q. Did you r ecognise       any of them           from other m at ch es ?
         A.   No.

      Q.   Did they at any stage put bibs on?                   A.     Not to my
           knowledge.    I didn't see them put                bibs    on.

      Q. Did you suggest to which part of the terr ac e they might go?
         A.     I just told them to go d o w n st a ir s to the t er ra c in g
         and I took them d o wn st a ir s to the bott om and I said, "Please
         yo ur se lf which part" and then they left me and then I
         went to see to my stewards.

      Q.   Did you see where      they went?            A.     No.

      Q. Well now, so far as you knew was there any a r r an g em e nt to
         pay any of the L iverpool stew ar ds ? A.  Just the two
         Lloyd brothers.   That was all I paid, no-one else.

      Q. Why did you pay them?              A.      Because       I put them on to my
         payroll.

      Q. Was that some th in g     you did just off your own i n it ia ti ve ?
         A.   Yes.

      Q. Even though you had not been e x pe ct in g them before they
         a rrived ? A.   No.

      Q.   And so pres um ab ly   they were not in your number                    of 33
           that you said ---        A.   No, 36.

      Q. -- you were expecting, but there was no d i f f ic u lt y finding
         the extra money to pay two more peop le ?   A.     No, beca us e
         they signed a docket and it went to the Club.

      Q. Can you a ctually help as to w he ther those six Live rp oo l
         s t ewards did in fact go on to the t e rr ac es ? A.     No, I
         can't.     I can't say if they went on to the t er r ac i ng
         anywhere.

      Q.   You did not see them at any later stage?                       A.      No.
                                 49


                                                         S.   T H OR PE



Q.    When you arranged for the Lloyd brothers     to be paid, did
     you have any discus sion with them about     paying them?
     A.     Told them what they would get paid    and he said,
     "Alright."     One of the brothers signed    for both of them
     and he said, "Okay, thanks."

Q. Was there any discussion about more stewards turning up
   than it had been agreed should be paid for?  A.   No.

Q.   Well now, you have told us a few minutes ago that at                 some
     stage you went outside Leppings Lane turnstiles.
     A.    Yes.

Q. Was that   fairly early on?        A.   12 o'clock.




                                      /Long before any crush
y*tf>   *


                                          50


                                                                    S. THORPE

            Q. Long before any .... - A. Yes.

            Q. Where were you between about 2 o'clock onwards? - A.              I
               was on my rounds seeing to my stewards, seeing if my
               stewards were all right, up in the stands.

            Q. Some of your stewards of course were on B and C Gate?
               - A.That is quite correct.

            Q. So when you do your rounds do you visit them to make
               sure they are all right? - A. Yes.

            Q. And do you continue to do your rounds up until 3 o'clock?
               - A. That is quite correct.

            Q. So at what stage did you become aware of the problems
               building up outside? - A. It was about just after half-
               past-2, noticed it was building up a lot outside,
               about quart - 20- to-3, I should imagine, round 20- to-3.
               Started to climb over the turnstiles.

            Q. And did you at that stage go to the area inside Gates B
               and C? -A. I went downstairs to my stewards at the bottom
               of the steps at the South West Side and I says watch it,
               lads, theres a lot climbing over? to make way for these
               gates and I went down towards this C Gate and asked the
               stewards if they were all right.

            Q.Were you conscious that over the next 10/15 minutes the
               pressure outside was getting worse and worse? - A. Yes.

            Q. Did you at any stage give any consideration to how that
               pressure might be relieved? - A. No.

            Q.     You have told us that in 1981 Gate Gwas opened    to
                 relieve pressure? - A. That is right.

            Q. Did you give any thought to the possibility of opening
               gates? - A. Well, they could not really because just
               outside the G Gates they got a line of Police and a
               barrier across.  They could not do it this year because
               they had got this barrier across.

            Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I am sorry. What   did       they
                 do last year? - A. No, 1981.   1981.

            Q. Yes. - A. They opened C Gate a little bit to ease the
               congestion.

            Q. Yes.  I appreciate that. But this time? - A. They could
               not do. They could not do it this year because they had
               got, the side of my C Gate to the railings, to the
               Riverside, they had a barrier across with Police standing
               there stopping people going round to the South Stand, you
               know, supporters going round to the South Stand.
                                      51
iTL
                                                            S. THORPE

      Q. Why did that stop them opening the gate? - A. Because -
         I have no idea but they got a barrier across, the Police.
         You could not do it with that barrier being there.

      Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:    Did not that actually mean there
           were a lot of Police Officers there who could be used
           to shepherd people into Gate C if it was partly open?
           - A. You could do, yes.   The reason they did it in
           1981, there were less turnstiles. Three years - I
           think it ws 1984 they had some more turnstiles built
           and, you know, I thought there were enough turnstiles.

      Q. As you looked at the situation at about c[uarter-to-3
         did you think everyone was going to get in by 3 o'clock?
         - A. Oh, yes.

      Q.   Through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

      Q.   Could you see from your position how far down Leppings
           Lane .... - A. No.

      Q          the crowd went?    So you did not have a complete
           view .... - A. No.

      Q ..... of the situation     outside?   - M* No.

      Q.    Between about 20-to-3 and 3 o'clock were you approached
           at all by any Police Officer about the problems that
           were .... - A. No.

      Q         building up?You had a      radio, I think? - A. Yes.

      Q. Did you have any communication at all with Mr. Lock
         between about half-past-2 and 3 o'clock? - A. He just
         asked me if I was all right.

      Q.   What time was that? - A. About lG-to-3.

      Q. Did you know where he was calling from? - A. I have no
         idea where he was calling from, to tell you the truth,

      Q. If you had needed to contact Mr. Lock yourself that day
         did you know where physically he would be? - A. No,
         because ....

      Q. Sorry. Did you want to add something? - A. I cannot tell
         you because sometimes  he used to go on his rounds.

      Q.   So your understanding was that between half-past-2 and
           3 o'clock he could well be on a general tour round
           the .... - A. Yes.

      Q. So far as you are concerned do you take up a specific
         point at some stage so that your stewards know where
                            52


                                                     S. THORPE

   you are? - A. Yes, bottom of the - but I kept going round
   to see to them because they were getting a lot of abuse
   from ....

Q. At what stage do you take up a specific point? - A. After
   the kick-off.

Q. After the kick-off; - A. Yes.

Q. So they know where to find you after kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Before kick-off you are on your rounds? - A. I go round
   to see my stewards are all right because this year they
   had more abuse than any.  I have never known abuse my
   stewards had this semi-final, abuse, swearing.  Two of
   my sons are stewards. THef turned round,-he says, "Dad,
   I don't know how you've coped with this lot." He says,
   "Its murder." He says, "I've had nothing but abuse.
   He was walking on the seat.  Said look at him, walking
   on the seat. An Officer says - all right, he fell and
   my son went down to him. When he got up he just swore
   at my son. The Officer could not do nothing because
   there were that many coming and sitting in the wrong
   seats.

Q. Wfell now, Mr. Thorpe, we know that Gate C was opened
   twice --- - A. That is right.

Q. .... in the few minutes before 3 o'clock. Did you see
   either of those openings? - A. I saw it open first time.

Q. From where? Where were you when it opened? - A. I was
   stood up in the stand.

Q. You were looking down? -A. Yes, from the snack bar, back
   of the snack bar.

Q. Did you at that stage think you should go down to Gate C
   and speak to a senior Police Officer? - A. No. I was
   interested in my stewards, how they were coming in. All
   my concern was for my stewards at the bottom of the
   steps because they were rushing towards the bottom
   of the steps. When you get a hundred or more rushing
   to those steps, there are six lads there, their lives
   are at stake, so I went down to them. I said, "Watch
   it, lads." We had some Liverpool people help us to hold
   the gates and we let them go so many at a time aft the
   stairs showing their tickets because someof them came
   through with no tickets, standing tickets. They were
   bottom of the steps trying to get in.

Q. This is bottom of Gangways Y and Z? - A.   Yes.

Q. The Steps to .... - A. Yes.
                                                     S. THORPE

Q. Did you give any instructions about the gates at the
   bottom of those steps? - A. To open them about a yard
   and my other stewards held on to them while they filtered
   upstairs and while they were going upstairs, getting
   abuse, kicked at by the - I think it was a lot of
   frustration outside.  They were swearing at my stewards
   as they were going upstairs. We made sure they got
   tickets for seating. Anyone without a ticket we told
   them to get away and abuse they got ....

Q. After you tried to sort that problem out where did you
   go? - A. When it finished then I went all the way round
   to my stewards to see that they were all right with all
   this crush coming up.

Q.    Did you go to Gate B or C at all at that stage? - A. I
     went round to Gate B. Asked the lads if they were
     all right. They said they were all right but they says
     its terrible outside here, its terrible.

Q. Did you at that stage give any thought to how the
   pressure outside could be relieved? -A. No, could not
   really. No way could do anything.

Q. Did it occur to you at all at that stage that gates
   might be opened? - A. No.

Q. If you had been told that gates were going to be opened
   what, if anything, could you have done to help? — A. I
   was not told the gates were going to be opened.

Q.    No, but if you had been told is there anything that you
     could have organised your stewards toe do t to make the
     people coming in come in in an orderly fashion?-A. No,
     you could not, because there were that; many at the back
     of the gates - they were not queuing at all. There was
     just one mass of people.    It was just like a floodgate.
     No-one, if they had opened the gates, no-one could have
     stood there and told them which way to go, no-one, even
     the Police, they would be knocked out of the way. Just
     like opening water floodgates when that gate opened.
     No-one could control them.

Q.Were you conscious when the gates were opened for the
   second time that most of the people appeared to be
   going down the central terrace? - A. A third of them
   were making their way for my steps at the bottom, bottom
   of the steps.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   k third of them, you say?
     - A. About a third of them were branching out like that.
     Biggest majority were going towards the tunnel and some
     of them were making their way to the right-hand side, to
     my stepps
U'                                 54


                                                          S, THORPE

     Q.       JMR. GOLDSACK:   In your general tour round in the
          previous half-an-hour had you been conscious that the
          pens behind the goals were getting fairly full? - A.
          No. I cannot see the pens from in the stands.

     Q. So had you at no stage seen pens 3 and 4 at all? - A. No.

     Q. But you would have expected that by about lO-to-3 they
        would be fairly full, would not you? - A. Well, I would
        do really but ....

     Q. Well, with that expectation when you saw all these people
        rushing into the tunnel did it occur to you then that
        there might be an overcrowding situation on the terraces?
        - A. No, not really, no. Trouble was, I was dumbfounded
        to see them running, that many. My interest was for my
        stewards in that stand. That is all I was interested - and
        people round about.

     Q. This was a new situation, was not it? - A. Yes.

     Q. A gate being opened and a lot of people rushing in? - A.
        Yes.

     Q.   Did you consider it was anything that you as Chief^Steward
          for that end of the ground should get involved in? - A. No.

     Q.   Are you saying from that you regarded it as entirely a
          Police responsibility? - A. Yes, I do.

     Q. If you had thought there is going to be overcrowding on
        the terraces what would you have done? - A. Well, I would
        have notified the Police. We have not got to get involved,
        like it says in our thing.

     Q.   You are not supposed to deal with the problem. - A. No.

     Q.   But if you see one you should alert the Police to it?
          - A. Yes.

     Q. So if it had crossed your mind at that stage the pens cannot
        c o p e t h e r e is going to be overcrowding, how would you have
        contacted the Police? - A. I would have to go up to an Officer.

     Q. Which one?    Do you have a particular point of contact? - A.
        No.

     Q. You would not have done it by Mr. Lock and the radio? - A.
        Oh, n o .

     Q. Where were you in the few minutes after 3 o'clock?     Were
        you up in the stand by then? - A. Yes.

     Q. And presumably you became aware of people going over the
        perimeter fences? - A. That is right.
                             55


                                                       S. THORPE

Q. Well now, I am not going to take     you through the part you
   played after 3 o' clock. There has    been some evidence, Mr.
   Thorpe, of occasions when people     are prevented from going
   down the central tunnel if it is     already full. Are you
   aware of that? - A. Yes.

Q. How often to your knowledge is that done? - A. About two
   or three times.

Q. Has that been at League matches or semi-finals? - A. At
   a semi-final, you close the gates for, I estimate, about
   five minutes so that it could filter round to the West
   Side terracing.

Q. You say they close the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Which gates do you mean? - A. Some gates usider tfee toaitl

Q. Look again at photograph 18. Do you mean those gates we
   can see at the Leppmgs Lane end of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. And when you say they closed them who do you mean by they
   - A. Police.  Police have stood and closed them.

Q. Do you know whether anything like that happened at the
   1988 semi-final? - A. No, I cannot remember if there was.

Q. You do not know one way osr the other? - A. No.

Q. Are stewards ever involved in making sure that no more
   people go down that tunnel? - A. No.




                                  / Q. Have you ever
                                    S. THORPE


Have you ever had a situation where you have thought it
necessary to bring to anyone's attention that parts of
the terraces appeared to you to be too full and something
should be done to ease it? - A. No, because I have always
said the Police have been more responsible for filtering
the crowd.  They have filtered themselves as well as they
come in.

      MR. GOLDSACK:   Yes, thank you, Mr. Thorpe.


               Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Mr. Thorpe, can I just take you up on the closing of the
tunnel? - A. Yes.

Could that have been something done at the r81 semi-final?
- A. No sir.

It is simply you remember it being done but you don't remember
when? - A. I can't remember the date.

Whether it is a good thing or a bad thing I am not going
to ask you, but was the position this:  the Police simply
closed those two gates at the entrance to the tunnel
temporarily? - A. Yes.

Allowing people out if they wanted to go to the toilet? -
A. That is quite correct.

But other than that not? - A. No.

And they would be allowed in? - A. That is right.

Can I go back now to the '81 semi-final.  On that occasion
let it be said there was no northern team involved, was
there? - A. No.

Midlands and London? - A. A London Club.

There were then complaints of drunken fans and hooliganism
from the local residents? - A. That is quite correct.

Mr. Thorpe, I dare say you can remember the days when you
could go to a football match and mingle with the opposing
sides' supporters and have a lot of fun, a lot of banter
and enjoy the game as well? - A. Yes sir.

Things have deteriorated? - A. That is quite correct.

They deteriorated by 1981? - A. That is right.

So that by 1981 it was no mystery to a Football Club or those
working for a Football Club that if there was a semi-final
or even a bi gleague game, there was likely to be hostility,
                              57

                                      S. THORPE


  Abrasiveness between the fans and a certain degree of drunken­
  ness and hooliganism? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Apart from the obvious step and fundamental step of segre­
   gating fans, what different instructions were given or what
   different procedures were carried out at Hillsborough to
   deal with this new phenomenon of drunkenness, hooliganism
   and bad manners among fans? - A. They were ejected out of
   the ground for swearing and drunkenness, the Police ejected
   them out of the ground.  If any one came in drunk, the smell
   of beer, ejected out of the ground.

Q. Well what different instructions were given for example
   to Stewards to deal with what was obviously a new serious
   problem? - A. Nothing really only "Don't get involved with
   anyone".

Q. "Don't get involved"? - A. That was it:    "Don't get involved.
   Notify a Policeman".

Q. The next thing is this:  from time to time there have been
   disasters or incidents, not amounting to disasters, when
   people have been crushed and hurt or killed through over-
   crowding? - A. Yes.

Q. You know that^ don't you? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been asked already by Mr. Goldsack about an incident
   which you know nothing about at Hillsborough where 31 people
   were crushed? - A. I can't remember.

Q. But you have known of other incidents? - A. Oh yes, the
   Bradford one.

Q. Well that was a fire? - A. Yes.

Q. I am talking about crushing through overcrowding? - A. No.

Q. You have known about that at other football grounds, of
   course? - A. Yes.

Q. It has been in the papers? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. What instructions were ever given to you or to any other
   Stewards to your knowledge by the Sheffield Wednesday Club
   which dealt with the problem of overcrowding and the
   dangers that might arise from overcrowding? - A. Nothing
   really.

Q. Was anything ever said to you to indicate that it was
   your responsibility, or one of your responsibilities:

            "To prevent overcrowding in sections of the
            ground and to help disperse spectators^in
            such a way as to reduce crowd pressure"

   A. No.
                                    S. THORPE


Was anything ever said to you to indicate that one of your
duties was:

         "To control and direct members of the public
         entering or leaving the ground to help achieve
         an even flow of people to the viewing areas
         and safe dispersal of spectators on the terraces
         or viewing slopes"?

A. No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Did you ever see the Green Guide?
- A. No sir.

      MR. HYTNER:     You now realise what I have been reading
from? - A. No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I am sorry, have I let the cat
out of the bag?

      MR. HYTNER:  No, not at all, sir.  I was not trying
to catch him out, nor was I trying to appear clever to those
who did not know what I was doing.

Did you even know of the existence of the booklet Lord
Justice Taylor has just held up? - A. No, it has amazed me
when he has just shown it to me.

That is the first time you have ever seen that? - A. That       is
the first time I have ever seen that sir.

Or heard of it? - A. That is right.

Can we just get this right.  You were the Chief Steward of
the West Stand? - A. That is quite correct.

There was attached to the West Stand a terrace, the Leppings
Lane terrace.  Did you regard yourself as the Chief Steward
for that area as well? - A. No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You regarded the terrace as a
no-go area really for Stewards, didn't you? - A. Yes sir.

      MR. HYTNER:  So did the Club, didn't it? The Club
did not appoint anybody, so far as you knew, to steward the
terraces? - A. On away matches, where the ground is
segregated like mine they have no Stewards for the standing
area but the Spion Kop they have got Stewards there.

Oh yes, but what Lord Justice Taylor is asking about and
what I am asking about is not the Spion Kop where the
Sheffield Wednesday supporters go, it is the terraces at
the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, they have no Stewards
there at all.

And the Judge using colloquial language has put it to you,
                                   S. THORPE


that was a Mno-goH area as far as the Sheffield Wednesday's
Stewards were concerned? - A. That is quite correct.

And on the day of this semi-final there we®e; something
like 10,000 people expected on those terraces? - A. Yes.

And so far as you as the Chief Steward at the West Stand
were concerned, the safe dispersal of those 10,000 spectators
was in the hands of six chaps who turned up from Liverpool
without tickets calling themselves Stewards and who might
or might not have obeyed your suggestion of going on to
the terraces? - A. That is quite correct.

      MR. HYTNER:    Thank you.


              Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON;

Mr. Thorpe, Hillsborough is a venue for semi-finals? - A.
That is quite correct.

'81 Gate C had to be opened, did it not, because the turn­
stiles could not cope? - A. That is quite correct.

At that time residents got petitions together to urge that
no semi-finals be held at Sheffield Wednesday? — A. That
is quite correct.

By '87 Sheffield Wednesday again hosted a semi-final? -
A. Yes.

The kick-off was delayed because    the Coventry fans had not
arrived on time? - A. Yes.

'89 consideration might well have been given to the kick-off
being delayed because of the Liverpool fans.

      Looked at with those matters in mind, it is perhaps
a little hopeful to say:  "Well it all went well in *88"
because in '88 you had in fact to close the tunnel, didn t
you, to prevent overcrowding? - A. I can't remember.

Well can you remember, Mr. Thorpe, because did you not
make a statement saying that you ... A. Yes, I did make
a statement, a Police statement.

      MR. JACKSON:    It is at page 9, sir, of the Club's.

I remind you what was said:

      "I witnessed the Police Officers at the entrance
      to the tunnel stopping fans from gaining access
      to the centre pens .M

A. That is quite correct, for about five minutes.
                                  S. THORPE


We know in *81 when they opened Gate C f someone had the
foresight to make sure the fans went to the wing terraces.

      Mr. Thorpe, everything that happened in 1989 was
well signposted, wasn't it? - A. Well ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Unfortunate.

      MR. JACKSON:  I am obliged sir. Apart from the
entrance to the West Stand standing area? - A. Yes.

There had been occasions on which each of these matters
had occurred.

      Mr. Thorpe, may I just move to one other matter.
When you let, Mr. Hytner described them the six Liverpool
people on to the terraces to act as your Stewards, what
did you tell them about evacuation procedures? - A. I did
not tell them anything.

Were they really Stewards? - A. Yes.

To do what? - A. Stewarding, they steward at Anfield because
they showed me their passes.

They may well steward at Anfield.  I am concerned with
stewarding at Sheffield.  They have no idea of the
evacuation procedures? - A.No.

They weren't wearing bibs? - A. No, they weren't wearing
bibs when they left me.

They weren't being paid? - A. No.

No one would recognise them? — A. They had got the identity
card on them.

Mr. Thorpe, when you told us earlier that two people arrived
and said:  "Can we help out?" can you tell us when that
occurred? - A. After 1 o'clock.

Who were they? - A. The Lloyd brothers.

tyjere you really expecting them to work as Official Stewards?
- A. NO.

And when they said:  "Can we help out?" who had sent them
to you? - A. Ken Castley from the cantilever stand.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I rather think that phrase
was   used in his evidence in relation to 1988?

      MR. JACKSON:  Sir,  if   I remember correctly his
evidence.  He first said in 1988 they had arrived inthat
way and then he retracted that and said fefe had a letter
from the Club.
                                 61

                                             S. THORPE


           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       That is right.

           MR. JACKSON:    ARddtherefore I was asking where     ....

            THE WITNESS:   I am sorry, I meant 1989.

            MR. JACKSON:   Sir, may I pursue that?

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

Q.          MR. JACKSON:  Let me make it quite clear.  You said
      that in 1988 the Lloyd brothers had stewarded? - A. Yes.

Q. How did they make their presence known to you in 1988?
   - A. They were on the list from the Club.

Q.    In 1989 they just arrived? - A. That is right.

Q.     Am    Iright that other people arrived with the         sameintent
      later? - A. That is quite correct.

            MR. JACKSON:    Thank you, Mr. Thorpe.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. ROBERTSON:

Q. Mr. Thorpe, as I understand your evidence you consider
   it no part of your responsibility or the Stewards under you,
   to steward the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. That is quite
   correct.
Q. Did you see it as a matter for the Police to control those
   terraces? — A. That is quite correct.

Q. And when it comes to the emergency evacuation P ^ e d u r e ,
   your Stewards would take up particular points, would they
   not? - A. That is quite correct.

 Q. They would know which point to go to? - A. Yes.

 O.   They would have been     told and in particular they would
      take up positions in     the Stand and on the stairs going
      from the Stand? - A.    That is right.

 Q.    And at the gates going out into Leppings Lane? - A. That
       is quite correct.
 Q. But none of them would take up positions in the terraces
    at all, would they? - A. No.
 Q     You obviously appreciated that it was important if the
       evacuation p L c e d u r e was initiated, that your Stewards
       take up that point because they would have to
       people which direction they should go in?         A. That is
       quite correct.
                              62


                                       S. THORPE


Q.   But nevertheless you would be    taking your initial instructions
     from the Police? - A. That is   right, yes.

Q. And in particular were those Leppings Lane terraces to
   be evacuated, did you understand it to be the case that it
   would be the Police who would be directing people off the
   terraces? - A. That is right.

Q. Would it be fair to say for that reason you did not ever
   pay any particular attention to the direction in which
   people should leave the terraces, that was a matter for
   the Police, was it? - A. That is a matter for the Police.

Q.   You mentioned in your evidence earlier in answering
     Mr. Goldsack, that you would expect your Stewards to take
     up positions at Gates B and C? — A. That is right.

Q. If that be the case, Mr. Thorpe, the easiest way to get
   to Gates B and C from the terraces would be through the
   tunnel, would it not? - A. That is right.

Q. Back through the tunnel or alternatively round the sides
   of the Stand? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. When you were asked questions about the gates in the radial
   barriers at the back of the terrace, do you remember being
   asked that? - A. Yes, I remember that.

Q. You said something about the Police, when you were being
   asked whether they could be used as a means of getting
   round the Stand, both sides of the Stand. What was it
   you wanted to say about the Police and; the radial ....
   A. A Policeman stands at each side of those radial gates
   and opens them when they announce the evacuation.

Q. You know what I mean by the "radial gates" don't you?
   Don't confuse them with perimeter fence gates, I mean
   right at the back? - A. Right at the very back just
   underneath my Stand.

Q. What should the Police do if the emergency evacuation
   procedure is initiated as regards those gates at the
   back of the radial fences? - A. Open them.

 Q.And if they are already open what should the Police do?
    - A. Filter people through.

 Q. Now it may be, Mr. Thorpe, that it is because you were
    concentrating on how to get people off the Stand rather
    than off the terraces that you may have misunderstood
    something. - A. Yes.

 O. But it never was the case, was it Mr. Thorpe, that
    people must be evacuated off the Leppings Lane terraces
    if there was to be mass evacuation on to the pitch.
    The idea was for them to go back through the main
                                 63


                                          S. THORPE


     entrances, i.e. the tunnel and the wings round the sides
     of the Stand? - A. Yes, if they could get through but they
     could not get through because it was compact.

Q. If the tunnel was full then the alternative would be to
   go round the sides of the Stand, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. You see you said you thought Mr. Lock had said something
   to you about mass evacuation on to the pitch.  Can you
   clearly recall that conversation and in particular when
   was it? - A. I can't remember now but they open the
   fencing gates for them to get on to the pitch.  If they
   can't get through the tunnel the other way is to come on
   to the pitch.

Q. When did he say that? - A. I can't remember now.

Q. Is it since this incident that he has said that? - A. No,
   before.

Q. Was it at a special meeting? - A. A big meeting, I think
   it was.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       I think he said before it
     was at the Annual Meeting.

           THE WITNESS:   Yes.

Q.          MR. ROBERTSON: Obviously if people were going
     on to the pitch they would be going towards Gates B and C
     which is where you thought people would be evacuated from,
     isn't it? - A. They would filter round to there.  There
     is also a gate at the right-hand side of the South Stand,
     a big emergency gate where they can go. Also they can
     use it from the terracing.

Q. Are you sure Mr. Lock was not talking about evacuating
   the Spion Kop when you heard him mentioning using
   the perimeter fence gates.  Is that a possibility? -
   A. It could be a possibility sir.

Q. Finally a point Mr. Jackson has already taken up. Is it
   fair to say that when you sent the six Liverpool Stewards
   as you thought towards the terraces, you gave them no
   instructions whatsoever as to what they should do? - A.
   No, that is right.  It is quite correct.

Q. You don't know where they went and you weren't particularly
   concerned as to where they went? ~ A. No, I wasn't.

Q. I said finally but just one other point.  You say you
   could not see the pens from the Stand? - A. No.

Q. So it would be impossible to m®nitor those pens from
   the West Stand, would it? - A. That is quite correct.
                                 S. THORPE


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Was that because you were
the back of the Stand? - A. That is right sir.

If you were right at the front I suppose you could ...
A. I could do if I got right to the front.




                  /Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:
                                              S. THORPE

          Cross-examined by Mr. MAXWELL:

Mr. Thorpe, I would like to ask you something about signs
at the back of the Stand, and X invite you first of all
to look at photograph 14 in bundle 'West Midlands 2'.
It is the view of the back of the Stand.  You have told
Lord Justice Taylor about a recollection you have of
there being some numbers posted.  I think you have
mentioned 1 and 2, and I think you may have referred
to 3?   A. 3 is the North Stand.

Bear with me. I am going to try and help you.   If you
look at the very right-hand concrete pillar, that is a
pillar on which there is a smallsignwhich says
 'Standing"?  A. That's right.

Immediately above "Standing" there are two wooden batons
that are attached to the pillar immediately above
"Standing"?   A. Yes.

To the left-hand side of the WestStand -and it is not
shown on any photograph - there are two similar wooden
batons fixed in the same sort of position at the extreme
edge of the Stand?   A. That's right.

Neither of these pairs of batons has got anything attached
to them, but they look as though they may have been the
mounting points for signs at some stage?   A. Yes.

Does that help you to remember whether or not at that edge
on photograph 14, of the West Stand there used to be a No.l
on a sign?   A. Yes, sir.

Above the word "Standing"?   A.   That's right.

And was there a No. 3 at the left-hand edge of the West
Stand?   A. Yes, sir.

And there was a time, was there, when one could look at
a ticket for an all-ticket match and work ou whether
you were to go to 1, 2 or 3?   A. Yes, sir.

Do you know when those signs came down?    A. I've no idea,
sir.

Do you know how long, roughly, a matter of months or years
Were they up for the 1988 semi-final?   A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: They were?    A.    I think they
were up for the 1988 semi-final, yes, sir.

      Mr. MAXWELL: Do you know what reason there could_
be for not having them put back?  A. I have no idea, sir,
to tell you the truth.

You told Lord Justice Taylor about the gate in the wall,
as it has been called, the opening that was left open at
this semi-final?   A. That's right.
                                      S. THORPE

You said, "The gate in the wall is locked. No-one can
go through there until you make sure the Pens through
the tunnel are full"?    A. That's right.  That's for
ordinary League matches.

Yes, that is ordinary League matches. Now, who makes
sure that the Pens through the tunnel are full so as then
to be able to unlock this opening?   A. The Inspector,
the duty officer who is on at Leppings Lane.

What happens? What does he do? A. He tells me that he
is going to open the gates, he is going to filter the
crowd to the north side of the terraces. He always
notifies me, so as to watch my stewards at the bottom
of the steps in case they run up the steps as they are
filtering across.

And do you know what he has done immediately before telling
you this?    A. He has checked with his officers, you
know, the Pens, because a lot of the supporters can't see
and I've mentioned it to him sometimes in League matches;
the spectators can't see , going over the north s i d e --

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: The spectators cannot see
what?   A. In ordinary League matches, sir, they come
through there, the seats, for standing only, and when it
gets full, the officer in charge, the Inspector, always
lets me know that he is going to open the north side
terracing by the North Stand, the two-tier.

       Mr. MAXWELL:   He is an Inspector who lets you know?
A.   Ye s .

He lets you know after he has checked with the officers?
A. That's right.

Where are the officers with whom he checks?       A. I've no
idea, to tell you the truth, sir.

When you were asked by the six Liverpool stewards whether
they could help you, you sent them to the Terraces?
A. That's right, sir.

You thought there was something that they   could do there,
did you not?   A. That's right.

What use did you think they would be there? What purpose
did you think they would serve down there? A. To tell
the crowd to move down, move down to the front instead
of   standing at the back. A lot of supporters when they
go   to a match just standin one spot, and they were
telling them to move down, down towards the railings.

What, to move from any area where there may be crushing?
A. Yes.
                                            S. THORPE

Is that the sort of purpose that you had in mind? A. Well,
notreally.  I just told  them, "Do what you do at Anfield".

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Moving down to the front sounds
more like trying to pack down so that you can get more and
more in?   A. Yes.

Well, is there any limit to that?      A.     No, not   really,
sir.

Not really?   A. Well, I told them to move them down so
that there's spaces at the bottom, to move them down into
those spaces until  it is practically full.

      Mr. MAXWELL:     This is what you told them to do, is
it?   A. Yes.

To move them down?     A. Move them down.

Until what point? When should they stop moving them down?
A. Well, I just tell them to move them down and I left
it at that, because if they are stewards at Anfield, they
must know what they are doing,on the terracing, if they
do stewarding on the terracing at Anfield.

Do you know of any maximum capacity for the Pens?        A. No.

I suppose that is because you say it is not part of your
area?   A. That's right.

Do you have a safety officer?     A. Yes.

Who is that?   A.    Doug Lock.

M r . Lock is your safety officer, is he?      A.Yes.

How do you know that he is the safety officer? A. Because
he was told that at the Annual General Meeting.  At the
Annual General Meeting he is told that he is the safety
officer.

When was that? When were you told that?        A. When he got
the job about three years ago.

That is before October, 1987?     A.   Yes.

And that has not been changed, as far as you are aware?
A. No.

He is the safety officer?   A. The safety officer.  If we
want anything done, we always notify him - such as gates,
bolts.  If the gates won't work properly, we always notify
Mr. Lock.

What about Mr. Mackrell? Is he the safety officer?         A. Well,
he must report to Mr. Mackrell.
                                              S. THORPE

Yes, but what is Mr. Mackrell's job in terms of safety?
A. I don't know really. He is Secretary of the Club;
that's all I know.  I always thought the safety officer
was Mr. Lock. Anything that I want doing in my Stand,
I always let Mr. Lock know.

1 see. That is the practical way in which you did it?
A. Yes, that is the practical way, sir.

        Mr. MAXWELL:   Thank you very much.

          Cross-examined by Mr. KALLIPETIS:

Mr. Thorpe, will you turn to page 9 of the statement that
you made to the Club?   Do you have it, Mr. Thorpe?
A. No, sir.   (Handed to the witness).

Would you turn down four paragraphs to the paragraph
starting "At last year's semi-final ..."? A. Yes, that's
right.

You say there that you saw the police on the terraces;
you cannot remember how many;  they were underneath the
West Stand?   A. That's right.

And you noticed these police officers as you leant over
the front of the seated area?   A. That's right, by the
fire escape.

You say, "These police officers were in position well
before kick-off ..."? A. That's right.

As far as you were aware, did they stay?        A. I've no idea,
sir, to tell you the truth.

Whereabouts were they?      A. Just underneath the Stand.

Along the back of the terrace?      A. That's right.

Stretching up towards the gate leading to the two side
pens?   A. That's right, yes, sir.

Turning to page 3 of your statement --        I am sorry, page
2   —




      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before you move on
from that, you said that they were in position well
before kick-off - indeed shortly after the turnstiles
opened?   A. Yes.

What were they doing on the terrace at that time, those
police officers?  A. I've no idea, to tell you the
truth, sir.

Pardon?     A. I've no idea.   They just stood there.
                                 69


                                                     S. THORPE

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I see, thank you.           I am   sorry,
     Mr. Kallipetis. Where are we going now?

           Mr. KALLIPETIS:   Page 2 , sir.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Thank you.

Q.          Mr. KALLIPETIS: Do you have that, Mr. Thorpe?
     A.   Yes, I've got it now, sir.

Q. Again the fourth paragraph down. You say:    "The evacuation
   procedures are important particularly with regard to any
   fire, and we are informed as to the code which will be
   broadcasted over the public address system"? A. That's
   right.

Q. Mr. Thorpe, I do not want to know what the code is, but
   what I want to know is this: Have there been any
   dress rehearsals during League matches when this code
   has been tested?    A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you remember on how many occasions?   A. There was
   one two matches before this semi-final that we were
   drilled on. We have had about four this year.

Q. Is that during a     match?        A. Yes.

Q. With a lot of shouting and chanting?              A. That's quite
   correct.

Q. Any difficulty with the tannoy?              A. No.

Q. So everybody could hear the message and go to their
   designated position?   A. Yes, that's right, sir.

           Mr. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you very much.

                Cross-examined by Mr.WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Thorpe, you have been asked about the green guide
   and the first time you have seen it is today? A. That's
   right.

Q. May I ask you about something else? Did you know that
   the Club had a Safety Certificate? A. Yes.

Q. Had anybody told you about it and about the responsibility
   and importance of stewards in the Safety Certificate?
   A. The Safety Certificate? I think it was in the press
   that we had got a Safety Certificate, Sheffield Wednesday
   Football Ground, because in my Stand there is a sheet
   up of the Safety Certificate, like a copy, with all the
   ground procedures and everything like that.

Q. It is in the Club's bundle, the first document in the
   bundle. May I draw your attention, please, to page 5 in
   the bundle? Section 9 deals with stewards.   It is page
                                 70



                                                  S. THORPE

     5 in the bundle. Do you see what it says there?
     It says, "The holder shall arrange for the attendance
     at every specified activity a number of safety stewards".
     Now, that is you and your men, is it not?   A. Yes.

Q. You knew that you were a safety steward?        A. Yes.

Q. And it there sets out the sort of task that you are
   expected to perform:  the manning of the exits, the
   control and direction of spectators entering, using
   or leaving the stadium.  So there are three tasks,
   entering, using and leaving the stadium?   A. Yes.

Q. You knew that that was a steward's job?        A.   That's right.

Q. The next requirement is that the safety stewards shall
   patrol the stadium.  Did you know that that was expected
   of the stewards? Did you know that, Mr. Thorpe? Not
   you necessarily, but that there would be stewards
   patrolling the stadium?   A. No, not to my knowledge.
   We just had to stand at us posts.

Q. Your role as a steward was in respect of a specific area
   and particular men?   A. Yes, that's right.

Q. And you did not have any concern about other parts?
   A. No.

Q. But from time to time during a day whilst your stewards
   were at their posts, were you visited and patrolled by
   any of Mr. Lock's men?   A. No.

Q. Did Mr. Lock come round?           A.   Yes.

Q.   You were a chief steward?        A. Yes.

Q.   Were there stewards above you, before you     get to Mr. Lock?
     A. Yes.

Q. What is the order of rank? What sort of steward is above
   you? A. Basil Jones, Mr. Jones.

Q. And above him?     A.   Mackrell.

Q. Mr. Mackrell?     A. Yes.

Q. Whatever job they had, there was Mr. Jones above you and
   then Mr. Mackrell. Where did Mr. Lock fitinto all this?
   A. Well, he was overall. He's below Graham.     I understood
   he was my safety officer for all the ground.

Q.    You took your directions and orders from Mr.     Lock, did
     you?    A. Yes.

Q.    But you do not recall, other than Mr. Lock coming round,
     any stewards having the task of patrolling?   A. No.
                                 71


                                                       S. THORPE

Q. You have told us about certain briefings that took place
   and certain meetings?   A. Yes.

Q. Those were briefings or meetings at which the police
   attended?   A. That's right.

Q. Would you have a look, please, at this document?    (Handed
   to the witness) . It is a Club document and it is not in
   the bundle.   Could you please tell us whether you have
   seen it before? It is headed "Management Information"
   and it has got some writing on the top. Would you ignore
   the writing on the top for a moment?     It then says,
   "Safety of Sportsground" and then it says "Use and
   Training of Stewards", and it is Sheffield Wednesday *s
   material.   Have you seen this before?    A. No.

Q.   Or anything like it?      A. No.

Q.   You have not seen that?     A. No.

Q.   You have not?   A. I have not seen       this whatsoever.

Q.   The first paragraph of it sets out  that the prime
     responsibility for the arrangement of affairs at the
     Club lies with the Club. Do you see that?     A. Yes.

Q. At paragraph 8 it talks about training and the training
   of stewards.  Do you see? A. Yes.

Q. And in the third section of that itsays, "Stewards   should
   be supplied with a hand-out detailing their responsibilities
   in general terms as set out above"?    A. Yes.

Q. The general terms we can see at paragraph 3 on the left-
   hand side.    That sets out "Controlling, directing and
   patrolling" and other matters.   You have never seen this
   before?    A. No, sir.

Q.    At the briefing or meeting or lectures that you had from
     the   police, do you recall being present at the meeting
     when Mr. Sewell addressed you in 1988?     A. Yes.

Q. That would be in the August, would it, the summer of 1988?
   A. Yes.

Q.    Mr.Sewell talked to you.  Was that the first time you had
     had any address or lecture from him - do you remember?
     A. I think it was.




                                  /Q.     Now, amongst the things
                                                 S.    THORPE



Now, amongst the things that he explained to you stewards
who were there was the sort of division of responsibility,
was it not, making it plain that the Police's task really
was to be concerned with preventing any breaches of the
peace, misbehaviour, public disorder, that sort of thing,
and that they would deal with matters outside the ground
but once inside the enforcement of the Ground regulations
and the ordering of the fans was really down to the
stewards and the Club.   A.   No.

      LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      That was a very long       question.

      MR.   WOODWARD:      Forgive me.

      LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      Very inclusive.

      MR.   WOODWARD:      I do apologise.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    If he had said, "Yes", it
may   be that some of it he does agree with, I do not know.

      MR.   WOODWARD:      Sir, may   I break it up?

      LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR,*    Yes.

     MR. WOODWARD:         At the meeting Mr.    Sewell i dentifi ed        the
areas of re sp on si bi li ty as he saw them.      A.   Yes.

The Police on the one hand and the Club and stewards                  on
the other;  you recall that?   A.   Yes.

Amongst the things that he was saying was that the Police
would be respon si bl e for breaches of the peace ---
A.  Misbehaviour.

Mis b eh av io ur and public   disorder. A.   That^s         right.

And   that the task of the stewards  and the Club was enforcing
the   Ground regulations.   A.   That's right, yes.

And   ensuring the movement around and the general control                 of
the   fans;  do you agree?   A.   I agree.

And ensuring also the safety of the fans.               A.      That's
right.

And that was plainly explained to you as how the roles
were to be played.   A.   That's right.

Were there any ques tions by anybody at the meeting on
that subject, do you recall?    A.   I recall some people
asking questions but I can't remember what they said, like.

Did anybody suggest to him that he had got it wrong -
the wrong end of the stick?   A.    I can't remember if anyone
did.

Do you recall whether Mr.          Lock or any of the senior men
                                   73



                                                         S.    T HOR PE



     were present   at that meeting?        A.   Yes.

Q.   You did have your   little stewards'        booklet? A.       That's
     right.

Q. Did you not,     with the tickets      in.    A.     Yes,,

Q.    Were those rules and regulations or the matters  that are
     set out in that booklet,   were they observed  by you?
     A.    Yes.

Q.   You are quite sure about that?   A.   fhat's right.    To
     a certain extent ---   At the start of the season, the Club
     always gave me copies for everyone of my stewards;  it is
     in their book.   Also I made sure that they had a copy
     as well.   The Club made sure they had that copy.

          MR. WOODWARD:   These booklets, sir, can be found
     following page 50 in the bundle, or anexample of it.

          LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:        Thank you.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:  Amongst the tasks that  you had as a
     steward to be concerned with was being prepared for the
     event of an emergency, an evacuation procedure.     A.   Yes.

Q.   In order to do that, you would obviously have to be at
     your posts throughout the game to the end of the game.
     A.   T h a t 's r i g h t .

Q.   To the final whistle, because if you were not in your
     positions for the final whistle and something happened
     towards the end, then there would be no way by which the
     stewards could comply with the procedure.   A.   That's
     right, yes.

Q. Did you have a prac tice of paying the stewards before the
   end of the game?    A.   I used to have, years ago, but
   now I pay them at the end of the match.

Q.   Well, is that right, Mr. Thorpe?      Do you not pay your
     stewards before the end of the game?      Would you have
     a look, please, at the statement that you made?      The Club
     statement, Page 1, the bottom of the page.      Do you see,
     "I am respon si bl e for paying the stewards and the gatemen.
     When the stewards and gatemen arrive, they hand over their
     passes and I also take a ticket from their booklet.       I
     keep the jackets in the cupboard in the snack bar at the
     rear of the West Stand...      Before the end of the match
     the stewards and the gatemen hand back their jackets
     and I provide them with their passes and their payment
     for the match."      Now, is that what you did?   A.   I
     pay them just before the final whistle, about 5 minutes
     before the final whistle and then they go back to their
     posts and they have the I.D. card on their jackets, on
     their coats.

Q.   This may be a practice   that has been going on for a long
                                     74




                                                                S.   THORPE



     time        A.    No, it has only been going on for the
     last 4 years, because the reason it is, on some occasion
     somewhere on the ground some of the stewards have been
     paid before the end of the game and Doug Lock pointed
     it out to us when we went to    a meeting that he saw a
     steward - he didn't    know where he had come from - walking
     up   Halifax Road with his jacket on.

Q.   Can I just ask about what you said there.             Forgive me,
     I interrupt you.      You were going to say Mr. Lock then
     said something else should be done?             A.   He said, "When
     do   you pay your s t e w a r d s ? " I said, "I pay them nearly
     at   the end of the match and I take their jackets and they
     go back and they keep their I.D. Card on them.

Q.   Where do you pay them?         A.      At the snack bar,        up the
     stairs.

Q.   They have to come from their posts to the snack bar?
     A.   Well, they come one at a time from their posts.

Q.   And you take the tabard        from them, you give them the
     money. A.   Yes.

Q.   They do go back again,      do they?         A.     Yes.

Q.    But without their tabards they are slightly at a disadvantage,
     are   they not?   A.   They have got an I.D. Card on.    The
     gates have opened at 25 to      5to  let people outside come in.
     They always open the gates      5or  10 minutes before the end
     of the match and that is when I pay them because a lot
     of s pectators are going home, the crowd —   the stands are
     filtering out, emptying.

                          (Luncheon a d j o u r n m e n t )
