From: M J Addison                            cc    Mr Walters
      FI Division                                 Mr Yates
      Extn 3743                                   Mr Chilcot \ •
      16 May 1989                                 HMCIC
                                                  Mr Woodcock   *
                                                  Mr Brownlow
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Malone-Lee
                                                  Mr Sandiford
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Whalley
                                                  Ms Ransford
                                            [without Mr Rooker's
                                             letter]

Ms Adams


HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


I have been asked for advice and a draft reply to the letter from
Mr Jeff Rooker MP to the Home Secretary of 9 May enclosing one
from the clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority.         The
original of this should be returned to Mr Rooker with Lord
Ferrers' reply. The clerk has written in the same terms to all
West Midlands MPs.
2.   Mr Rooker is encouraging the Government to give a positive
response to the West Midlands Police Authority's request that it
will be fully reimbursed for the costs of the West Midlands
police inquiries into the Hillsborough disaster.
3.   My submission of 28 April suggested that         thebest way
forward, in sorting out the precise mechanics of how the West
Midlands police should be reimbursed, would be an early meeting
between the Home Office and the South Yorkshire Police Authority
initially as the force in whose area the tragedy occurred.     A
copy of my letter to %the Clerk of South Yorkshire Police
Authority is attached at Annex A.     The meeting has now been
arranged for Thursday 18 May.
4.   I also wrote to Mr Astling, the Clerk to the West Midlands
Police Authority, on 5 May [copy attached at Annex B] informing
them that the Home Secretary has asked Lord Ferrers to receive
their deputation on his behalf to discuss the costs issue. This
meeting has now been arranged for 25 May. My letter of 5 May was
faxed to Mr Astling on the same day but that does not seem to
have deterred him from sending off his round robin to all MPs.
5.   It seems likely that the police authorities concerned will
press for a direct payment to the West Midlands from central
government funds. This will need to be resisted since it would
fail to recognise the statutory basis for paying for police
costs.   Under this it is for South Yorkshire to reimburse the
West Midlands, looking to Central Government for a special
payment if the costs are likely to be excessive.
6.   The West Midlands are also likely to demand reimbursement of
the full salary costs of their officers.     The Home Secretary's
guarantee to Mr Beaumont-Dark and other Conservative MPs in the
West Midlands only covered additional costs (ie overtime, travel,
accommodation etc).     It would be wrong to reimburse salaries
because their costs would have been borne by the West Midlands
even if the tragedy at Hillsborough had not occurred.
7.   I suggest therefore that Lord Ferrers may wish to remind
Mr Rooker of the assurance given by the Home Secretary that the
additional costs of the police inquiries being undertaken by the
West Midlands will     not fall on    the West Midlands Police
Authority.   We can also give him details of the forthcoming
meetings where full discussion of this issue will take place. I
enclose a draft letter for Lord Ferrers' use.     v

                                   M J ADDISON
                                                                               V. /

                                                                 I W i f c t t P\ P --

                                                HOME OFFICE
                                        Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T
                                                Direct line: 01-273 3 1 * 3
                                              Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:
Your reference:

   R C Johnston Esq
   Clerk and Financial Officer
   South Yorkshire Police Authority
   PO Box 37
   Regent Street
   Barnsley
   South Yorkshire
   S70 2PQ            *                       8 May 1989




   HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY: TRIBUNAL OF INQUIRY
  The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 24
  April and to reply to it on his behalf.
  The immediate costs of the Public Inquiry undertaken by Lord
  Justice Taylor will be met in full by the Government. The costs of
  the inquiries being undertaken by the West Midlands police are,
  however, a different matter since those inquiries were started at
  the initiative of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and are
  being undertaken for reasons connected with policing in South
  Yorkshire, although it was agreed at the time they were launched
  that their results would be made available to Lord Justice Taylor.
  The best way forward would seem to be an early meeting between us
  to discuss these issues further. We need I think to focus on the
  purposes being served by the inquiries being undertaken by the West
  Midlands Police in South Yorkshire; whether and to what extent
  these inquiries could be said to be serving a purpose other than
  those connected with policing in South Yorkshire; and the scale and
  cost of those inquiries in relation to South Yorkshire Police
  Authority's available financial resources.
  I hope that you will agree to this course and am asking my
  Secretary to get in touch with a view to arranging a meeting here
  at the earliest convenient date.

                                                                     t
                                                  •   7   •              i


                                         M J ADDISON
                                                HOME OFFICE
                                        Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T
                                                Direct line: 01-273 _ 7 . _
                                              Switchboard: 01-273 300V



Our reference:
Your reference:




  A V Astling Esq
  Clerk
  West Midlands Police Authority
  Council House
^^udley
^ Y 1 1HG                                     5 May 1989




   PUBLIC INQUIRY - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY
  The Home Secretary has asked me to thankyou for yourletters of              25
  April and 4 May and to reply to them on his behalf.
  To take first your letter of 25 April, the Home Secretary has
  already accepted, in a letter to Mr Anthony Beaumont-Dark MP, that
  the additional costs of the police inquiries being undertaken in
  relation to the Hillsborough disaster by West Midlands police
  officers should not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority.
  The precise arrangements for reimbursing the West Midlands Police
  Authority will, however, need further discussion.       I shall be
  asking for an urgent meeting with the       Clerk to South      Yorkshir
  Police Authority, since it was at the request of the Chief
  Constable of South Yorkshire that the West Midlands police
  inquiries were set in hand and their inquiries seem related in
  large part to questions connected with policing in South Yorkshire.
  It is true, as you point out, that the results of Mr Dear's
  inquiries are to be made available to Lord Justice Taylor.   But
  that does not mean that the work of the West Midlands Police has
  ceased to have any connection with police issues in South
  Yorkshire. For this reason it is necessary to start with a close
  examination of that authority's position.
  These matters will clearly take some effort to resolve. I think it
  must be right for me to take them up with the Clerk to the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority initially, as the force in whose area
  the tragedy occurred and whose Chief Constable invited the West
      E.R.

         Midlands police in. But I will be in touch with you again as soon
         as I can after my initial discussions with South Yorkshire.
         As for the request in your letter of 4 May for a meeting of a
         deputation from your Authority with the Home Secretary, the Home
         Secretary has asked Lord Ferrers, the Minister of State at the Home
         Office with responsibility for police matters, to receive the
         deputation on his behalf.    I should be grateful therefore if you
         would get in touch direct with Lord Ferrers' Private secretary on
         01-213-2769 to arrange a date for this.




                                                   A-s .
(/■
       *                                          M J ADDISON
                                                                         FILE NUMBER


DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


 TO                                           ENCLOSURES                       COPIES TO BE SENT TO
Jeff Rooker Esq MP                                                          HCC Mr Walters
House of Commons                                                                Mr Yates
London                                                                          Mr Chilcot
SW1A OAA                                                                        HMCIC
                                                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                                                Mr Malone-Lee
                                                                                Mr Addison
                                                                                Mr Sandiford
                                                                                Mr Nagler
                                                                                Mr Whalley



  ^ f = U L L POSTAL ADDRESS)                                           (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                                                                    .. , LORD FERRERS
                       LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y .............................................................
                                                                                      (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                       Thank you for your letter of 9 May to the Home Secretary
                       enclosing this one from the Clerk to the West Midlands
                       Police Authority about the costs of the inquiries by the
                       West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium
                       Tragedy.

                       As you will know, the Home Secretary has already accepted
                       in his reply of 28 April to a Parliamentary Question from
                       Mr Beaumont-Dark and in his letters to West Midland MPs,
                       that the additional costs of the police inquiries being
                       undertaken in relation to the disaster by West Midlands
                       police officers should not fall on the West Midlands
                       Police Authority.

                       "Additional costs" include the cost of overtime worked by
                       the West Midlands police officers in their own force area
                       to cover duties which would otherwise have been




       H.O. EST. 112
SS36                                                                                                        35688 9.85 XNW
undertaken   by   officers   seconded   to   the   Hillsborough
inquiry.

The Home Secretary also mentioned that it will take a
while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the West
Midlands police should be reimbursed.

As a first stop in this process, a meeting is to be held
between Home Office officials and officers of the South
Yorkshire Police Authority shortly to discuss the
representations made by that authority over the costs
issue.

I have also agreed to meet a deputation from the West
Midlands Police Authority to discuss this matter. I am
anxious to reach agreement on the reimbursement of West
Midlands police costs and hope to make progress following
these meetings.
