THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975

DESIGNATION


How does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act work?


The principle mechanism for achieving spectator safety is by the
issue of a safety certificate for a sports ground designated by
the Secretary of State.


How is designation done?


Designation is by Order, subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.   The individual ground is named in the
Order.


Are there limits in designation?


The Safety of Sports Grounds Act provides for the designation of
sports grounds which have accommodation for over 10,000
spectators.


Is there provision to change the 10,500 limit?


Yes; the Secretary of State has power to vary the limit, either
up or down, by Order - subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.


How many grounds are designated?


91 out of the 92 football league grounds are designated.     The
exception is the ground used by Torquay Utd which holds less than
10.000 spectators.


What is the designation policy?


All sports grounds identified as having accommodation for over
10.000 spectators and used for either association football, rugby
union, rugby league, cricket are designated.     (This follows HMG's
acceptance of the Popplewell Inquiry recommendation).


SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Issue of the Safety Certificate


The issue of the safety certificate is the responsibility of the
local authority, who is under a duty to issue one.


Contents of a safety certificate


A safety certificate will contain terms and conditions "necessary
of expedient" to secure "reasonable" safety.   For example, it
includes conditions on authorised numbers of spectators to a
ground, or any part of a ground; the exits/entrances to the
ground; size, location, strength of the crush barriers.


Effects of the Popplewell Inquiry on the 1975 Act


The 1975 Act was amended as from 1 January 1988 by Part II of the
Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 which
reflected HMG's response to the Popplewell Inquiry.


Has Hillsborough a safety certificate?


YES


Is the ground inspected?


There is a duty on the local authority to arrange for an annual
inspection of the ground.   Inspections are carried out in
accordance with guidelines from the Home Office.     These are in
addition to any test/inspection requirements set by the safety
certificate.


SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR GROUND OPERATORS


The Home Office/Scottish Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds" is intended to provide advice to both ground operators
and "certificating" local authorities on spectator safety.

Status of the Guide


The Guide is a voluntary code but may be called up in terms and
conditions in safety certificates.



Adequacy of the Guide


The Guide was revised in October 1986 in the light of
recommendations from the Popplewell Inquiry.


Does the Guide contain advice about the ingress to sports
grounds?


Yes.   The Guide specifically highlights the dangers of crowd
pressure and over crowding and includes advice on crowd
dispersal, crush barrier specification stewarding and controlled
egress.


What is the purpose of crush barriers on a standing terrace?


To control the movement, density and pressure build up on a
terrace, it is necessary to comply with the strength and spacing
requirements, or the capacity of the terrace should be reduced.


Any additional studies on adequacy of crush barriers?


Home Office engineers have attended tests on crush barriers with
engineers carrying out the test procedures advocated on the Guide
to Safety at Sports Grounds.   There have been no indications that
the procedure recommended in the Guide were inadequate.


Is the advice in the Guide adequate?


This is something which the Inquiry will wish to examine.
Does the Guide contain advice on First Aid?


The Guide reminds ground management of their responsibility to
provide adequate first aid provision and first aid staff.


[Note: St John's Ambulance have recently pressed for compulsory
minimum first aid provision to be the subject of regulations.        We
have said we believe this to be a wrong approach.     Safety
certificates are the     main safety mechanism and their
terms/conditions can     be tailored to individual needs. It is    also
doubtful whether the     provisions of the Act are wide enough to
make such regulations.    We have told St John's   that we        will
include expanded advice on the subject when updating the Guide
this year.]


RESPONSIBILITY FOR SAFETY


Who is responsible for safety?


Prime responsibility lies with the ground operators to ensure the
safety of their customers.


Who is in charge: the club or the police?


It will be one of the tasks of the inquiry to examine the
arrangements made by the club and the police for the stewarding
and policing of spectators at the match.     There is invariably
close consultation between the police and clubs over such
arrangements.


IF PRESSED:


The police have responsibility for the preservation of the peace
and the maintenance of public order.    If they perceive a threat
to public order or public safety, they have a duty to take action
to counter it.    This is an operational Judgement for the senior
police officer.
