                               cc   Mr Bolton -            * 1
                                    (for information only)
                                     Mr Cook
From:   D J Mould
        G2 Division
        Ext 3099                                             *.«




Mr F Smith
F8 Division



DoE Briefing Material


1.   I attach a copy of DoE's draft briefing prepared in
readiness for their oral evidence to the Hillsborough Inquiry.

2.   The issues addressed are cross-referenced to evidence put to
the Inquiry jointly by the Football Association/Football League.
I think DoE would like our comments later this week, preferably
before Friday.  I am willing to do this if you wish although most
of the items seem to be hooligan/alcohol related rather than
safety.  I am not sure where the demarcation lies between F8 and
SARD on all this but I would have thought that DoE should stick
to Part I of the Football Spectators Bill.

3.   Home Office written evidence to the Inquiry also covers some
of the points, including the sale of tickets. Are C4 content for
the DoE line proposed at item 6 of the draft briefing material?

4.    I think F8 and G2 also need to consider in readiness to
expand, if necessary, our line on pitch barrier fencing which
gives rise to differing views,-some strongly held as to their
value in relation to safety at football grounds.    I envisage
clearing any such line with DoE.

5.   Could you please let me have any comments by close of play
on Wednesday - telephone will do if this will save time.




                                         D J MOULD

                                         9 October 1989


FEP/89 35/48/65
                                        Department of the Environment
                                        Room                 P3/165
                                        2 Marsham Street London SW 1P 3EB
                                        Telex 22221    Direct Line 01 -27 6   0675
                                                      Switchboard 01 -27 6 3000
                                                                 GTN 276


2 October 1989



D Mould Esq
Rm 926
Queen An n e's Gate
LONDON SW1




Dear David

SPORTING FACILITIES:    NEW   ITALIAN   REGULATIONS               FOR         SAFETY   AND
CONTROL OF SPECTATORS

I enclose for your information a copy of the                              new Italian
regulations for safety and control of spectators.                          A copy has
been sent to Lord Justice Taylor's Office.

I also enclose a copy of same draft briefing I have prepared in
connection with Phase II of the Taylor Inquiry.

Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
Criticisms of the Football Membership Scheme


It will cause additional congestion outside the turnstiles (7-3)

Line to take

Potential suppliers of the technology say that some systems would mean no
extra time would be necessary to check the card at the turnstile. It could
be done in no more than the time it presently takes to part with tickets or
to pay for them.


It will lead to the loss of occasional supporters (7*^)

Line to take

It is a    requirement of the Football Spectators Bill that the scheme must
include    provisions allowing for temporary membership.   Joining a scheme
will be    a simple process involving completing a single form with a few
personal    details and providing two photographs.

There should indeed be an increase in attendance as a result of the scheme
by those who would otherwise not attend because of the threat of violence.
In particular we would expect more families to attend.


It will involve major policing problems,    in particular of removing those
who attempt to enter illegally (7-5)

Line to take

Where a card is rejected it will be retained by the turnstile operator, the
spectator given a receipt and allowed in and the investigation will follow
later - either during the match or the following day.        We accept the
practical policing difficulties of attempting to investigate all rejected
cards either at or immediately after the turnstiles. Reasons for rejection
would include, faulty machinery, damaged and forged cards or because the
carcj was declared banned, lost or stolen.

Where a spectator is not authorised to attend because of a previous
conviction but nevertheless obtains      illegal entry and subsequently
misbehaves inside the grounds, he would be charged with both the criminal
offences of being there illegally and for his misbehaviour.


It does not address the problem of hooliganism away from grounds (7*6)

Line to take

It^is not true that hooliganism is no longer a problem inside grounds. Over
45/ of arrests in the 1988/89 season were inside football grounds.   In the
case of the First Division, the arrest figures inside and outside grounds
were almost identical.

The scheme would end football as a focus for hooliganism outside as well as
inside the ground.   It would remove the match as a central focus for the
activities of hooligans.   If they cannot get into a match they will not
travel to one.
' ThQ Safety of Sports Grounds Act should be amended to make the achievement
  Si— English Football League grounds of a stated ratio of seating to ground
  capacity compulsory within a stated time-scale


 Line to take

 This is a matter    under the Football Spectators Bill for the Secretary of
 State to take the   advise of the Football Licensing Authority. The FLA will
 no doubt wish to    consult the local authorities for the grounds concerned
 and the football    authorities.  It is likely that different grounds would
 require different   solutions over varying time-scales.

 The Secretary of State is not bound by the FLA recommendation but he may by
 order direct the FLA to make it a condition of a licence to admit
 spectators, that the ground or grounds named should replace terracing by
 seating as specified in the order.
• The Government should give financial assistance to football by effectively
  reducing the rate of pool betting tax from Its present 42.5# and ensuring
  that the entire benefit of the reduction was passed to football (5 *2 5 )


 Line to take

 The pool betting duty is a tax on gambling, not on football.    Channelling
 of a fixed proportion of this tax to football would amount to a
 hypotheration of revenue.   It is a basic principle of the tax system that
 receipts from taxation are treated as belonging to a central pool from
 which resources are allocated according to public expenditure priorities.

 The pools promoters through the Football Trust and the Football Grounds
 Improvement Trust already provide substantial financial assistance to
 football, about £9 .5® a year. This assistance is not affected by the level
 of pool betting duty since they are found from the proceeds of the Spotting
 the Ball competitions on which duty is not charged.


 [If required on comparison with horseracing levy.

 The horseracing levy board was set up in I96I when off-course betting shops
 were legalised and this drew money away from the courses.    Football pools
 betting does not, of course, have a comparable effect on the income of
 individual clubs.]
4.    The Government should   make   capital   allowances   available    for       ground
     improvements (5 .2 6 )

5* Central and local government should         be   encouraged   to   assist       in   the
   construction of new grounds (9.6)


     Line to take

     Football is a prosperous industry which should pay for the measures needed
     to secure the reasonable safety and comfort of its customers.    It should
     not look to the Government for assistance to enable it to discharge its
     responsibilities to its customers.      The Government does not provide
     financial assistance of this sort to any sport.




                                                                               I
The sale of tickets on match days     other   than at official   club selling
points should be made illegal (8.3)


Line to take

While we have every sympathy with the objectives behind this proposal we
doubt that there is a practicable and enforceable legal remedy to the
problem.   The proposal if implemented would prevent the legitimate last
minute sale of spare tickets or tickets which an individual was no longer
in a position to use, to a friend.     Moreover, there would still be the
danger that the 'professional' touts would continue their activities
underground and demand yet higher prices.
7* Recommendations on alcohol consumption:


a) The sections of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act. 1985
   dealing with the consumption of alcohol at grounds should be repealed (9.5)

   Line to take

   This is primarily a matter for the Home Office but our view and that of the
   Home Office is that the measures to control alcohol introduced in 1985 have
   unquestionably played a part in improving the situation inside grounds in
   respect of drink related disorder.    We see no reason for relaxing these
   measures now and it is far from evident that the provision of alcohol on
   the grounds will encourage the hard core of spectators who stay in the pubs
   until the last minute to leave early.


b) The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act. 1985 should be amended
   to require coach operators carrying football supporters to matches to carry
   supporters direct to grounds and to prevent the consumption of alcohol both
   in the coach and en route (9-5)


   Line to take

   The Home Office position is that there is no evidence that coach operators
   are not abiding by the spirit as well as the letter of the 1985 Act under
   which it is an offence to consume alcohol on coaches going either to or
   from matches.
8. Green Guide recommendations:


a ) It should be a condition of the issue of a Safety Certificate that certain
    specific requirement of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds are met (6.3)

   Line to take

   This is a Home Officer matter.

   Background

   The Home Office position is that the Green Guide is there to provide
   guidance on safety at sports grounds to be drawn upon by local authorities
   as appropriate according to the circumstances of the case. Whether or not
   there should be certain standard safety requirements to be a condition of
   the issue of all football ground Safety Certificates is a matter for the
   Inquiry.


b) A Working Party should be set up to draw up these requirements of the Guide
   which should be satisfied as a condition of the issue of a Safety
   Certificate (6 .5 )

   Line to take

   This is a Home Officer matter.


c) Various amendments and additions to the Guide should be made (6.6 to 6.11)

   Line to take

   These are Home Office matters.

   Background

   The Home Office has not yet formed a view on all these specific
   suggestions.    In some cases they can be supported or indeed are
   self-evident,  such as the suggestion that each turnstile/group of
   turnstiles should give access to one designated area of the stadium.

   The key issue for the Home Office in relation to the FA/FL comments on the
   Guide is the question of perimeter fencing.    The advice in the Guide on
   this stemmed primarily from considerations of prevention of disorder rather
   than public safety although the two are of course inextricably linked. The
   Home Office are still considering the line they should take if pressed by
   Taylor.
+
 POPPLEWELL INQUIRY



1.   The Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at
 ports Grounds was chaired by Mr Justice-Popplewell and the Final
Report presented to Parliament in January 1986 (Cmnd 9710).

2.   The Final Report made 15 recommendations - ten of those
related to safety; four to expansion of the criminal law; and the
remaining recommended some form of membership scheme for football
 eague clubs in England and Wales. The Government's proposals for
giving effect to the safety recommendations in the Final Report
were set out in a consultative document produced jointly by the
Home Office and the Scottish Office in June 1986.
Recommendation 1

3 •   "The distinction between sports grounds and sports stadia
should be abolished."

4.   Section 19 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 removes the distinction in the SSGA 1975 between a
sports ground and a sports stadium. The provisions of the 1975
Act apply to-all sports grounds as defined in section 17(1)'of
that Act.

Recommendation 2

5.   "Further designation under the SSGA 1975 of sports grounds
and sports stadia with accommodation for over 10,000 spectators
where Association Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and cricket
is played in England, Wales and Scotland."                    '

6.   In England and Wales there are 92 designated grounds for
Association Football, including Wembley (Torquay United is the
exception because it holds less than 10,000 spectators); 22 Rugby
League grounds; and a total of 54 cricket and rugby union
grounds. All sports grounds identified as having accommodation
for over 10,000 spectators are used for those stated sports are
designated.

Recommendation 3

7.   "All sports grounds and sports stadia not already designated
under the SSGA 1975 and having a capacity in a stand of over 500
spectators should be designated under the FPA 1971 as premises
requiring a fire certificate."

8.   Designation under the FPA 1971 would permit fire authorities
to certificate the stand only in matters relating to fire safety;
they would not be able to seek improvements to the structural
safety of the stand.  Part III of the FSSPGA 1987 stipulates that
a stand at a sports ground which is not a designated ground and
which can accommodate at least 500 spectators under cover must
have a safety certificate if it is to be used to view the
activities at a ground.  This is known as a regulated stand.
 Recommendation 4

 9.   "One authority should be given responsibility for securing
 structural safety at sports grounds and stadia not designated
 under the 1975 Act".

10. This follows on from the Inquiry's Recommendation 3 in that
the Inquiry recognised that designation under the FPA 1971 would
be limited in its scope to fire matters only and not to
structural dangers.  The introduction of regulated stands has
significantly increased the number of grounds at which local
authorities are now required to carry out inspection for safety
ce ification of the unit of covered accommodation.
Regulation 5

11. "In England and Wales indoor sports facilities with
accommodation for over 500 spectators should require a fire
certificate*.

     Part ?v of the FSSpA 1987, which came into force on 1 June
1988, requires that premises are not used for sports
entertainments except under and in accordance with the terms of a
licence granted by a district or borough council. The 1987 Act
requires the licensing of premises for any entertainment which
consists of. any indoor sporting event to which the public are
invited as spectators.   This allows for more than just fire
safety to be regulated.

Regulation 6

13. "An urgent review of the existing legislation on indoor
sports facilities in Scotland should be undertaken and if they
are not currently covered by fire regulations such facilities
should be designated under the FPA".

14.^ Section 44 (within Part IV) of the 1987 Act stipulates that
a licence to be known as an "indoor sports entertainment licence"
shall be required for the use of premises as a place of public
sports entertainment.  Again this allows the licensing authority
to deal with safety in general rather than with fire safety
alone.

Recommendation 7

15*t "Provision should be made in the FPA 1971 for authorised
officers °f & fire authority to have power to issue a prohibition
notice".

and

Recommendation 8

16.  "Provision should be made for authorised officers of the
local authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice under
the SSGA 1975".
17. Section 23 of the 1987 Act replaces section 10 of the 1975
Act with^provision for a system of prohibition notices.   Local
authorities are empowered to serve a prohibition notice where
they are of the opinion that the admission: of spectators to a
sports ground or any part of a sports ground involves or will
involve a serious risk. The prohibition notice can take effect
immediately.

18. The emergency procedure under section 10 of the FPA 1971
remains in force.

Recommendation 9

19. "There should be (l) annual renewal of safety certificates
under the SSGA 1975; (2) a duty on the local authority to inspect
the premises prior to reissuing the certificate and (3) power for
the local authority to revoke the certificate".

20. The:Government did not accept the need for (1) - and
therefore-(2 ) - nor for (3).

21. The 1975 Act works in such a way that revocation is
unnecessary. A safety certificate can be amended if
circumstances: change: so as to justify such a course. Local
authorities can be flexible in their approach to remedial works
required to be carried out and pan' regulate -the number of
spectators-permitted: into the grounds: or parts of it, to match
the conditions which exist within the ground.

22. Designated grounds are inspected annually by local
authorities.^

RegOXation 10
                                                               i

23.  "The Department of the Environment should urgently amend the
building regulations guideline codes in relation to structural
fire precautions in new stands".
POPPLSWSLL US PORT


BACKGROUND NOTE

1*     It waft always accepted that the comprehensive review of, the

fire building regulations would take some years to complete»

Thus, the Home Office eoriB'ultative document "Fire Safety and

safety at Sports Venues" indicated at paragraph 2.49 that the

Department of the ..Environment ..would-issue .interim-..:guidance on the
need for concealed space ..in..the floor of stands to be sealed and

sub-divided where this was necessary to inhibit the spread of fire
within a stand.

2 , . This■■;-int.ex.±m.:-gai'4anc.e,-'was :.;ne\rer..isdned.   This was, because -

it was felt that such new single storey stands as might be built

would not be constructed with a cartbustible floor structure open

to sub-floor voids.           Such a thing was possible, but for a stand

of any size it would almost certainly be more economical to use#

non-colabustible structural materials.                 Voids in multi-storey

stands would be covered by existing provisions in the Approved

Documents which give guidance on compliance with the existing

requirements of the regulations dealing with fire spread.

3.    There are no powers in the building regulations to make

owners improve existing stands by sub-dividing voids.
BACKGROUND NOTE




Recommendation 11 — an unfettered right to search those entering
                       or trying to enter a football ground,
                       conferred:by statute.



Police officers at football grounds have a general power, under
PACE, to stop and search a person whom they reasonably suspect
of possessing a stolen or prohibited article, including an
offensive weapon.   They have other statutory powers of stop and
search, for example under the Sporting Events (Control of Alcdhol
etc) Act 1985.    In addition they may, as elsewhere, search a
person with his agreement.     In the case of football matches,
police powers are backed up by the right of the club to deny
entry, or to eject, a person who refuses to be searched.       This
has been set out by the Football League in its ground
regulations.


The unrestricted power recommended by Popplewell would not depend
on there being reasonable suspicion that the person concerned was
committing an offence, and would represent a substantial
departure from the principles which were only recently
established in PACE.    It would be difficult to restrict to
football grounds.   The Popplewell recommendation therefore has
ramifications extending far beyond football.     PACE had only just
come into force at the time the Popplewell final report was
published.   The powers available to the police, both statutory
and to search by agreement, are adequate.
Recommendation 12 - an offence of disorderly conduct at a
                       football ground.           ,


The Government had already included in the Public Order Act 198 6
an offence of disorderly conduct, subject to the requirement that
alarm, distress or harassment is likely to be caused to another.
Popplewell recommended no such qualification.     The difficulty
about that is that the police and courts may have difficulty in
interpreting what-is disorderly.     Conduct which may be disorderly
in other contexts, may be part of the atmosphere of a football
match (cheering, chanting etc).     Care must be taken not to create
offences which are oppressive, or which may give rise to
inconsistent treatment .by the police .a n d .the courts, whilst at
the sa m e :time ensuring:that.the law is adequate.   Experience has
proved the offence of disorderly conduct in the Public Order Act
to be adequate.


Recommendation 13 — a widening of the power to arrest under
                      Section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936.


The recommendation is for a general retrospective power of arrest
where the police reasonably suspect that an offence under Section
5 of the Public Order Act (threatening behaviour etc) has been
committed.    The power of arrest, re-enacted in the Public Order
Act 1986, provides a power of arrest only when the person is
committing, or is reasonably suspected to be committing an
offence.     But the arrest scheme in PACE provided a general
retrospective power of arrest if one of the general arrest
conditions set out in Section 25 is met.     In broad terms the
police may arrest anyone whom they reasonably suspect of
committing, or of having committed an offence, including the
offence of threatening behaviour, if it will not be practicable.
to proceed against that person by way of summons, for example
because the person’s name and address cannot be obtained, or if
there are grounds for believing arrest to be necessary to prevent
certain consequences - such as the person concerned causing
injury or damage to persons or property.       The general arrest
scheme in PACE was subject to careful and critical scrutiny and
had only just come into force at the time of the Popplewell
recommendations.    There are no problems in practice so far as we
know.



Recommendation 14 - a review of the provisions.of.the Sporting
                      Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act 1985 in
                      relation to executive boxes.


During the passage of the alcohol legislation it'was suggested by
the football organisations that clubs derivedca total:of:¥4m per
annum from the leasing of executive boxes.       Relaxation of:the
controls over the possession/ aittdssa.le„:Of alcohol:; in; executive
boxes was introduced in Schedule I of the Public Order Act 1986.
The effect of the provision was to reduce the "dry" period at
designated sports grounds in executive boxes and private rooms
with a view of the pitch from two hours before until one hour
after to a period from 15 minutes before the match until 15             *
minutes afterwards.
