                              103                           JyVUl      /ZA
                  \&\a/iAsA kvib tV ’   •             •


                                                          P. M. SAXTON


                   Cross-examined by MR. MAXWELL:

Q. When Jaqueline and Michelle came back from the toilet
   and they told you that there were people trapped against
   the perimeter fence.   A.   Yes.

Q. They also told you that they had seen an incident or an
   event which had led to that, did they not?    A.   They
   said there had been a ciush forward, yes, and people were
   being trapped against the front of the fence, yes.

Q. But they told you,  did they not, that they had seen
   a big push forward?   A.   Yes.

Q. The way you described it earlier was that you told Lord
   Justice Taylor that when they came back they said there
   had been a big push forward.   A.   Yes.

Q. But in your statement you made it clear that what they were
   telling you was that they had seen this big push forward.
   A.   Yes,  they had seen a big push forward and they were
   crushed at the front of the pens, yes.

               POLICE CONSTABLE HAROLD GUEST, called

                      Examined by MR. GOLDSACK;

Q.   Police Constable Harold Guest?         A.   I am.

Q.   And you were working in the Club Control Room           onthe day
     of this match.   A.   I was, sir.

Q.   Is that a duty that you had performed       before?     A.    I
     have, sir,^-yes.

Q. This is a room in which there are video monitors;              is that
   right?   A.   It is, sir.

Q.   And there are also computer screens?        A.       There are, sir, yes.

Q.   What exactly is your job there?    A.   If I can explain
     the computer room, sir.   There are 20 monitors which are
     worked from cameras situated strategically placed r.ound the
     ground which cover all 95 turnstiles.     There is a monitor
     in the centre of the Control Room in there which is coupled
     to the cameras which are situated in the main Police Control.
     On the side of this monitor there is a switch.      Bear in
     mind I have only got one screen; they have got four
     cameras.   I can then   put either from 1 to 4 and switch to
     any four cameras «.nat they are usingin the Police Control
     Room.

Q. Is it your choice to do that or that of somebody else in
   the Club Control Room?   A.   That is my choice, sir.

Q. In the Control Room with you there are employees of the
   Club?   A.   There is, sir.       3*^0
                              104



                                            H.   GUEST


Q. Who are they?    A.  One being Roger  Holdsworth, that is
   the person who installed the system on behalf of the Club,
   and the other one is a Mr. Lock who is the main Security
   Officer on behalf of the Club.

Q.   So the three of you spend the afternoon in this Control
     Room.   A.   That is correct, sir.

Q. Well now, you have access to a lot of information, do
   you not?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   In theform not only of what is shown on the Club's       own
     video monitors but also in the form of what you can      see
     from the Police monitors.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. By selecting the switch,     as you have just described.
   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. You also have access to the computer screens, do you not?
   A.   That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. What do you do with all that information?      A.   It is
   information that is piled up as regards starting right from
   the beginning of the match.    Once the turnstile operators
   are briefed and,ieave. to 90 to the .turnstiles, once they
   start going i    4     r    >   d     r-then the first person
   to arrive at the ground will show up onthe computer     screen.
   It does not matter which Department or which turnstile he has
   entered, as soon as that happens then all the other 20
   monitors are recorded.    In that room also there are 20
   monitors — I am sorry, 20 videos, which monitor those 20
   cameras.   I switch them on then, as stun as the first person
   comes into the ground.

Q. But you see, as the crowd starts to come into the ground,
   you have not only sight of the people coming in through
   the turnstiles by means of the monitors - that is right,
   is it not?  A.    That is correct, sir.

Q.    You   can.also have sight of what is going on inside the
     ground if you happen to select the right video from the
     Police Control Room.    A.   That is correct, sir.

Q.    And    you have   sight of numbers of peoplecoming through
     the turnstiles.      A.   That is correct, sir.

Q. What I asked you, Mr. Guest, is what you   do with that
   information.       A. That information is mainly on the safety
   of sportsground regulations in respect of the attendances for
   any given section of the ground capacities.

Q. Do you know the maximum capacity of each       section of the
   ground?   A.    I do know them, sir,yes.        On the table in
   front of me in the video room there is a       list of each
   section what the capacities are for each       area with the grand
   total at the bottom.
                               105



                                                        H.   GUEST


Q. Vou are subject to Superintendent Murray who is in charge
   of Control, are you not?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   Of course, we know that theother members of his    team are up
     in the Police Control Box.   A.   That is correct.

Q.   What are you expected to do by way of communicating, for
     example, with the Control Box?   A.   There are two ways —
     two systems which can be used in order to contact the main
     Control Box.    One is by the Police personal radio and the
     second one, being by the internal telephone system.

Q.   That is right.    You have got a set which is set toChannel
     25, have you not?   A.   That is correct.

Q. And you have got a direct telephone link with the Control
   Box.   A.    I have, sir.

Q.   Well now,there you are, you are sitting in this room with
     these screens and these numbers.           What are your instructions
     to do so far as the Control Box is concerned?           A.   If I
     can monitor on the monitor as opposed to the Police Control
     monitor, the other 20 ----          IfI can see any problems
     developing on the inside of the ground when people have
     come in-tbrough t|je. turnstiles,and.,may. be .fighting .or _
     whateverV'fch&n^t"'cah'*u-fcgenfcly-*pass ^aJme&sage an td the
     main Police Control Box in order that they can assist
     with Police Officers into that area as soon as possible.

Q.' Are you under instructions to do that?         A.        Yes, that
    is my duty, sir, yes.

Q. This is w jia t I am trying to get from you, you see, what
   your duties are and what you are expected to do.      A.   Yes.

Q. You are expected to inform the Police Control Box if any
   problems emerge from your sight of the cameras?
   A.   That is correct, sir.

Q. Are you there to doanything if you notice anything on the
   computer screens which show the number of people through
   t h e .turnstiles? A.   Yes, frequently during every match
   either I contact the Control Box or the Control Box will
   contact me asking probably for specific areas, for example,
   Leppings Lane, how many have gone in through Leppings
   Lane, or how many has gone through West Stand or Spion Kop.

Q. Are you expected of your own initiative at any given point
   on the number when the numbers come up to tell the Police
   Control Box or are you expected to wait until you are asked?
   A.   It depends on the situation.   If I think that there
   may be a development in any area of the ground to be on
   the safe side, probably, before that did develop I would
   notify them immediately.

Q. Alright.   Now, first of all, were you asked about numbers
   or anything else for that m a t ^ ^ in the period before
                                          H.   GUEST


3 o'clock on this particular day?   A.   Yes, there were
probably two or three, possibly four, requests made from
the Control Box asking for specific numbers for specific
areas of the ground.

From whom would those requests come?   A. From Sergeant
Goddard or P.C. Ryan.   I think mainly on that particular
day it was from Sergeant Goddard.

Would these be requests over the radio?    A. ' No, more
often than not it would be used by the telephone system so
that we would not be blocking any transmissions on the
radio.

Can you remember if there were any requests for numbers
in relation to Leppings Lane?    A.    I cannot ---    There
probably was made on thatday but    obviously I cannot
remember the exact total of what I would give to them at
the time.   Obviously that is not recorded but it is ---

You cannot recall either the time when that request wss
made?   A.   No, sir.

 Did there come a time when, as you were looking at the
 screens, you noticed the situation, first of all^ at the
 PeoisjiQije             A          r         r^--1, the   i;
 first time I can recall looking at the — well, not looking
 at it but actually sort of commenting on the situation,
 would be about 2.15 p.m. when I did comment to Mr. Lock that
,it would appear that they are slow at arriving today because
 we are only approximately half full.   Somewhere in the
 region of 25,000 to 30,000 had actually attended at the
 ground at that time.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Slow    in arriving, only half
full, is that right?   A.    Yes,   sir.

Are you referring to the whole ground?         A.   That is the
whole ground, yes, my Lord.

And then you added something about a quarter ----        Idid
not get the last bit you added.

     MR. COLLINS:    Quarter past two.

      THE WITNESS:   That was about quarter past two, sir.

     MR. G0LDSACK:   Was there any imbalance at that time
between each end of the ground?   A.   Not that I can
recall, no.   Looking at the video — I am sorry, the
computer, it did appear to be evenly split.

The next point in time,   did you look a bit later on?
A.   I did, sir.

What time wold that be?   A.   This would be approximately -
and when I do say it, I mean approximately - approximately
20minutes to 3.   I had occaji^g to look at the Police Control
                                107



                                                  H.    GUEST

     monitor which covered the Penistone Road end.    It was
     noticed that the traffic outside and the amount of pedestrians
     outside on Penistone Road was very, very small.    Looking---
     I then switched from that camera to the one that covers the
     inside of the ground looking into the Spion Kop.    That is
     the camera situated on the South Stand looking into the Spion
     Kop.   It appeared to be quite full.   Quite full.

Q. Did you check the figures?    A.   Looking at the figures
   it was ----    Idon't know the exact number but it was
   something in the region of 19,000 plus.

Q. Sothat was very close, within   10% of the total, was it?
   A.    The actual attendance for the Spion Kop area of that
   ground is 21,000.    I do know that.

Q. Had your computer started to make any particular noises
   or do anything?    A.   For each section of the ground,
   as I say, the Spion Kop, for a start, which holds 21,000,
   when that capacity gets within 15% of capacity the total
   number which is situated at the bottom starts to pulsate
   to let you know it has got within 1 555 of capacity.

Q.   And at 2.A0 had that started to happen?       A.       It had.

Q. With regard to the. Spion Kop..turnstiles?          A.    Yes.

Q. What did yoii do about that?' ~A.  Nothing because, due
   to the fact that it was a Semi-Final and it was expected
   that it would be — there would be only sufficient tickets
  •sold to cover that area of the ground, this was obviously
   a thing that we did anticipate and realise would happen
   with all the sections of the ground because we knew that
   all the tickets had been sold for the match and therefore
   we knew dr we expected each capacity of the ground coming
   to full capacity.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can you tell me, what           is the
     signal you get when you get to within 15SS?   What          happens?
     A.   The number, which is the total number at the           bottom
     of each section on the computer starts to pulsate.             It
     sort of changes colour from white on blue to blue          on white.

Q.   But there is no   sound?     A.   No sound, no.

Q.   No klaxon or anything like that?        A.   No.

Q. Nothing outside your room happens?    A. No, sir.    There
   is only one noise that we do get from the computer and,
   as you will appreciate, on the computer it shows the
   turnstile number which is your first number;   the second
   number that you will see is the actual number of people
   that have actually gone through that turnstile and the
   next one is what we call a check, and if anyone jumps over
   the turnstile there is another radar infra-red over the
   top beam, over the top of the turnstiles, which will then
   cause a red cursor to show on the screen and then that will
   cause a buzzer to sound just for two or three seconds.
                                       374
                                             H.   GUEST


You say that you get this pulsating on the screen.        Does
anything happen at the turnstiles?   A.   No, sir.

     MR.c GOLDSACK:     So it is up to you then to interpret
this information, this pulsation, this flickering, and do
something about it, is it not?         A.    Yes, on a normal
match where it is not a ticket match where we are expecting
a large gathering of ---        We will say it is a large
match of Manchester United, Everton, even Liverpool, and
we did get to this situation on a normal match when people are
attending and actually paying at the turnstiles, and if
that did happen, we will say at the Spion Kop, and the
computer started to pulsate towards us, I would obviously
check outside of the ground with the Police camera, and
bearing in mind that that camera could possibly be facing
the Herries Road and not actually on Penistone Road, or
it could be pointing left towards H.alifax Road and not
actually on Penistone Road itself, then 1 would have to
ring them at the Control and tell them, "Would you pan
down on Penistone Road and let me see how many spectators
there are queueing outside in order to get in."             It is
a possibility although, you see, the numbers may start to
pulsate at us to tell us that it is getting within 15% of
capacity, but when you actually look outside the ground to
see how. many. aje_.queueing^ J:o gejt in., th.e.re. is possibly
nobody there-? so theTefore-you know that you.sr© going to        !
get that amount of people into the ground without any
problems.




                                        /Qo you not as a matter.
                              109


                                         H. GUEST


Q. Don't you as a matter of course just tell        the Superintendent
   in the Control Box that you are coning up        to full capacity?
   - A. Yes, it has been known, yes sir, but        apart from such
   as all ticket matches on semi-finals then        it is not very
   often that we do get this.

q   . Do I understand from this, then, that you have not been
      given specific instructions to tell the Superintendent that
      you are coming up to full capacity? - A. It is done as an
      automatic thing sir.

Q. When it is done at all? - A. When it is done, yes, but as I
   say on normal matches it is not very often that happens and
   I do inform them, but on the semi-final on this occasion we
   knew that every Department would get to within capacity because
   we knew that every ticket had been sold for each area.

Q. Well now there we are, Penistone Road very nearly full, hardly
   anybody outside? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you looked, did you, at Leppings Lane? - A. I did sir.

Q. Now before we go into the figures in Leppings Lane, had you
   seen any indication that people were jumping over the turn­
   stiles, in other words had the check numbers come up on the
   Leppings'Lane, turnstiles?^--A. No,: the pul-sating-had not           ;
   started' on' Lepping'3'Lane" at1'tha'tP sv£a'£e.-‘" •'' /C:- " - "J

Q. That is a different matter. I am asking you now about -the
   check numbers where you told us that a red cursor appears
   if somebody leaps over a turnstile and does not go through
   the turnstile. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Now what J- want your help on is whether this check number
   or any of" these check numbers appeared against any of the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. I do know we had several
   during the match but to be specific whether any had happened
   on Leppings Lane I could not be 100% certain on that, but I
   do know there were checks made with someone coming over the
   turnstile.

Q. You see, Mr. Guest, there seems to be plenty of evidence
   that people were going through the turnstiles without the
   turnstile itself operating? - A. That is a possibility, sir,
   but I would not like to say exactly how many came through
   or jumped over. There was a number, and if I could go a
   little step further from that, at the end of the match or
   on this particular day, the computer then adds a print­
   out and on that print-out it will show the checks that are
   made and where tlsse people have jumped over the turnstiles.

Q. But the point is that that information coaes up to you first
   of all there in the Club Control Ro o d , doesn't it? - A. It
   does, yes.

                                       376
                               1X0

                                            H. GUEST


Q. And where you see evidence of people getting through the
   turnstile without the turnstile operating; what do you do
   about it? - A. I 'phone Control again or if Mr. Lock is
   with me in the Control Room I explain: "Look, we have had
   a jumper on say Gate 44" whatever it may be, and he will either
   go round himself and try and find if there is anyone
   jumping over turnstiles or what the problem has been at
   that turnstile.

Q. Did you do that on this day in relation to Leppings Lane?
   - A. I did mention it to someone that was in Control at
   the time.

Q. To someone in the Control Room? - A. Yes, in our room, yes.

Q. Did you tell the Police Control Box? - A. I didn't sir, no.

Q. Why not? - A. Because usually that is a matter for the Club
   to sort out, not the Police.

Q. That is a matter for the Club, is it, if people jump over
   the turnstile? - A. Yes. If I can just explain a little bit
   further on to that. As a public relations thing we have
   seen in the past where maihave been bringing their children
   to the ground and they have actually carried them over the
   turn^^l% 7 ^d-[£hat;<^i^l^-Sometiroes -operaite £h*i‘sf$beck -.point    5
   and if it was 'a publ ic Ve rations' 'tiling'' Then obvious ly -there
   is no action taken in that matter.

Q.-You see we have actually got the print-out of these part­
   icular check numbers. This is in the Sheffield Wednesday
   bundle of documents, a black bundle and it is at page 167
   and 166. The North Stand, do you see, page 166, page nos.
   1-8. There are a total of 8 on those particular turnstiles.
   Is that right? - A. The West Stand has 4; Leppings Lane has
   1.

Q. Go to the previous page? - A. Yes, on the North Stand there
   is 8 .

Q. And then if we go to the next page again v/e find Leppings
   Lane A-G only one? - A. That is correct.

Q. And the West Stand, 9-16, a total of 4? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. That is all there seems to have been on this particular day?
   - A. Yes, on the next page on 168 it shows a total yes sir
   of 15.

Q. The check total altogether was only 15 including two in the
   Spion Kop? - A. Yes.

Q. That is how it appeared to :you? - A. Yes.


                                      377
                                                       Ill

                                                                          H. GOEST


    Q. Were those figures anything for you to be concerned about?
       - A. On a semi-final day, no sir.

    Q. That is the sort of figures you would expect, is it? - A.
       We can even get that figure, sir, on a normal match day.

    Q. Were you satisfied that all the check mechanisms were
B      working? - A. Well I don't do a physical check, sir, that
       is obviously left with Mr. Ho Idsworth who was the engineer
       for the Club.
    Q. So you are just assuming that the check mechanism does work?
       - a " Yes sir. I can only just say on previous matches, the
       build-up to the semi-final, there is a double check made
       in respect of attendances at the football ground. There
       is the normal turnstile click which is a mechanical operation
       and there is the electronic one which is used.on the computer
       and I do know on the previous matches that one figure has
       been in correspondence with the other and they have been
       found to be correct.

    Q. All right, now 20-to-3. You have told us about .Penistone
       Road end and the Spion Kop. What was your computer showing
D      so far as Leppings Lane was concerned? - A. I can't remember
       the exact figure but I have reason to believe it was some-
       t h i n g ’^iV- t h e ' : r ^ i - b - h ^ f - 4 b o e t T7 > 4 0 ^ . ?        '


    Q. Were you getting any pulsations on the figures for the
       Leppings Lane end? - A. No sir.

    Q. I have your statement here which says: "The figures for
E      the West Stand were pulsating and showing near to capacity"?
       - A. You just said "Leppings Lane" sir.

0   Q. Leppings Lane end? - A. You said Leppings Lane. There is
       two parts of that Stand, there is the Leppings Lane and
       the West Stand, you said Leppings Lane.

    Q. By "Leppings Lane" you mean the terraces? - A. Yes.

    Q. So the Leppings Lane West Stand was showing near to capacity?
       - A. Yes, it was pulsating sir.

    Q. Did you look at the video monitor which shows the West Stand?
       - A. Not at that stage, no sir.

    Q. Well when did you look at it? - A. It was later.

    Q. Kow much later? - A. After looking at the situation on the
       Penistone Road end and inside the ground on to the Kop
       itself, then I changed to the camera which covers the
       outside of Leppings Lane, the camera which is situated on
       the South Stand looking across towards the turnstiles.

H
                                                              3?8
                                 112

                                            H. GUEST


    Q. What did you see then? - A. I could see there was a large
       gathering of the crowd on the outside of the ground of the
       turnstiles.

    Q. Did you continue looking at this for some time? - A. I did
       look at it for quite a while, sir. Exactly I would not like
       to say how long.
B   Q. Did you see that the crowd was increasing all the while? -
       A. It was sir.

    Q. Then you say you find figures for the West Stand starting to
       pulsate? - A. Yes sir.


t   Q. Did it cross your mind that a number of those people out
       there might be for the West Stand? - A. No sir, it did not
       at that stage, although when it does intially start to
       pulsate, as I said on that particular day we did expect
       that there would be a crowd capacity so we knew all depart­
       ments would start to pulsate and tell us that we were getting
       near to capacity at some stage during the afternoon.

    Q.   What about the terrace figures? - A. They were        not flashing
D        at all for Leppings Lane.

    *q . What •dq:ryc^..^'ayrc t h f r , " t h e  terrace? - A. Some­
         where in the region, this was approximately 20-'to-3, quaxcer-
         to-3, which shows approximately 7,000.

    Q.   ,7,000 people? - A. Yes.

E     Q. That is not far off the point when   it is going         to startto

•
         pulsate, is it? - A. Well it would certainly pulsate at
        about 8,50C because it actually holds above 1 0 , 0 0 0 in the
        Leppings Lane terracing.

     Q. You could see what was outside the Leppings Lane end? - A.
        I could sir.

     Q. You could see how many were supposed to be in there? - A. Yes,
        approximately.

     Q. Didn't these two natters appear to you not to fit together?
        - A. Well I estimated when I first looked at the crowd out­
        side there was somewhere in the region of approximately 3,000.
        Obviously the West Stand was pulsating. It was not to
        capacity, but exactly what that figure was I would not like
        to say, but it was not near to capacity. Leppings Lane
        was somewhere in the region of approximately 3,000 away
        from capacity which meant, in my opinion, that the people
        that were still wanting to get into the ground,there would^
        be room and sufficient room far them to get in that part of
        the ground.
     Q. Did you not tell the Police Control Box what you could observe
H       from your computer screens? - A. Well no because they can
        only see the same monitor as I see from their Control Bo::.
                                               n1C
                                113

                                           H. GPEST


Q.    They can*t see your computer screens? -A. Yes, I agree on
     that, but same as I say I did telephone them and explain
     to them exactly what .... If they were asking or I was
     telling them in the Leppings Lane end we had X number of
       people in the ground and working on the capacities, we
     were not up to capacity at that stage.

Q. You did telephone them you say? - A. Yes.

Q. And told them that? - A. Yes.

Q. What time was this? - A. This was somewhere in the region of
   about 20-to-3 and at that stage, same as I say, we were
   approximately 3,000 short of capacity in Leppings Lane
   terraces alone, not including the West Stand.

Q. And as the next ten minutes or so progressed, did you keep
   an eye on Leppings Lane? - A. Yes sir, I did keep an eye
   on Leppings Lane but also I changed the camera over to see
   what was happening over on the North Stand and also back
   in the Spion Kop and in Penistone Road.

Q. Well Penistone Road was not causing any trouble, was it? -
   A. No sir, it wasn't.

Q .. WhereasclLeppings VLane quiteep-1ariirly:reas r^wasnit   t? - A . It t ^   v-
     was sir, yea."*                                :     ~               i

Q. And as the next ten minutes went by, did you see the crowd
   pn Leppings Lane getting greater? - A. I did sir, yes.

Q. Is that your impression that it was greater than it had been
   at 20-to? - A. Yes.

Q. And you then had more up-to-date figures presumably? - A.
   Yes. Same as I say there is only a matter of a couple, two
   or three minutes later and it was probably showing just over
   7,000 then.

Q. Did you pass any messages about figures to the Control Box
   after 20-to-3? - A. Hot that I can recollect.

Q. Why not? - A. Because it was at that situation where things
   were obviously getting out of hand when I heard the first
   commentary from Superintendent Marshall.

Q. I am sorry? - A. It was at that stage then when I first
   heard a commentary on the personal radio from Superintendent
   Marshall and I could see obviously at that stage things were
   getting out of hand at Leppings Lane.

Q. Didn't you think that might be the time when your input could
   be valuable? - A. Yes, what I actually tried to do at that
   stage when I heard Superintendent Marshall asking for assistance
   at Leppings Lane, I tried to get through actually on my
   personal radio to the main Control Room, but there again
                                114

                                           H. GUEST


        I was obviously blocking someone else who was already on the
        radio. It was obvious I was not getting through to the
        Control Room, so I thought there may have been a possible
        fault on my radio, so I left the radio on my desk and I
        tried to get through then on the internal telephone system
        to Control. There again I found that each time I dialled
        the number for the Control Room it was blocked, it was
        engaged, so it was just impossible to get through under any
        circumstances because at that stage then when things were
        getting out of hand, Mr. Lock also left the Control Room
        to go and see to his Stewards.

Q. Can you say what time it was that Hr. Lock left the Control
   Room? - A. I would imagine there again somewhere between
   2 0 -minutes-to and quarter-to-3. I could not be exact on
   the time.

Q. Were you able to keep in contact with Mr. Lock? - A. No, I
   v/asn't .

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What were you going to say if you
        had got through? - A. To Mr. Lock, sir?

Q. No, to the Control Room? - A. I was more or less going to
   duplicate what Mr. Marshall had already said by saying
   that-]tiec.regi;ire4~ fU5 tjbe?c^g§ist^ne^.ra-^^Rpinss-La©e and. ,
   for them to^ organise some..further "Police Officers to go to ,
   Leppings Lane area.

q   .         MR. PHILLIPS:  Were you going to tell them about the
        /numbers you had got on your computer screen? - A. Yes.

Q. Had anybody asked you at any stage what your numbers were?
   - A. They^said they had asked me earlier on, yes sir, about
   three or four times during the afternoon, somewhere between
   quarter-past-2 and 20-to-3.

Q. But after 20-to-3/ and this is the period we are dealing with
   now, you say nobody asked you for any numbers? - A. No sir.

Q. And you weren't able to get through? - A. I was not able to
   get through at all sir.

Q. You could see perfectly well what was happening on'the
   screen, couldn't you? - A. Yes sir.

q. And you could also overhear the radio traffic that was going
   on from outside the ground to the Control Box? - A. I could
   hear some of the messages. I thought there was a problem
   on my personal radio and I was only sort of listening and
   hearing parts of messages.

Q. Did you hear the requests for gates to be opened? - A. I
   did sir.
Q. Did you hear any requests for the kie:*off to be delayed?^
   - A. I heard part of a message, something to do with kick-o.f
                                       m
                                115

                                           H. GUEST


        that was all I heard just "kick-off" and I presumed it was
        a delay for kick-off.

Q. Can you say when you heard that? - A. I would think it would
   be in the region of 10-minutes-to-3, 5-minutes-to-3, something
   of that time, but I could not be exact there again. Obviously
   I was not keeping an eye on my watch.

Q. Did you know whether the teams were yet out on the pitch
   when that request was made? - A. No sir. Where I work then
   I don't see the ground itself, the actual playing surface
   at all.

Q. You can’t tell what is happening on the pitch? - A. Ho sir.

Q. Unless you happen to have one of the ground facing inward
   cameras pointing at it? - A. That is correct, sir. If one
   of the cameras which have been controlled by the main Control
   Room, if they do happen to turn their cameras round and point
   them on to the pitch, then that is the only time I do see
   any football at all sir.

Q. You could hear these requests. Were you able to do anything
   about them yourself? - A. No sir.

q   .   You.wouLd            torr.^p^^.y.qot7^r            -   ,

Q. You would expect them to go through to Control and for them
    to deal with them? - A. Yes sir, the persons who were in
    that position at the time, i.e. -in the Leppings Lane area,
   .-I expected them to be transmitting messages like Superintendent
   Marshall was in respect of requesting further assistance etc.

Q. Was your failure to get through to the Control Room due to
   any fault in the radio or just because there was so many
   people trying to talk at the same time? - A. I think it was
   probably so many people trying to get through on the radio
   at the same time and obviously it was just causing a blockage
   of messages, so I thought the best thing I can do in the
   position I am in, is to leave the radio alone.

Q. Nov/ the internal telephone line you have got to the Control
   Room, does that go through the Club's switchboard? - A. I
   would not be exactly certain on that, sir, but I do have
   a list of numbers where I can dial to various areas of the
   ground, but more often than not I only use the main Control
   number, which is 145.

Q. That is right, you have to dial a number, 145 to get to it.
   You don't have a direct line between yourself and the Control
   3ox? - A. No.
Q. Of course if you had had such a direct line you could have
   got through at any stage, couldn't you? - A. Of course sir,
   yes.

                                         382
                              116

                                          H. GUEST


Q. Did it occur to you that since you were having such difficulty
   in getting through to the Control Box and yet you had some
   apparently useful information, you might leave your post and
   go round to the Control Box? - A . No, I would not do that.

Q. You would not do that? - A. No sir.

Q. Why not? - A. Because the valuable amount of equipment that
   is in that room. There is a hell of a lot of valuable equip­
   ment in that room.

Q. Valuable equipment? - A. Yes sir, and I am instructed that
   I must stay in there at all times.

Q. That is your instruction? - A. That is my instruction, yes.

Q. But of course it is equipment belonging to the Club, isn't it?
   - A. It is sir, yes.

Q. And they have their own security staff in there with you? - A.
   Yes, but on that occasion Mr. Lock had to go outside actually,
   or he left and so there was only me in the Control Room at
   that time.

Q. What about the other gentleman who was there before? - A.
   <well -wfeefl -Wi- -‘S^^.forthsav-*tfeev»£taa£i0tt%«u£t was developing?
   on Leppings Lane-he also left.' Where' he' went I don't knowi
   but he just walked out.

Q„ So that was leaving you alone in that room? - A. Leaving me
   alone in that roon, yes.
                                                        •

Q. And you thought that was more important that you should stay
   there tharv-try to get in touch with Mr. Murray? - A. Well yes
   because there was obviously messages being passed through
   to Mr. Murray. I could hear broken messages through the
   radio so I knew they were receiving information. The only
   thing that I could assist with was probably as you- say was
   figures and at that stage we were not up to capacity and
   that I would have thought was secondary compared to the
   seriousness as regards the injured persons or possible injuries
   that we could have received out on Leppings Lane.




                             /Q. You told us


                                    383
                                  117

                                                  H. GUEST


Q. You have told us about a figure of something like 10,000 —
   1 am sorry, 7,000 at twenty to three.   A.   Yes.

Q. Can you give us any later figure up to the 3 o'clock run-up?
   A.     No, because at that stage the computer ---    As I say,
   at quarter past two we knew it was approximately half full,
   something in the region of 25,000-30,000.      I can remember
   commenting on that but the exact figure 1 could not tell
   you but on a normal match, if 1 can explain this, when,
   say, Sheffield Wednesday are playing there and it is when
   people are attending at the ground and are actually paying
   to go through the turnstiles, I have seen when the computer
   has accepted a thousand people - this is for the whole of
   the ground - a thousand people per minute through the
   turnstiles, and they are paying people through the turnstiles
   not people with just a ticket.     So in my estimation from
   that time at twenty to three to 3 o'clock there was sufficient
   time for them people in Leppings Lane     end -3,000 or possibly
   4.000 including the West Stand area -     therecould be up to
   4 .00 0 to go in, there was that amount of people out of the
   ground at that time at twenty to three and in my estimation
   there was sufficient time for them people to go in if they
   had gone in in a proper and orderly manner.

Q. Did you not think there was a problem    then? A. Yes,
    there?1wife*                           ’
                                           .'HTb'n, some' reason'!-
    that the people coming into the turnstiles were not coming
    through fast enough.   For some reason there was some
    obstruction inside the turnstiles and this is why 1
  , mentioned it to Mr. Lock and this is why Mr. Lock left.

Q. But all that number had to go through 23 turnstiles,
   did it not?   A.   Yes.

Q. Not through all the turnstiles round the ground.          A.    It
   is a percentage of the area, is it not?

Q. And that was where your crowds were.    What I asked you, if
   you can recall, before you explained all that, Mr. Guest,
   what I asked you was whether you had any recollection of
   any later figure showing up on your screen than the 7,000
   you mentioned to us earlier.   A.    Yes, the actual
   readings were taken of the computer readings.    This was
   after the incident.  This would be somewhere in the region
   of four ---

Q. I know they were taken after the incident, Mr. Guest.
   We know that you saw at twenty to three something like
   7.000 people had gone into the Leppings Lane terraces.
   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. What I am asking you is whether at any later stage between
   20 to 3 and 3 o'clock you recollect a figure showing up
   on the screen for those terraces.          A.      No, sir, because
   between twenty to three and approximately ten minutes to
   three, this is when the crowd surged through the Gate C,
   I believe it was, down the south side of Leppings Lane.
   Once thst massive crowd came t h r o u j ^ ^ h a t gate, that more
                                         H.     GUEST


or less made the computer figures inoperable because
obviously they would never be shown on the computer.

That is right, but until that happened did you not think
it right to keep your eye on the figures going through
the turnstiles at Leppings Lane?   A.   Yes.   You are
still sort of looking, watching the mass of crowds, really,
going through and seeing what direction they were heading
for.

But you cannot help as to what those figures were?
A.   You could still see the odd ones coming through the
turnstiles, yes.

     LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The 7,000 you referred to was
for the terraces?   A.    It was for the whole of Leppings
Lane, which includes Leppings Lane and the West Stand.

                Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

Mr. Guest, after a tragedy of this sort it is natural,
perhaps, that everyone wants to think that somebody else
is to blame.   You would accept that?   A.   Yes, sir.

Aftfir.„tJbAs..&ragedy,_you made a statement?


Throughout the entire time from the beginning of the
trouble in Leppings Lane until the disaster was over,
you were sitting in a room with television monitors;
you had no view outside at all, other than the monitors,
is that right?   A.   Only from the Police cameras which
were showing, sort of, yes.

And you were not in contact, presumably, with Police
Officers until after it was all over?   A.   That is
correct, sir.

 Yet in your statement this is what you saw fit to say.
"I would only like to add that in my opinion the main cause
 of this major incident was caused by the Liverpool fans
 arriving at the match too late and being under the
 influence of drink and trying to enter the ground without
 tickets.”    What evidence did you have that Liverpool
 fanj3.were entering the ground without tickets?   A. f I
f^oljld"only assume, on the number of people that were
 attending at the ground, as I said, as I looked at the
 computer at approximately twenty to three, quarter to
 three, there was approximately 7,000 in Leppings Lane
 end.    The West Stand itself was not up to capacity;
 exactly what that figure was likely to be, I wouldn't
 like to say but it was obviously near the capacity which
 would be something in the region of approximately 1 ,0 0 0 ,
 which would mean that the Leppings Lane end as a total
 would take approximately 4,000 people and at twenty to
 three there was in my opinion approximately 3,000 out
 there, but gradually, as time went on, up to the gates
 being opened at C Gate, that crowd had swelled to such
                                   119

                                                   H.   GUEST


   a- proportion that in my estimation there would be something
   in the region of approximately 5,000, which would at that
   stage then be more than what the ground capacity would
   allow for that area of the ground.

Q. At what time did it occur to you that there were people
   who had got into the ground or were still trying to get
   into the ground without tickets?   A.   I have none, sir.
   1 can only assume on the attendance of the people that
   were stood outside, with the amount of crowd.

Q. What evidence did you have from your monitors that Liverpool
   fans were under the influence of drink?   A.   Because of
   the behaviour as they were trying to get to the turnstiles.
   They were sort of climbing on each others' backs, waving
   their arms about, jumping up and down and actually climbing
   over the tops of the turnstiles.

Q. It did not occur to you at that time that people were
   climbing up over the turnstiles because they were getting
   crushed on the ground?    A.   No, sir ---

Q. I do not want to finish your answer if you have something
   else to add.   A.   No, I have finished, sir.

Q. Can I- go. iia^k v to    beginninjg. ^ - W-ha.ty>fas ;your duty in
   the control room?       What-were you there to do, other than
   just to look at screens?        A.    As I say, it is to manage
   the situation'in respect of any trouble that may occur
   in the ground and inform control as soon as possible and
  /under the Safety of Ground regulations in respect of the
   attendances for each specific area of the ground to notify
   the Police.       If I could just give an example of that?
   As we havj&'said earlier on, the Spion Kop takes 21 ,000 ---

Q. I am sorry, I do not want to interrupt you.   You have
   said that - you have explained.   Can I just go on to
   the Spion Kop.   You knew the capacities for the Spion
   Kop.   A.   Yes.

Q. 21,000.    A.    Yes.

Q. Is that right?     A.    Yes.

Q. Taking that for the moment, what was your job when the
   computer began to pulsate?   A.   My job is then, as I said
   earlier on, to look on to Penistone Road, to see what sort
   of crowd it is outside there and if there is only a very
   small crowd and we know that they can be accepted into
   the ground without the ground coming to full capacity for
   that area, then we haven't a problem, but if I can see
   that, for example, there is at least 4,000 outside, we
   know that that area cannot cover that amount of crowd into
   that area, so I then inform Control so that they can start -
   completely shut down the turnstiles and I can inform them
   where to move them people round to other areas of the ground
   where I know there is sufficient room.
                                         3Pf?
                                                              120
                                                                                     H.     GUEST


Q.       That sounds sensible, does it not?                                    A.      Yes.

Q.       You wait, the crowd are gradually coming to theturnstiles
         and suddenly, bingo, the computer hits 21,000.      Have you
         any job then?       A.  At that stage -    You know, we
         wouldn't   allow it to get to that stage because obviously
         someone would be in control, or somebody would have been
         informed in Control well before that incident.

Q. As I say, when do you inform Control that the Kop is now
   full?   A.   Immediately ---   This is on a normal match,
   same as I say, on the Semi-Final there was only sufficient
   tickets sold to cover that area of the ground so we knew,
   as far as we were concerned it would get to capacity but
   only just to capacity;  it would not be over-flowing unless
   there were people trying to get in that area of the ground
   without tickets.

Q. I am sorry to have to press you on this, Mr. Guest, but
   it is actually rather important.   Are you saying this,
   that on this particular day - and I am dealing with this
   particular day - you did not really have any bother or
   concern, for example about the Kop, which is all I am
   asking you about at present.   A.   Yes.
     "    * r o •*’.<?*c k ■   ‘ LPC ■£>*.y i   n«'«2.r   j     • ■   <vn3i         -voi.               t n . i, s ’
Q. Because you knew that whatever the computer was saying ‘
   no more than 21,000 would ever seek to go into the Kop,
   because that was the number of tickets sold, and that was
   the capacity, so so far as you were concerned you need not
  ■'bother about the Kop.   A.   The only thing I can say on that
   is that the capacity for that area of the ground is 2 1 ,0 0 0 .
   How many tickets were sold by the Club, whether it was less
   than 21,Q.0O or it was more than 21,000, obviously I cannot
   say that.

Q. You are not told?   A.   I am not told.   I can only
   assume that they know the ground regulations and in respect
   of each area and how many people are allowed in any specific
   area, and they only sell that amount of tickets for that
   particular area.

Q. Is this the position, that if everything went well, and if
   everything went according to plan there should not have
   been more than 21,000 in the Kop so there was nothing to
   bother about.   A.   That is correct, sir.

Q. And you had no job, really, that day in relation to the
   Kop.   A.    Well, no, it was just a case of monitoring the
   whole sections just to make sure that we were not going
   to get over o p a c i t y .

Q.        That is what I am asking.    There                                  are such        things as
         forged tickets.   A.    Yes, sir.

Q.        There are some very wicked people                                   about. A.         Yes,   sir.
                                                                              387
                                     121
                                                         H.   GUEST


     This was explained earlier on and I did sort of have a
     sort of a chat with Mr. Lock in respect of this, said
     that, you know, we shouldn't have no problems today with
     the exception of people attending the ground without
     tickets, trying to pay to get into the ground, obtaining
     forged tickets, etc.

Q.   What 1 am interested to know is this.     Mr. Lock left
     his post sometime round about quarter to, twenty   to.
     When, if ever, were the Kop turnstiles shut because the
     Kop was full?   A.   The Kop was never full.

Q. Never full?      A.    No.

Q.   Now let us go to Leppings Lane.     Your job was tomonitor
     for crowd safety the capacities — the people going in
     to Leppings Lane to ensure they did not exceed capacity,
     is that correct?    A.   That is correct.

Q. The overall capacity we know was something like 24,000.
   that is North Stand, West Stand and the terraces.
   A.   Yes.

Q.   You had in front of you the individual capacities for the
     North Stand, did you?   A.   Yes.

Q.   And the-West   Stand? -    A.   Yes,    sir.-

Q.   And Leppings Lane terraces?       A.Yes, sir.

Q . ;‘Did you have in front of you the capacities for each
      individual pen on the terraces?   A.   No, sir, I don't
      have them.   I only have the full total for any specific
      area.    X

Q. Were you   ever even told that the individual pens had a
   separate   capacity?   A.   1 did know there was a separate
   capacity   but that has not been my responsibility.   That has
   been the   responsibility of the Officers who were working
   actually   in that area.

Q. You do, however, have eyes and you see the monitors?
   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. When you got to 2.40, something over 7,000 people had gone
   through the turnstiles for the terraces.  A.   Yes, sir.

Q. 3,000 short of full capacity.            A.       That is correct, sir.

Q. But it was obvious at twenty to three that the two wing
   pens v/ere virtually empty, was it not?   A.   Yes, sir.
   As far as 1 am aware, 1 don't know, sir, because i w a s n ’t
   looking at that particular screen.    1 was only looking at
   Leppings Lane on the outside;   I was not looking on the
   inside of the ground.

Q. Are you saying you never saw ---?    A.   I did, yes.  1
   did actually look on the inside of the ground but this was
   later.   This was after theogaftes was broken — well, either
                                122
                                                H.   GUEST


     broken or opened, and once the crowd had got in.    It was
     after the crowd had got in,  then when I turned to that
     camera that would cover the  West Stand and the Leppings Lane.

Q. Are you saying that prior to the quarter to three, ten to
   three, you never saw on the monitor the inside of the
   ground at the Leppings Lane end?   A.   Yes, 1 did look
   at it earlier on, before twenty to three, yes, and at
   that stage it was quite normal.

Q. When did you last see the terraces on the monitor?
   A.   1 couldn't be exact, sir, but 1 would think it would
   be something in the region of probably half past two, probably
   twenty-five to three.

Q.   Twenty-five to three?   A.Something like that.

Q.   At twenty-five to three the  wing pens were virtually empty,
     were they not?   A.   They were, sir.

Q.   You agree?   A.   I agree on that, sir, yes.

Q.    So when at twenty to three you saw that there were over
     7 ,000 through the turnstiles, did not a warning bell ring
     that the two centre pens must be full to bursting?
     A.    No, sir-, because in. that five minutes I.cannot say;
     by not iooking-'at the screen to say that, you know, everybody’
     went into them turnstiles through the tunnel into the centre
     pens.

Q. Did you not then sort of look ip front of you to see what
   is happening, where have they all gone?     They are there
   in front of you, are they not; the monitors?     A.   Bearing
   in mind I-^'can only see one screen at a time.   1 cannot
   see all four in the Police Control Room, 1 can only see
   one screen at a time.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   1 am wondering whether we are
     off on a false premise here, Mr. Hytner, because, forgive
     me a moment.   Constable,you say that at twenty to three
     there were over 7,000 in the Leppings Lane ---    A.   Approx­
     imately 7,000.   It may be just under 7,000;   it may be
     just over 7,000.   1 know it was something in that region,
     sir.

Q. In the Leppings Lane terraces?          A.        That is correct, sir.

Q. And you have already said that the pulsation would go on
   in regard to that at 8,500.   A.   Approximately.   It
   normally starts to pulsate within 15% of capacity.

Q. Because the total is 10,100.       A.        Yes, sir.

Q. But according to the figures we have got, which we were
   just looking at before, unless I am mistaken, there are
   only 7,038 tad gone through the Leppings Lane terraces at
   3 o'clock.                     3g9
                                         123
                                                            H.   GUEST


          MR. JACKSON:   If I can assist on this point?    It is
     a matter that I raised some time ago.    You may recall
     I was corrected, there is a 400-and odd mistake, so we have
     been waiting until today for the true figures, if these
     still are the true figures.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           There is a mistake, you say?

          MR. COLLINS:   That is, with respect to Mr. Jackson,
     a wholly irrelevant mistake because it is what the computer
     shows that we are talking about, not corrected figures.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I thought the only mistake
     that Mr. Jackson was accused of making was the figure at the
     bottom of that page, the 5619 where it was said that
     because of the two extra turnstiles being incorporated
     for the North Stand, that might have included that, but I
     do not think that bears on this point.

           MR. COLLINS:        No, it does not, not at all.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Which is that, if it is right,
     that just over 7,000 had gone through the seven turnstiles
     A-G by 3 o'clock.   A.    Yes, sir.
                                                                              t      ,
■Q. I f t h a t 1 is % 5Dc,^*i'ti dbes^fttit tUtofc rv:er-y£smuch as 'though about   >'■
    7 ',000 ' can" have gone thr'oUgh'ttYfem by twenty to three.
    A.      It was approximately 7,000.                   It may have been 6,000
    and some.

Q. There must have been a lot more in between.                     A.     Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            Well, there it is.

Q.         MR. HYTNER:   What concerns me at the moment is
     your comment - you may well be right;    it is just that
     I may have got a completely wrong impression from my
     visit to the Control Room.     You say you. can only see
     one monitor in the Sheffield Wednesday Club Control
     Room?    A.   That is correct.

Q.    But there is a whole bank of monitors in the Control Room.
     A.     I think you are getting confused with the Control
     Room - my Control Room and the Police Control Room.

Q.    No, I am not, I have not seen the Police               Control Room.
     The Sheffield W-ednesday Control Room has               a bank of monitors.
     A.     That is correct, sir,yes.

Q. How can you say you can only see one at a time?
   A.   What I meant to say, I could only see one screen at
   a time which is from the main Police Control.    For me
   to change that screen, I would have to press the button.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE T A Y L U R : ; I think there is confusion
     here.    You have got a whole battery of Club screens.
     A.    That is correct, yes, s i r . 3 9 0
                                             124
                                                             H.   GUEST


Q. Which show all the turnstiles round the ground.                        A.   Yes, sir

Q. But there is only               in addition to that one screen which will
   bring up what the               Police Control Room shows.   A.   That
   is correct.

Q. That is the one you are referring to?                    A.     Yes, sir.
   I am sorry about that.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:      Are you saying that during this period
     between 25 to and 20 to they never showed in your Control
     Room the Leppings Lane end? A.      Yes, I was looking at    —
     I was monitoring it and there is one on the right-hand
     side of this console which monitors the Leppings Lane end
     which is virtually the same — in the same position as
     what the main Police Control Box one is.

Q.    There is another piece of evidence you could help us with,
     perhaps.We have heard some evidence        and it may be we
     are never going to hear any more evidence from the Club
     about this, that at round about 2 o'clock Mr. Lock, outside
     the Control Room, so he was not there at this particular
     moment, mentioned that as compared to the previous year
     the crowd was 8 , 0 0 0 down at 2 o'clock and the bulk of those
     were Liverpool supporters.       Now. can you think back to..,
i    'ro u n d s tftfu -f'‘-*2   c?fbelf?1    ytfu           ^ o c c a s i o n when
     Mr. Lock'had left             the Control Room?   A.        He did frequently
     leave the Control             Room, yes, sir.

Q.„Do you recall that at about 2 o'clock or perhaps a little
   before the   crowd at the Liverpool end was very, very thin?
   A.   No, I   can't recall that being said, not in our Control
   Room, no, sir.

Q. Had it been ---    A.    The first recollection I have in
   respect of   crowd attenbnces, as Isay, was when I discussed
   it with Mr. Lock at approximately 2.15 when I said the
   ground was approximately half full and they appeared to be
   slow in coining to the ground today.

Q.    Let us take 2.15 then.   At 2.15 the monitors showed what
     no doubt could be seen by  anyone looking at the terraces,
     that although the Nottingham Forest end was filling up,
     the Liverpool end was very light.    A.   That would
     probably be a fair assumption, yes, sir.

Q.   That is fair, is it?               A.    Yes.

Q.    Did you at any stage then inform Police Control of the
     numbers that were already in at the Liverpool end?
     A.   No, sir.

Q. I want you to think again about what you said to Police
   Control at 2.40.   Are you sure, Mr. Guest, absolutely
   sure, that at 2.40 you informed Police Control of the
   computer numbers that were coming through?             A.   That would
   probably be before twenty to t h re a p b e c a u s e 1 think at
                                125
                                               H.   GUEST


twenty to three, and I can only assume on time - you can
probably correct me in this - the first thing I knew about
any problem at all at the ground was when I heard the
voice of Mr. Marshall and it was at that point or just prior
to that point when I or the Control had rung me and asked
for the figures which I gave them.   It was just prior to
that and obviously if you know what time Mr. Marshall sort
of made his first comment in respect of requesting assistance
at Leppings Lane, then it would be possibly a couple of
minutes prior to that.




                    • :Tin -V fT*»




                              /You see, we have had evidence...




                                      392
                            126

                                                 H. GUEST

Q. You see, we have had evidence from two operators in
   Police Control and their recollection is that there was
   no communication, there were no requests made by them
   for information and no information was volunteered by
   you relating to computer numbers.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Were there two?

           Mr. HYTNER:    I think Sergeant Goddard --

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No, I think Sergeant Goddard
     said the contrary.

           Mr . HYTNER:   He said that there was?

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

           Mr. HYTNER:    Then my recollection is wrong, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sure that is right, is
     it not?

           Mr. HYTNER:    It is Mr. Bichard --

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr.Bichard ---

         ~ Mrv HYTNER^'Mt. ‘Bichard saidJ there was, but he *was
     not dealing with it.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Because it was on the
 > telephone, Mr. Goddard said.

           Mr. HYTNER:     I am sorry,my recollection is wrong.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Hesaid that the last one was
     well after 2 o'clock.

           Mr. HYTNER:     I am sorry,my recollection is wrong.

           The WITNESS: Sir,the only    thing I can say on that
     is that I do know there were communications made between
     me and the main control in respect of people attending the
     ground but what I cannot specifically say is exactly what
     time, but I do know that the last one I did make was well
     before possibly 20 to 3 or before Mr. Marshall was
     shouting for assistance;  it was somewhere prior to that
     but what time before I wouldn't like to say - probably
     a matter of minutes, five minutes at the outside.

Q.         Mr. HYTNER: I will not ask you about what happened
     when the crisis occurred because that may not have
     altered matters very much.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Hytner, just before you
     sit down, can you help about this: You have put to more
     than one witness this dictum of Mr. Lock about 2 o'clock.
                                  393
                                                                                              H. GUEST
       Mr. HYTNER:                            Yes, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I do not think we have had
it in evidence, though, have we, from anybody?

      Mr. HYTNER:   We have had evidence of two officers
who said that that is what Mr. Lock said.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                                       Have we?        Perhaps we have.

       Mr. COLLINS:                                Sergeant Chapman.

       Mr. HYTNER:                                Sergeant Chapman and a Police Constable.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Then I am in error. Is that
when he said it was hell oat there? No, that is 19 minutes
to 3 , is it not?

      Mr. HYTNER: No, I am talking about just before
2 o'clock, near the tunnel.
      LORD- JUSTICE TAYLOR:                                             And you say it is Sergeant
Chapman?

      Mr. COLLINS: No, I am wrong, sir.                                                   The conversation
with Sergeant .Chapman was at.2.41.                                                                    ;
   *     - ' . p v r r ^ r c p »• • , * ' . . w   -• •   «•   ♦'< * *           ^ v ...   —   1
      Mr. HYTNER:                                 No, there was a conversation at the
tunnel.

       Mr. COLLINS:                                That is at 2.41.

       Mr. HYTNER:                                No, it is just before 2 o'clock.

      Mr. COLLINS: I do not recall anything being given
in evidence. Mr. Hytner has told us about it, but I do
not think any witness has yet.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: It has not achieved that status,
despite repetition from you!   Presumably it must be
around somewhere, but I was just pointing out that I do
not think we have actually hadit in evidence.

       Mr. HYTNER:                            We will             try and find it, sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                                         Thank you.

                           Cross-examined by Mr. JACKSON:

Mr. Guest, I have been trying to work on these figures
for some time. Are you the right man to ask?   A. Well,
I can only supply you   withthefigures.

Can we begin with the observation taken up by Mr. Hytner?
Everybody «lse has to work 1much harder on semi-final day
except you - am I right? Your task, because of the ticket
                                                                 394
                          128

                                                  H. GUEST

   allocation and the ticket expectancy and the like, makes
   the job of monitoring the crowds easier on semi-final day
 • than on other days?   A. That's negative, that, sir.
   It makes it even more work.

Q. If that is right, you say, why is there any difference
   between maximum approaching on a League game and maximum
   approaching on to the final day? A. Because of tickets.

Q. Yes.   It is easier?    A.   Provided everything else --

Q. Provided everything else is as it is on a League game,
   your task on that aspect is easier?   A. It depends on
   the match itself, sir. If you get a large match and you
   are expecting a large crowd, you are then expecting the
   number that you are expecting on a semi-final, which is
   virtually known to a certain extent; it's the unknown
   that you don't know about on a match that isn't a ticket
   match.

Q. Indeed, it is the unknown element?    A. The unknown quantity,
   that's right, sir.

Q. If you look at page 168 of the Club's bundle, you will find
   that somewhere in the order of 49,000 people only used
   -tickets>rpn-thats-.day? -:A. That's correct sir, but, having
   said thsit, as I said earlier-on, the crowd capacity for'
   theground is 57,000 or 54,000, but I am not sure --

Q. Mr. Guest, first of all, only 49,000 people used tickets?
  'A. That's correct, sir.

Q. Not only that, the Spion Kop,. the subject of no problem
   at all, \^:s under-used to some 5 per cent?   A. Yes, there
   was 19,900 and something.

Q. Just let's take it very, very slowly, Mr. Guest. Unless
   we hear of more than 5,000 people going through without
   using tickets, there do not appear to be too many people
   there that day without tickets?   A. Well, each section
   determines, doesn't it, in respect of --

Q. Forget about sections for the moment, Mr. Guest. You see,
   we are going to hear of possibly 3,000, 3,500 or 4,000
   people who went through the gates when they were opened,
   A, B and C?  A. Yes.

Q. I do not think anyone has   suggested more than 4,000
   people. The two figures together means that people
   attending that game that day only came to about 52,000
   or 53,000 people?   A. How can you be so specific on
   that number when all that crowd went in without actually —

Q.   Mr. Guest, I did not count them. We will hear estimates
     from hundres of people who did. A. Very good, sir.

                                   395
                             129

                                                     H. GUEST

 Q. It does not seem as though anyone is justified in saying
    that a major cause of this incidnet- was a large number
    of people without tickets, does it? It seems that we
    can get rid of that. There may be 200 or 300, but the
    thought of there being thousands is not supported by
    any evidence?     A. Yes.

 Q.    So we can go toa different aspect.      At 20 to 3, you
      realised that there was a problem?       A. Yes, sir.

 Q.    Mr. Marshall isasking for something terribly unusual,
      i.e., the gates to be opened?   A.  Yes, sir.

 Q. You can see officers being pushed on their horses?           A. Yes,
    sir.

 Q. And you saw the crowd outside Leppings Lane?         A. Yes,
    sir.
 Q. I may have misheard you, but did you tell us that when
    you saw the Leppings Lane crowd and you saw the figures
    on your computer, that you thought they could be
    accommodated in the ground?   A. That would be at
    approximately 20 to 3.

- -Q: ‘-ts5                                                       '
 Q.    Are you sure that is what you really thought? A. Oh
      yes, sir, because looking at the computer, it was
      approximately 7,000 that it was showing, but it was
      under 7,000.

 Q. I am not asking you to remember whether it was 7,000.
    I am mefely asking you to say this: Using all the
    information before you, you are telling us now, are you,
    that at 20 to 3 you thought that the ground could
    accommodate those people?   A. Yes, sir.

  Q. Would you look at your statement, please?        A. Yes, sir.

  Q. I would like you to look at the bottom of thesecond
     page, five lines from the bottom, at 20 to 3:

                "It was obvious that looking at the crowd from
                outside trying to get in that there would not
                be sufficient room for all to be accommodated."

      A.      Which page is this, sir?

  Q. The bottom of page 2, five lines from the bottom. You
     have made two statements. One of them is typed and
     one is hand-written. The typed one is dated the 29th
     April, Mr. Guest.   A. Yes, this is the one.

                                     396
                          130

                                                   H. GUEST

Q. Five lines from the bottom. If it assists you, I will
   take you back.through the paragraph:  "I made a check
   of the computer"       A. Could I have a copy of that
   statement, sir?

Q. It is your statement dated 29th April, page 2. (Handed
   to the witness). I will take you through the paragraph.
   You say:
        "I made a check of the computer and saw that the
        figures for the West Stand were pulsating and
        showing near to capacity and the Leppings Lane
        figures were showing in excess of 20,000 which
        would be near to capacity and the computer would
        be at a point when it would start pulsating."

   That is your statement dated 29th April?   A. Yes. I think
   the word 'excess' there is actually wrong; I think it
   should be 'approximately.''

Q. Mr. Guest, as I have said before, I am not taking you
   to task on the exact figures. Your next sentence says
   this:
            "It was obvious that looking at the crowd from
   ..-.,2;: oqatside trying,.t,o get. in, that there would not .
            'be*'su£ficient-'TOom fkSr/all £o‘be accommodated."    <•

   Now, what did that tell you, Mr. Guest?   A. As it says
   here, to keep within limits of ground capacity, obviously
   there were more outside in my opinion, and that's only
   my estimation.

Q. Mr. GuesJEr, that is what you said in your statement.
   However, you have said something quite different when
   I asked you about it before I showed you your statement.
   Which is the correct position?    A. I think there wouldn't
   be sufficient room for these people to enter the ground.

Q. As I see it, you are the man in charge of the computer
   and you realise that there is a problem outside; you
   think, rightly or wrongly, that the people outside cannot
   be accommodated.   What do you think would happen if the
   gates were open?   A.   This was later. At 20 to 3 when
   I first estimated there were approximately 3,000 outside,
   that crowd did build up to possibly 5,000 at the time
   when the gates were opened.

Q. Mr. Guest, I want to take it as shortly as I can but,
   in fairness to those I represent, would you consider
   that answer again?    Read as much of your statement as
   you like. You knew that there was going to be a crush
   inside, did you not?    A. There was going to be a crush
   outside, due to the remarks that had been made by Mr.
   Marshall.
                                     397
                            131


                                                 H. GUEST

Q. Nobody is asking you about the crush outside. You were
   the only person who had the computer figures in front of
   you?    A. Yes, sir.

Q. You knew that there was going to be a crush inside -
   that was your belief?   A. Not really because, as I say,
   at 20 to 3 there was in my opinion sufficient room to
   accommodate the people that was outside.

Q. Yes. Read your statement.'   A. Can I just make a comment
   on this, if you don't mind, sir?   It was approximately
   10 to 3 when them gates was actually broken down, when'
   I realised that the computer would be irrelevant because
   of the amount of figures.

Q. I beg your pardon?   A. Well, when the gate was opened
   or whatever and the crowd actually went through the
   gates, that more or less made the computer irrelevant
   really in respect of the actual people and numbers.

Q. I am not asking you anything more about computer figures.
   I am merely saying this: Is it the position that when
   the officer who was monitoring the crowd took the view
   that the crowd outside could not be accommodated inside,
   you          n<£message?;:•«>- Av*. that's correct, sir, because
   I couldn' t’*. -&s’ T ’S'aid earlier dti," t^reT raiTio was broken
   down and I couldn't transmit through the telephone
   system, and my personal radio were just blocking every
   other message that were being passed. There was just
 .'nothing I could do. I was more or less made useless,as •
   you might say, really.            There were just nothing I could
   do there.

Q. So we have got to the position that the man in the control
   had formed the view that there was going to be a crush
   inside and he was virtually useless because the equipment
   that he was using was not up       tothe job?  A. No, I
   wouldn't say that, sir.   The equipment was uaable but
   I couldn't get through on it; I couldn't use it because
   obviously somebody else was using it and no matter how
   I tried, I just couldn't get a message through, so the
   equipment was working, I would say, but --

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Guest, was the reason that
   you did not 'phone through that you could not get through,
   or was it because, as you said before, "I saw the crowd
   increasing" - and this is at 20 minutes to 3 - "I estimated
   the crowd at 3,000 and I thought there was room for them
   to get in"?     A. Yes, at 20 to 3, sir, yes, according
   to the computer figures at that time, but, as you say,
   every minute the crowd is increasing tremendously.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, all right.

                                       398
                           132


                                                      H. GUEST


Q.         Mr. JACKSON: Mr. Guest, is it that- you have come
     to that conclusion because you have heard the evidence
     since, because your statement has been an absolute
     contradiction of that?   A. No, sir, that's my feeling
     of the situation.

Q. So your statement was wholly, wholly wrong?   A. Same as
   I said, there was between 3,000 and 5,000. I can't
   estimate exactly, sir, how many there was outside, but
   in my opinion I thought we could accommodate the people
   at 20 to 3.

Q. So your statement is wholly wrong?

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Jackson, it is not helpful
     to put that when there is a great long statement. You
     are asking about one matter.

          Mr. JACKSON:   I am indeed,    sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Then   why notput that.

Q.       Mr. JACKSON: When you say in your statement that
   you thought the ground could not accommodate the people
 ..outside, ^ou.Twere.:whollyj-wrong?s cAvvtThat's correct, =yes,
   if you "put :it that .-way-because,.as’.I say^ in my opinion' -
   there were 3,000 outside and that was increasing tremendously
   by the minute.

          Mr. JACKSON:   Thank you, Mr. Guest.




                            /Mr. HYTNER:        Sir, I think I can
                                         399
                                      133

                                                              H. GUEST

        MR. HYTNER:   Sir, I think I can help. My re­
   collection was faulty in detail but accurate in substance.
   It was not by the tunnel. It was in the club control
   room. It was Inspector Darling. His evidence is
   Transcript 14, Monday, the 5th of June. The afternoon*.
   Page 78, 77/78.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Was it in chief o r ___

         MR. HYTNER:       Cross-examined by me.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          By you.

        MR. HYTNER:   I start with a pious hope, "Very
   briefly, I hope,   Mr. Darling. At 2 o'clock you went
   to the club control room?" "Yes, sir, or some time
   before 2 o'clock, actually, I think." Then it goes
   on, just below,        you were told by somebody who
   had a view of the mechanical check on entry into the
   ground that whereas 20,000 had been there at that tine
   last year there were now .only 12,000 in the ground?"
   "That is right."    "A shortfall an hour before kick-off
   of 8,000 fans?"    "An hour-plus, yes." That is where I
   get it from.

   . : . ..•IjOSD-^ST-KaEr’-i-TAXIiOit;'^ •-Thank yoei -And-give m e t h e   • c;it
   reference againj'-’wil-l -you?               -   •-

        MR. HYTNER:  “It is Transcript 14, Monday, June the
   5th, Afternoon Session, page 77.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Thank you very much, Mr.
   Hytner. Is that attributed to Mr. Lock then?
             y
        MR. HYTNER: No, somebody in the control room with
   a view of the computer *...

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Oh, I see.

       MR. HYTNER:    .... Mr. Lock presumably or Mr.
  Holdsworth or this witness.   It is quite right, the
  conversation x*ith Mr. Lock which I confused it with
  was at the tunnel with somebody else.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          19-minutes-to-3.

         MR. HYTNER:       19 minutes before 3, yes.

                   Cross-examined by MR. MULLER:

Q. Mr. Guest, on this semi-final Gates A ‘to G served the whole
   of the terraces? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. On the Leppings Lane end.          Do I take it that there are
                                             400
                                 134

                                                       H. GUEST

   other games other than semi-finals in which the whole
   of the West Terrace is used by supporters fron one side?
   - A. That is the usual procedure, sir, all away supporters
   on normal football matches is that the West Stand and the
   Leppings Lane is used solely for away supporters.

Q. Sometimes, as I understand it, only part of that terrace
   would be used for away-supporters if there were not very
   many? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What I want to ask you about are those situations in
   which the whole of the terrace was going to be used.
   Do you follow me? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you help me? Did the situation ever arise when that
   was the situation where entry into the whole of the terrace
   was confined as it was on this semi-final to turnstiles
  ■A to G? - A. I would not like to ---

Q. Do you know one way or the other? - A. I would not, sir,
   no. That is not a situation that I have had to deal with.

Q. As far as you were concerned what has the situation been
   on other semi-final games when the whole of the West
   Leppings Lane terrace has been used? Have turnstiles in
   addi-tloin-foi^vau^ Gu’Jjeen                 terraces? .
   - A-. ‘No, s'ir,-not that .1 am aware, of. .

Q. Your understanding is, never mind semi-finals, on any
   game when there is either a capacity crowd or anticipated
 / crowd which will take up the whole of the West Terrace -
   the club decides to confine admission to those terraces
   to A to G? - A. Yes, sir, as far as I am aware, yes, sir.

Q. So that on all those games the personnel gate in that
   wall must be used. Is that the position? - A. I would
   think so, yes.

Q. Did you realise it was a personnel gate?- A. No.        You
   mean gates ....

Q. Can theybe pointed out to you? The wall that runs
   from the turnstile to the _____;There is a wall.
   That is it. - A. Yes.

Q. Mr. Poole is pointing at it now. - A. Yes.

Q. There isa gate .... - A.      There is, sir, yes.

Q. That is actually supposed to be a personnel gate. - A. I
   do not know anything about that gate. Never had any
   dealings with that situation at alluiththat gate, no.

Q. The situation is nevertheless clear as you put it, even on
    other than semi-final games entry is purely through
                                       401
                                135


                                                     H. GUEST

    on your experience A to G into the terraces? - A. That
    is correct, sir, yes.

                Cross-examined by     MR. MAXWELL:
                                 ip



Q. Mr. Guest, you told Lord Justice Taylor that you have a
   list of the different numbers that apply to the crowd
   capacities for various parts of this stadium? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. Is one of the numbers that you have available that for
   the West Stand where there is seating actually in the
   stand? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. In your statement to which you have been referred on
   page 2 you describe how the figure was pulsating for
   the West Stand? - A. H'm.

Q. Would you just like to remind yourself about that?     It
   is on page 2 ... - A . Yes.

Q        immediately above the passage to whichyou have    been
    referred. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you see that? - A. Yes.   The West Stand was pulsating.

Q. Yes. *Th6 figures- that-th^s-club-have produced show tliat
   for the West Stand 5,619 people gained entry? - A. That
   is correct, sir.

Qi And the figure for the capacity of the West Stand is 4,465?
   - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. What happens in the control room as the capacity figure is
   exceeded? - A. It just continues pulsating, sir.

Q. Yes. But you are interested in this figure, are you not?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Are there others there who are interested in it? - A. No,
   sir. At that time, as I say, there was only me in it at
   the time, in the control room at the time, at 20-to-3
   any way. Mr. Lock tfhen he is in obviously he just keeps
   a check on it now and again, yes, sir.

Q. The figure goes through the barrier, does not- it? - A. It
   does, yes.

Q. And eventually you end up with about a thousand more in the
   seated area than there should be apparently? - A. Yes, sir.
   This is a natter that I overlooked, to be honest.

Q. There nay x*ell be another explanation as to where they
   went but on the face of it it looks as though a thousand
                                402
                                  136
                                                         H. GUEST

     had gone where they should not have gone? - A. That is
     correct, sir.

Q. You were alone in the room at the time, were you? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Did anyone come back before 3 o'clock? - A. No, sir.
   As I say, from apaproximately 10-minutes-to-3 when
   the crowd ---

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:I am sorry.      Can you speak
     into t h e    “ A. Sorry,   sir. As from approximately
     10-minutes-to-3 when the crowd came through Gate C as
     far as I was aware that more or less rendered the com­
     puter useless because it would not give a correct sort
     of number of the people who were actually in the ground
     at the time and I have got to admit that I never actually
     took a full check of what actually happened through the
     West Stand.

Q. You had lost control really. No fault of yours.          You lost
   control once that happened? - A. Yes, sir.

q.       MR. MAXWELL:      The numbersthat appear on the ....
     - A. The print out?

Q. Not >ther"prxni.t out. ..Oft .whatever, jixai. area of the machine,
   it is you are looking at , those figures are produced
   whenever anybody goes-through the turnstile. Is that
   right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Forgive me. I do not know this. But is it that
   they make- the turnstile rotate causing the number to
   increase >y one or do they break some electronic beam
   or some other such recording device so that the numbers
   go up by one? - A. It is an electronic switch. When
   the turnstile moves round it moves an arm on the
   electronic switch and that takes the computer number
   up one.

          MR. MAXWELL:     Thank you very much.

                 Cross-examined by      MR. GLASGOW:

Q.    Mr. Guest, can we just clear one small matter? In
     addition to the electronic counter on the turnstile
     I think you knew that some or all of the turnstiles
     had infrared eyes? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.That counted body heat as it went through as well. I
   do not think anybody is going to suggest that the figures
   were material in the context of this case but did you in
   fact know that some of those infrared counters had been
   spoilt? - A. No, sir, I did not, no.

                                        403
                                137

                                                    H. GUEST

Q. We see them, I think, in the photographs if necessary
   that at least one of them had had the wire to it cut.
   Were you aware of that? - A. Ho, sir, I was not.

Q. At any event, are you saying that on your understanding
   the number of people who would have come over the top of
   the turnstiles would have been very small in your
   experience by comparison to the figures that we are
   actually talking about? -A. On a capacity of this one,
   you know, you could never estimate really how many
   would try it. On a normal football match, you possibly -
   I think the most that we have had is about 15 on a
   normal match.

Q. On a normal match. - A. Obviously the numbers shown on
   this one - would possibly be under but having said that,
   you know, I cannot verify that because I could only go
   on the figures shown because obviously I cannot see
   everyone coming through the turnstile.

0. We can take it shortly.      If you were unaware of that
    cutting of the wire I w o n ’t take it further with you.
    Can we go back to the black bundle that you have got
    on your right, the Sheffield Wednesday bundle, and iust
    look at the figures again on page 167? I would like to
    take you ba'ck^ pljeasej to your; recollection on the day
 ~ as distinct from what you*may" have’learned subsequently. "
    Can you now remember vrtiether on the day that this tragedy
    occurred you knew that two of         the turnstiles whichare
    listed under West Stand were in       fact being used for the
  • North Stand?    - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you know   that on the day? -   A. I did not, sir,no.
   I knew that some of the turnstiles which are at Leppings
   Lane end had been closed down but I did not know exactly
   how many.

Q. Can you remember who told you there were some? 7 A. I
   think it was Mr. Lock that mentioned it or possibly one
   of the turnstile operators, as we call them.

Q. Do you remember that there was an occasion v.hen  the
   person responsible for the turnstile operation came
   into the control room to tell you precisely what was
   going on with the turnstiles? - A. Actually I think
   he did not actually mention it to me but I think he
   mentioned it to Mr. Lock x*hile I was sort of looking
   at the computer screen or something. I sort of over­
   heard the conversation.

0. You heard a conversation with Mr. Lock about the closure
   of turnstiles but you yourself were not aware of the fact
   that two of the turnstiles ordinarily used for the West
   Stand were in fact being used for the North Stand on this
                                      404
                                 138

                                                      H. GUEST

   day? - A. No, sir.

Q. I won't take that further. Mr. Guest, again this is no
   criticism but when you made your ....

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I just say in case it is
   of any help - I an sorry I have not said it earlier - we
   x*on'tgo beyond this witness today if it is any help to
   those waiting.

        MR. GLASGOW:     Perhaps you will stop me if I go over
   the line:

0.. Mr. Guest, when you made your first statement, the one
    that we have had referred to us as the manuscript
    statement, I think it is right to say that it was
    very brief. - A. Yes.

Q. And you did not recall an awful lot of what had gone on
   on this tragic day. - A. No, sir.

Q. Subsequently you have made a very much fuller statement
    and I am sure you have done your best to put your re­
    collection in it and again, without being in any way
    offensive, may I ask how much of your recent very full
  - state©g$t represents -tfy^gsr£hat ;you-h&ve learned.after     . .
    the day in the. light .of;all,"that.yotT.tiave been shown and 1.- '“ .
    seen? Can you tell us? - A. I think possibly, as I said
    earlier on, with the estimated crowd, I think o n e of the things
    I have learned today is obviously the attendance in the
  ?West St2nd ....

Q. Let me stop you there. - A. Obviously did not realise the
   computer Jrad gone up.

Q. All right. Let me stop you there, Mr. Guest. When you made
   your own manuscript statement and you wrote out your own
   recollection of the day's events to the best of your own
   ability did you have the figures for the actual computer
   count in front of you? - A. No.

Q. No. When you made your second statement, whoever asked
   you to do it or properly helped you with it, did you then
   know what those computer figures were? - A. Yes, sir.
   This is when — .

Q. You did. - A. I have found out this last day or two
   actually because on the day of the incident this was
   some time, 4 o'clock time, after the match I actually
   wrote the computer figures down for each section on a
   piece of paper and that is the piece of paper and it
   is only this week, last couple of days, I actually wrote
   the maximum capacities down on the right-hand side of
   what is allowed and it was only at that stage I realised

                                       405
                                139
                                                 H. GUEST

   that the West Stand was showing more in the ground than
   it is capable of accepting.

Q. Yes, because by that stage you realised something had
   gone very wrong and you wanted to explain it for your
   own satisfaction, I expect? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. Coming back to your recollection rather than
   your statements, I think it is right to say - your own
   word is that Mr. Lock frequently was in and out of the
   room? - A. He is, yes, sir.

Q. And I am sure not meant to be rude but it was suggested
   to you that he was therefore leaving his post. Did you
   understand that the club security officer was ordinarily
   stuck to the control box throughout the match? -A. Ho.
   That is not his role, sir. If there is a problem
   involving any of the stewards out on the ground at
   the turnstiles or in respect of car parking area or
   things of this nature then sometimes Mr. Lock will go
   out of the control room to go and sort that situation out.

Q. And is it right that sometimes there were calls made for
   him to go and deal with a problem? - A. Yes, sir, oh, yes.

   An4 --sometim£s-.hfe*weatu©;f feds! ownjv£H-Hon?-- A; Oh, yes, sir

Q. To look to see whether there was a problem in a
   particular* area? -A. I can give you another example. On
   a normal match where money is taken through the turn-
   stiles, sometimes there may be some differencers in
   respect of the amount of money the turnstile operator
   should be handing in and no doubt Mr. Lock is called
   to that situation to go and sort that matter out which
   obviously is a club matter and not a Police matter.

Q. Mr. Guest, I want to bring you particularly to the time
   before the gate opened for the first time, in other words,
   something between 20-to-3 and a quarter-to-three. - A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember that there was a period of time then when
   you were on your own or?alternatively, just with Mr.
   Holdsworth? - A. Yes, sir.

0. Or v/ere you on your own then? - A. Yes. Just prior to the
   gate opening - I had actually tuned in to the Police control
   box which showed Leppings Lane I could see there were
   problems . I could see there was a problem. and I could hear
   the voices from Mr. Marshall. Mr. Lock was with me at
   that stage and Mr. Holdsworth. As soon as Mr. Lock saw
   the situation as it was at Leppings Lane he said something
   to the effect that he was going to go and sort his s-ewards
   out. I presume he meant the stewards or the turnstile
   operators at that end of the ground.
                                 / 0. Do you remember ....
                                 40B
                                           140

                                                 H. GUEST


        Q. Do you remember that Mr. Lock was with you at the time when
           the gate opened?   - A. No, I don't think, he was with me when
           the gate opened.    I think he left prior to the gate being
           opened. I would    not be 100% certain of that.

        Q. There were two openings of the gate, weren't there? - A. There
           was sir, yes.
    B   Q. Perhaps, without meaning to be unfair, can I take them in
           the reverse order.

                 On the second occasion when the gate was fully open
           and a lot of people came in, I think you were on your own?
           - A. I could not be 100% certain on that sir, but I probably
           was.
%       Q. Do you remember Mr. Lock coming back into the room and you
           telling him that the gate had been opened? - A. Yes, but I
           can't actually recollect it. No doubt I would do,yes.

        Q. I think, Mr. Guest, you were very surprised about that? - A.
           I was sir.

    D   Q. You said to him in some surprise, the best that he can
           recollect are the words:     "Doug, they have opened the gates"?
             '
             a i^Y^V'scferetMng-^b t « h a * * e f f r y e * sir,-   r .t;. /iti-c-

        Q. Does that help you to remember that if you said that he was
           obviously not in the room at the time when you had seen them
           ppen? - A. That is probably true, yes sir.

    E   Q. Let us come back a few minutes to the time when they first
           opened. When they first opened and you saw them open on
           the television monitor, I think you too believed initially
           that they had been burst open or forced open? - A. Yes sir.

        Q. And is it right that on that occasion you pointed to the
           screen and said something like: "They have pushed their
           way in" or "forced their way in"? - A. Something like that,
           yes sir.

        Q. Does that help you to recollect that Mr. Lock was with you
           when that incident actually occurred? - A. I would not be
           100% certain on that sir, but I may have been mentioning
           that because of Roger Holdsworth being in the Control Soon
           at the time with me.

        Q. What I do want your help with, Mr. Guest, is that we have
           been told, and I have no reason to doubt it, that shortly
           before that incident occurred, specifically at 19-minutes-to-3,
           if that helps, Mr. Lock had been out on the perimeter talking
           to two Police Officers? - A. I do know he had been out before
           but same as I say there again with times I would not like
           to be 1 0 0 % certain, but he had been in and out all afternoon,
           bearing in mind on that particular day as well we did have
    H      a lot of visitors in the Video Room to have a look at the
           system.                      £u <
                                       141

                                             H. GUEST


q   . Are you able to help the Inquiry on the question of whether
      or not anybody else in the Control Room knew that you were
      attempting to contact your colleagues in the Police Room, or
      was that obvious? - A. I don't know sir. I can't remember
      whether anybody was in the office with me at the time.

(J. Were those attempts made on your own initiative or did
    somebody tell you to get in touch .... A. Ho, they v/ere
    made on my own initiative.

ij. Again, I am sorry if it is I who misunderstood the position,
    but I would still like to make clear: what was it that you
    were going to say if and when you got through to Police
    Control at about a quarter-to or 10-to-3? - A. I was going
    to more or less repeat what I heard Superintendent Marshall
    saying, to make sure that them in the Control Room had actually
    heard the message because immediately Hr. Marshall asked for
    the request for the extra manpower at Leppings Lane, I did
    not hear any reply going back to Mr. Marshall to say: "Roger,
    we have received your message 11 or whatever, so I was trying
    to get on the radio then to make sure that they had received
    his message.

2. You wanted to make sure that Police Control v/ere aware of
    the seriousness of the situation in Leppings Lane? - A. That
   • is . ^ o ^ x e q t * . -tc-     .'/c-i: s- .v.-: . •

3.   And finally, Mr. Guest, you have been asked about the difference
     between league days and semi-final days. Is it right to say
     that on a league day you do not know as the crowd is coning
     in whether or not any particular part of the ground will reach
     capacity? - A. No sir.

2. If the computer starts pulsating on a league day, am I right
   that the proper course of action for you to take is to find
   one of the monitors or ask Police Control to direct one of
   the cameras to the queue outside that particular area to see
   whether or not there is any need to switch direction and send
   the fans to a different turnstile where there is capacity
   to take them? - A. That is correct, sir.

2. That is the object of the exercise? - A. It is sir.

           MR. GLASGOW: Sir, I am almost certain there is nothing
     else but there is one matter I have to check, if this would
     be a convenient moment and if necessary put it in the morning?

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, well we will break off now
      and sit at 1 0 tomorrow.

                    (The Inquiry was adjourned until
                     1 0 a.m. the following morning)




                             A     '     408
INQUIRY     INTO        THE       HILLSBOROUGH

       STADIUM                DISASTER




                       Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                        and

                PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS')




                         At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                         on

            Tuesday,   13th June, 1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning       Session)



     From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX
                                409
                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                    (Morning Session)




POL. CON. HAROLD GUEST Recalled

      Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
      Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS


IAN TURNER Called

      Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
      Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW


CHIEF INSPECTOR McROBBIE Called

      Examined by MR. PHILLIPS
      Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER
      Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON
      Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS
      Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
      Re-Examined by MR PHILLIPS
      By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


KENNETH ROOK Called
 »•
      Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
      Cross-Examined -by MR. MULLER
      Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS
      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
      Further Cross-Examined by
        MR. KALLIPETIS


SUSAN ELIZABETH DAVIES Called

      Examined by MR. PHILLIPS
      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
      Cross-Examined by MR MULLER


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER J. SWAIN Called

      Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
      Cross-Examined by MR HYTNER
      Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS
      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
      Cross-Examined by MR MULLER
      By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
             TWENTIETH   D A Y 'S PROCEEDINGS

               TUESDAY. 13th JUNE. 1989

                    (MORNING   SESSION)


     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I should apologise to everyone
who has been waiting for the start this morning. We have
had to have a conference to consider the further progress
of this Inquiry and what time may be needed to digest a
great deal of material which has to be considered later
on this week so we have been discussing that and the
future stages of the Inquiry. Now we will proceed.

        POLICE CONSTABLE HAROLD GUEST Recalled

            Cross-examined by     MR. GLASGOW:

     MR. GLASGOW:    One more matter if I may, sir:

Mr. Guest, one more matter I would like to put to you.
You told us yesterday about the comings and goings from
the club room, if you remember, of other people. - A.
That is correct, sir.

There is one matter which I think you may be mistaken
about and I would.like you to reconsider. Mr. Holdsworth
believes that he remained in the room right up until
3 o'clock and I wonder if you could help with your re­
collection of that. - A. That may be correct, sir.

It may be correct. - A. Yes. .

In that event I do not propose to take more of your time
by dealing with the question of the times at which people
came and went and I am sure you would understand the
position. I do not want to waste any further time.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, Mr. Glasgow, I think I
have already said this at an earlier stage of the Inquiry.
It is a matter which obviously fell for discussion with
Counsel this morning when we were considering the future
conduct of the Inquiry. It cannot possibly be the duty
of this Inquiry to investigate the precise whereabouts
and role and precisely what was said and done by every
individual who was present on duty at the match on the
15th of April or otherwise this would go on for ever.
I well recognise that there may be people who were involved
that day who get mentioned from time to time in the
evidence and they may feel that in some way some aspersion
is being cast upon them which they would like to clear
but it cannot, I am afraid, be the duty of this Inquiry
or of Counsel at it to go into every minute detail of


                                  411
                            2



                                                   H. GPEST

  where everybody was at a particular time. We have got
  to consider the broad issues involved and I hope it will
  be understood that individuals who are mentioned cannot
  expect that the Inquiry will investigate to the last
  letter what they said and did.

        MR. GLASGOW:    We are extremely grateful to you for
   making that clear.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: • I say that now in response
   to your telling me that you do not propose to go into
   everybody who was in the control room and what times
   they came and left. I do not think we can investigate
   it to that minute extent.

        MR. GLASGOW:    I am very grateful, sir.

        MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, perhaps in the circumstances I
   may also trim what I was to put to the witness.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   May I just   make it clear,
   Mr. Woodward, when you say "trim". We    have §ot of course
   to look at the important issues raised   in this matter
   but all I am saying is there must be a   level of minutiae
   down to which we do not go.

               Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Guest, may I ask you about Mr. Lock's position?
  <• In the control room he is there with you looking at
 r- the developing situation? ? A. He is.

Q. On the screens. -And there are all the club screens giving
   an overview of what is happening at each of the turnstiles
   - A. There is, sir.

Q. Was Mr. Lock a gentleman who you would have expected to be
   having everything as it was developing at his fingertips?
   - A. Not all the time but obviously when he is in the
   control room, yes.

Q. He would be fully in the know whilst in your control room?
   - A. He would, sir.

Q. In an earlier statement which you gave, the one that I
   think is - have you got it in front of you - in manu­
   script, the one that is dated the 27th of April, 1989?
   Mr. Glasgow asked you about it yesterday. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think the intention of that interview and the purpose
   of that statement was upon security matters? - A. Yes, sir

Q. Because there was concern there about how long you had
   been in.the room and whether anybody else had been able

                                  412
                           3


                                                   H. GUEST

  to get in there to interfere with or get at the equipment?
  - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In that statement on the second page you refer to the
   persons who were present, Mr. Holdsworth, yourself,
   Mr. Lock and a man called Geoff. Who was Geoff? Do
   you have page 2? - A. Yes. Geoff, he is the assistant
   to Roger Holdsworth. He is one of their employees.

Q. Yes. You have not mentioned Geoff so far. - A. I forgot
   about him, I did forget about Geoff because I did not see
   a great deal of him that day because I do know that he was
   going round the ground looking at the situation in respect
   of some of the turnstiles.

Q. Yes. And is it right that from time to time there were
   other visitors who included Mr. Darling? - A. That is a
   possibility, sir. Same as I say, between me arriving
   there at 10 o'clock and even up to kick-off time there
   were people sort of coming in and out all the time.

Q. Do you have a recollection   of Mr. Darling coming in at
   any time and having a word   with Mr. Lock? - A. Yes, sir, yes.

Q. And was that discussion so far as you are aware of its
   contents a discussion relating to figures and the attendance
   rate as it had then developed? - A. That would possibly
   be it, sir, yes. I cannot remember exactly what the
   conversation \?as about.

Q./Are you able to say what time that was? - A. No, sir.

Q. In your manuscript statement at the end of it you speak
   of   ....
          MR. WOODWARD:   Would you forgive me a moment, sir:

Q. Do you recall Mr. Lock at any stage saying that the
   situation was obviously getting out of hand or words
   to that effect? - A. Yes, words to that effect, sir, yes.

Q. Do you remember when that was? - A. I should imagine, sir,
   obviously looking at the computer, the screen, at Leppings
   Lane it would be somewhere in the region of approximately
   about 20-to-3. Obviously there again exact time I would
   not be exact.

Q. Was Mr. Lock’s position and his responsibility one that
   you would have expected him to endeavour to deal with the
   situation getting out of hand? - A. That is correct,sir.

0. And did Mr. Lock in fact go off from the room saying that
   he T?ould see what he could do? - A. That is correct,sir.

Q. Or words to that effect? - A. Yes, sir.

                                413
                              4



                                                       H, GUEST

Q. And this was in relation to the situation that was
   developing at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes. It
   had been commented on that the crowd that was attending
   at that area and were coming through the turnstiles were
   very slow and when he said he was going to try and sort
   something out I assumed he was going to go to the turn­
   stile operator to see what was causing the delay in people
   getting through the turnstile.

Q. So he was aware of the situation and so far as you can
   recall he went off to endeavour to   do something about it?
   - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You say there came a time when Mr. Holdsworth went off?
   - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Mr. Holdsworth went off. Was that also to do something
   about the situation that was developing?- A. I believe
   so, yes, sir.
Q. Do you remember what time it was Mr. Holdsworth went out?
   - A. I have no idea exactly the time. As I say, it would
   be when the incident had occurred as regards the spectators
   coming through the gate. It would be some time after that.
   Exact time obviously I would not like to say.

Q. It would be some time after Gate C had opened?- A. Yes, sir.

Q. In your evidence yesterday you spoke of difficulties of
   communication? - A. I did, sir.
  Jt
- Q. You could not get through on the telephone.       It was engaged?
    - A. That is correct, sir.
               s'
 Q.     And you could not get through on the radio becausethere
       was too much radio traffic? - A. There was, sir.

 Q. That would be a situation that the club would be fully
    aware of through Mr. Lock?- A. I presume so, yes. I can
    only presume that would be correct.

 Q. But you were able to communicate with Mr. Lock? -A. No,
    because Mr. Lock had already left at that stage.

 Q. Whilst he was in the r o o m       - A. Oh, yes, while he was
    in the room, yes.

 Q          you t/ere able to talk to him? - A. Yes.

 Q. Would this be the situation? When you were not able to use
    the communications to get through to the control room your
    line of communication was to and through Mr. Lock? - A. Yes,
    sir.
 Q. When Mr; Marshall was speaking on the radio you could hear
                                      414
                       5



                                               H. GUEST

him and overhear the difficulties he was confronted with?
-A. That is correct, sir.




                            / Q. Would it be


                              415
                                              H. GUEST

Q. Would it be after or at the time of    Mr. Marshall speaking
   that Mr. Lock decided to go off and    do something about it?
   A. I think it was probably just a      couple of minutes after
   that message had been passed; just     after that, Mr. Lock
   did leave.

Q. That was a message to do what, to open the gates or what?
   A. The first message that Mr. Marshall left, as I can
   recollect, is that he was asking for Police assistance
   in the Leppings Lane end.

Q. Was thatbefore or    after he had asked for gates to be
   opened?   A. That    would be before, I would think.

Q. Mr. Holdsworth was in the control room when Mr. Marshall
   was asking for gates to be opened?  A. Yes, he was,
   I presume.

Q. From what youwere able to observe in the control room,
   were the Club endeavouring to monitor and observe and
   control where spectators were going?   A. I couldn't say,
   sir, because obviously I was just in the control room, so
   I can't say what the Club would be doing. Presumably
   they would be trying their best, yes.

Q. Were the Club officers using their radios?   A. I couldn’t
   vouch for that, sir, because Mr. Lock had gone out with
   his radio and obviously I couldn't hear transmission
   between him and the security officers.

Q? So when Mr. Lock had gone off with the radio, you were
   left without communication with Mr. Holdsworth? A. I was,
   sir.

        Mr. WOODWARD:   Thank you, sir.

                   Re-examined by Mr. COLLINS:

Q. Mr. Guest, I want to see if I have understood your evidence
   correctly. When you were trying to get through without
   success to the control room at about 10 to 3, that, as I
   understand it, was to inform them of the position at
   Leppings Lane. Am I right?    A. That was to inform them
   in respect of the message that had been passed by
   Superintendent Marshall.

Q. Exactly. A. And to let them know the situation in respect
   of the crowd.

Q. At Leppings Lane?    A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were not intending to inform control about the numbers
   through the turnstiles, is that right? A. I would probably
   have mentioned it, you know, the situation, if they had
   asked me when I got on the radio, but usually that
   communication is done by the telephone.
                          7


                                                 H. GUEST

Q. But you were not intending to volunteer the information
   about the numbers through the turnstiles - am I right?
   A. Yes, sir. I was mainly concerned with the message
   from Superintendent Marshall, that he was requesting
   further assistance, and after that there seemed to be
   a delay from a report going back to Mr. Marshall --

Q. I follow that.   A. -- that assistance was on its way;
   so I tried to interrupt to make sure that the message
   had been received at the control.

Q. So the answer to my question is that you were not
   intending to volunteer the figures through the turnstiles?
   A. No, sir.

Q. Was that because you did not think it a relevant matter
   for them to know?   A. Yes, I suppose they did ought to
   know, but, having said that, at that stage the crowd had
   then come through Gate C which, as I say, made the figures —

Q. No, you have told us that you were trying to get through
   before the crowd came through Gate C. Now, you saw a
   large number of people outside which you estimated at
   between 3,000 and 5,000 - is that right? A. Yes, sir.

Q. You had figures which indicated that if 3,000 to 5,000v
   came in, there might be an over capacity? A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. I am just wondering why you did not think it necessary
 /: in those circumstances to try to volunteer that information?
    A. Well, I thought with the situation at Leppings Lane
    when Mr. Marshall was shouting for assistance, because
    they said,-that further messages came through and they said
    there could be serious consequences outside Leppings Lane
    turnstiles, I thought at the time that that was the more
    serious thing to pass messages by at that stage.

Q. I see. The only other thing is this: Can I ask you to
   look at the last sentence of your second statement, the
   typed one? You say this:

         "I tried several times to pass messages about the
         situation at Leppings Lane, but each time I tried
         1 was blocking transmission, so I kept off the radio.”

   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. I am just wondering why you did not mention the telephone
   in that last sentence, if you really were trying to get
   through on the telephone?   A. Well, I was, sir. It was
   transmission both by radio and telephone.

Q. I just wondered why you did not mention the telephone
   there. It was just an oversight, was it? A. It is an
   oversight, yes, sir.

                                     417
                         8


                                                  H. GUEST

       Mr. COLLINS:    Thank you, Mr. Guest.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.

       Mr. GOLDSACK:   Inspector Turner, please.

                   IAN TURNER Called
               Examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

Q. Inspector Turner, I do not think you were present at the
   semi-final this year?   A. That's correct, sir.

Q. But last year you were an Inspector in charge of serials
   out in Leppings Lane?   A. Correct.

Q. I think you had men that year protecting the side roads
   off Leppings Lane with barriers?   A. Yes.

Q. Ensuring that non-residents did not go down?     A. Correct.

Q. Did you have any system last year for filtering people as
   they came along Leppings Lane?   A. No.

Q. Did you have any system last year for checking whether
   people had tickets before they reached the perimeter
   gates?   A: No-.

Q. Either a formal system or an informal system? A. Informal
   in so much as perhaps being asked by individual officers,
   as fans came down Leppings Lane, "Have you got tickets?",
 / on an informal, ad hoc basis, but not a formal situation.

Q. Do you recall at any stage last year having the portable
   barriers.,-?- you know the sort I mean - across Leppings
   Lane at any stage?      A. No, never, sir.

Q. To make sure that people went in particular directions?
   A. No, never.

               Cross-examined by Mr. GLASGOW:

Q. Inspector, just one matter, if I may.     Do you know a Mr.
   Kenneth Evans?    A. No, sir.

Q. A silly question! The Kenneth Evans who used to be, I think,
   the Assistant Chief Constable of West Midlands who is now
   the Liaison Officer to the Football Association? A. No,
   sir.

Q. We are going to hear, I think,    that in this year that you
   were responsible for, Mr. Evans   was concerned on behalf
   of the Football Association to    look into the arrangements
   at Hillsborough to see whether    they were working well
   for semi-finals?   A. Yes.

                                     418
