                                   hdm     ^            .
                                       J               n,
NOTE OF MEETING WITH MR DAVID BLUNKETT MP 11 JANUARY 1990



Lord Justice Taylor said that he was happy to meet Mr Blunkett to
hear what he wanted to say which was relevant to Part II of his
Inquiry.   He was not going to say anything further about the
events at Hillsborough, other than by way of example.        The
Interim Report had been based on the oral evidence of 174
witnesses, including a number of civilian witnesses in Sheffield
living near the ground.    The Final Report would be concerned with
what should be done in the future about safety and crowd control
at sports grounds.   The Report would strongly concentrate on
football but would deal with sports events generally.        Everything
said would be in the context of sports events.     Publication of
the Report would be a matter for the Home Secretary.        This would
include any question of summarising the Report.


2.   Mr Blunkett said that his intention was not to be unhelpful.
He had so far maintained a low profile, but would be bound to
comment when the Final Report emerged.


3.   Mr Blunkett went on to say that he had been visiting
Hillsborough since he was a small child.     He was concerned that
major sporting grounds were used only spasmodically, with
inadequate attention to their facilities, comfort and
accessibility.   In Sheffield, whether or not Sheffield Wednesday
and Sheffield United should continue in their present grounds or
share a new ground was an active question.     Also in Sheffield,
the new stadium for the World Student Games involved massive
investment and it would be desirable to learn the lessons of
Hillsborough in building what would be one of the newest, if not
the best, international sports facilities.     He hoped that Lord
Justice Taylor would be able to advise on how better use could be
made of such facilities.


4.   Lord Justice Taylor mentioned practice abroad, where local
authorities took a greater interest in promoting sports grounds,
often owning them, and at least being anxious that they should
serve the wider community, by drawing in revenue from commercial
complexes etc.    The local government structure in this country
was, of course, different but he nevertheless wondered whether Mr
Blunkett saw any possibility of local authority expenditure on
the lines which he had noted at Nimes.


5.   Mr Blunkett said that even with the current controls, ways
had been found of funding local authorities sports facilities.
Birmingham City Council had managed to do so at the National
Exhibition Centre.     A trust had been set up to raise capital from
private enterprise.     The same principle had been followed for the
World Student Games.     Separate trusts were needed because local
authorities could not raise money directly, although their assets
were held as collateral and they were responsible for the long
term guarantees on any costs of facilities if trusts were to go
bankrupt.   Much attention was being given to partnership ventures
in which an arena would be seen as an asset for the whole
community, with franchises being sold and a variety of
organisations involved in promoting and running events at the
stadium.    He believed that thinking on these lines was only just
beginning to develop.     The aim must be to make facilities
comfortable so that fans could be encouraged to arrive early:        he
believed that the Liverpool fans had "got off lightly" in this
respect.


6.   Activities should focus on the pitch but the stadium could
be developed as part of a wider day out for local people.      There
was a presumption that fans were sporting by nature, so new
facilities should embrace the provision of facilities enabling
people to participate.     But for other groups, such as youngsters,
events such as pop concerts could be used.     Certainly, stadia
should not just be geared to the game of football:     the
disruption of local life was hardly worth it at present simply
for football.


7.   Lord Justice Taylor raised the questions of space outside
sports grounds, difficulties in securing planning permission for
redevelopment on a green field site, and local resistance to such
developments.    Mr Blunkett mentioned the case at Bramall Lane,
where a majority share holder had wanted to develop shopping and
a hotel, which had generated a massive upsurge of feeling:              in
the event, the proposal had been turned down by the Inspectorate.
The important point was that if an asset was realised there
should be a guarantee that it would be used for the benefit of
the local community, so that the local authority should look
carefully at planning consent and the infrastructure.        He
believed new legislation was needed to bring about enforceable
guarantees to make an asset reusable for the community's benefit.
Environmental questions did not mean that attention need be
focussed solely on green field sites:     there were several
examples at Sheffield of derelict areas, associated either with
open cast mining or steel works, being reclaimed as part of
redevelopment schemes.     One of these had resulted in facilities
for sailing and boating, so that, grasped imaginatively, there
was a real opportunity both to improve the environment and
provide new sports facilities.     He too noted the comparison with
continental practice, through Sheffield's twinning with Bochum in
the Ruhr.    Part of the difficulty was that local authorities had
lost the sense of enterprise which had driven them during the
inter-war period.


8.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for Mr Blunkett's views on the
Football Spectators Act.     Mr Blunkett believed that the problem
lay with identifying those committing acts.     He believed that
anyone apprehended should be made to attend some community
activity under the direction of the police or the probation
service.    He had been in favour of the withdrawal of passports
from those misbehaving overseas, and had no truck with those
identified as hooligans.     The trouble with the football
membership scheme was that it organised all spectators, notonly
the miscreants.     On the practicalities, he believed that the
scheme could work at venues designed with that in mind.           But
there was a risk of problems of queuing and pressure building up
at older or less adequate grounds.


9.   Mr Blunkett hoped that the Report would be concerned with
prevention rather than merely with picking up pieces.        It was
important to identify professionals and practitioners in each
area who could ensure that the lessons were learned for
preventive purposes.     There was always a danger that muddle would
prevail.     For example, from the social service angle, what had
been needed was immediate practical help with warmth and comfort
as well as counselling.     He was concerned that, with a large
number of tragedies, each would pass by in its own compartment.
He linked progress in this respect with better emergency planning
locally generally.     By way of comparison, he believe that the
immediate response to the M1 plane crash had been better than at
Hillsborough.


10.   Mr Blunkett believed that more could be done in the planning
process leading up to major events.    There was advantage in
designating a particular agency as the co-ordinator in a lead up
to a major event where a large attendance was identified.
Admittedly this would place a terrible responsibility on one
person but it should be reflected in forward planning.     At
Hillsborough, the recent change of the Chief Superintendent had
made matters worse, so more attention was needed to
organisational matters and training.


11.   Finally, Mr Blunkett thought it was important to monitor
regularly the implementation of safety measures at sports stadia.
A constant process of education, updating, and briefing was
necessary.
