                                      cc.   Ms Adams
                                            Mr Yates
                                            Mr Chilcot
                                            HMCIC
                                            Mr Boys Smith
                                            Mr Malone-Lee
                                            Mr Sandiford
                                            Mr Nagler
                                            Mr Whalley
                                            Mr Waghorn




Mr Addison


  HILLSBOROUGH:   COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE



    I attach a further letter from West Midlands Police Authority
pointing out that no reply has yet been received to their letter
of 4 May and seeking a meeting with the Home Secretary. The Home
Secretary has seen this and has asked that they should be seen by
Lord Ferrers or senior officials. I should be grateful if Ms
Adams could let you know as soon as possible whether Lord Ferrers
is happy to see them. When this has been settled your letter to
Mr Astling can issue, amended accordingly, since the Home
Secretary has seen your submission of 28 April and agreed the
draft subject to the views of Lord Ferrers and Sir Clive
Whitmore. Neither had any comments on the draft reply to West
Midlands. As you know, Sir Clive has, however, commented on the
draft letter to South Yorkshire. I shall show the Home Secretary
Mr Yates' minute of 4 May over the weekend and will let you know
on Monday whether the Home Secretary is content for your letter
to South Yorkshire to issue.




Private Office                               C J WALTERS
5 May 1989                           Principal Private Secretary
W E S T ^ p L A N D S POLICE AUTHORITY                          Council House
Clerk                                                           Dudley
                                                                DY1 1HF
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M .S o c.S c
                                                                Telephone: Dudley 456000

My Referenrt?:
                      CT/EYP                                        or
                                                                    (021) 236 5000 Ext.
Y o u r Refercnct*:




                                                                                               I
                                                                                           V-
         Rt. Hon. DouglaB Hurd P.C., M.P.,                                                 £
         Secretary of State*
         Home Office,                                                                      r
         LONDON.




         4th May, 1989


                                                                                           fr
        Dear Secretary of State,                                                           ?
                                                                                           *!

                                                                                           k
        Judicial Review - Hillsborough Football Tragedy


        I am writing to ask if you personally trill meet with a deputation from this
        Authority as a natter of extreme urgency to discuss the matter of the recovery
        of costs incurred by the Vest Midlands Force by virtue of its Involvement in
        the judicial inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

        This request derives from a special meeting of the Authority held this morning
        and the fact that no response has been received to date to my letter of
        25th April, 1989, seeking confirmation that this Authority would be reimbursed
        in full for any additional costs it incurred In this matter.

        1 should be glad if you would let me have, as soon as possible please, dates
        when the Authority's deputation may meet with you.

        Yours Bincerely,




                                                    ...

        Clerk                                  .j          \
                                                    1 O*
                                                               \*




        3410a
