                               13th January 1998
Dear Mr Bone,
                 Re: Hillsborough Disaster 15.4.89

             I have read the documents you have sent me.
   When I was summoned to see Chief Inspector Foster
   at HQ after the typed recollections had been submitted
   I was asked to delete certain paragraphs which you have
   highlighted in pink.
   I must say that I wished my final statement to be the exact
  copy of the original recollection (except for the item where
  I mistakenly stated seeing Chief Supt.Duckenfield running
  onto the pitch. This was of course Supt. Greenwood.)
  However, since I (like most others) was suffering from
  post traumatic stress and depression, I agreed to the deletions
  to my final statement under the conditions I was placed
  under. My personal view is that a police officer should be
  able to freely make an honest and truthful statement
  of facts and opinion and it was an injustice for statements
  to have been ‘doctored9to suit the management of the
  South Yorkshire Police.


                 Yours sincerely



                 Michael C. Walpole
Brian Huckstepp
                                                                             13




Dear Mr Bone,

I read with great interest the documents you sent to me. They were very useful in
refreshing my memories of that day. I will try to answer the points you raise in your
letter as folly as possible.

1. I can remember very clearly the thoughts and feelings behind my original:
recollections version of events. I do not recall how the amended version was
presented to me but I remember being told that the alterations were made to exclude
personal opinion, to leave the document as a factual piece, similar to a statement.
This seemed a satisfactoiy explanation to me. At the time I accepted the removal of
my personal opinions, especially as they were based on the hundreds of times I’d been
to Hillsborough as a football supporter and not from police experience of working at
the stadium.

2. I cannot recall being pressured to sign the typed amended version but neither can I
recall being given the opportunity to compare the original and amended versions.
Looking at the original now I didn’t appreciate at the time how much had been
removed.

3. After studying both versions I can’t see any other differences other than the
missing last paragraph detailing my opinions and observations. With regards to the
missing text, obviously my views were expressed with the luxury of hindsight after
the event. However everything I said in that account I would still stand by. It is still
my firmly held belief that the key to the whole incident was the lack of direction of
the fans once they were allowed into the stadium following the crush outside. It
remains my opinion that adequate planning or preparation for the influx was not
carried out.

If I can help in any other way please feel free to contact me either at home or through
work. I have no reservations in discussing this matter.
