                                               cc   Mr   Turney
                                                    Mr   Bolton
JR.                                                 Mr   Whalle
                                                    Mr   Mould
                                                    W ja Caitl*
 Mr Martin                                                        v ---

 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT:    ADVANCE COPIES       ^

 I am grateful to Chief Superintendent Cornmill of HM Inspectorate
 at Sheffield for his help in arranging for advance copies of
 Lord Justice Taylor's interim report to be issued at 9.30 am at
 Sheffield to parties to the inquiry and to one or two other
 selected people on Friday 4 August.  I attach a list of the
 recipients of the advance copies with an indication against each
 of the number they are to be given.

 Thirty copies of the Interim Report will be ready for collection
 by the Chief Superintendent at 9 am on 4 August from
 W Harteley Seed, 154-160 West Street, Sheffield.   Three copies are
 spare - at present at least).

 I should be grateful if, after final confirmation later today that
 Ministers are content for publication to go ahead at 11 am on
 4 August, Mr Cornmill will arrange for a room at the Old Town Hall
 in Surrey Street, Sheffield to be made available to him for the
 purpose of issuing the advance copies.  As soon as this is
 arranged we should be given the room number so that the Inquiry
 Team can let the would-be recipents know during the course of
 tomorrow, 3 August.  The Secretary to the inquiry, Mr Wh^Lley,
 advises that Mr Cornmill approach Mr Pat O'Neill at the (ji£y Hall
 to make the arrangements for a room and further suggests that
 Committee Room 4 would be one which would be familar to the
 parties to the inquiry.

 As to the handling of giving out advance copies, Mr Cornmill
 should be advised to convert the final copies he collects from
 W Harteley Seed into CFRs by tearing off the front covers and by
 affixing on to the lower half of the title page of each copy of
 the Report (ie the new cover) a gummed label.   Sufficient stocks
 of ready-gummed labels are also enclosed.   Mr Cornmill may as a
 precaution wish to ask for recipients to sign for the copies.     We
 expect that most parties to the inquiry which employed solicitors
 will arrange for their copies to be collected by clerks from those
 firm.  At Annex B is a list of the parties and their legal
 representatives.   We expect that Dr Popper and Prof Usher will
 send someone from the Medico-Legal Centre at W atery Lane and that
 Dr Nicho lson will send someone from the Health and Safety
 Executive.   We will let you know of any further details of wh o m Mr
 Cornmill should expect, if they come to hand.

 I understand that you will arrange for Mr Cornmill to receive the
 enclosures by tomorrow morning.  I shall let you know as soon as
 possible when we have the Ministerial go-ahead for publication and
 for these arrangements.




 3/ro-
                                               J A GILBERT
                                           Parliamentary Clerk
 Private Office
 2 August 1989
                                                                      ANNEX A


                                                      27 copies




            r The Lord Mayor of Sheffield                                   1
            / Dr Stefan Popper                        Coroner               1
        / Prof Alan Usher                             Pathologist           1
        V    Dr Chris Nicholson                       Health and Safety
                                                      Executive             2
             Sheffield City Council                                         2
             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                              2
             South Yorkshire Police                                         2
             South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
                Authority                                                   2
             Trent Regional Health Authority                                2
             Dr W Eastwood                                                  2
             Football Supporters'    Association                            2
             Hillsborough Steering Committee
                (o b o bereaved and injured)                                2
             Lynn Taylor                              COI Leeds
            ( A l a n Goldsack   )                    Junior Counsel of     1
llfr*   / Bernard Phillips)                           the Inquiry           1
r
P;

     %


         LIST OF PARTIES AND THEIR REPRRSTTWTATION


         1.    Mr Andrew Collins QC, Mr Alan Goldsack and Mr Bernard
               Phillips of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor,
               appeared on behalf of the Inquiry.

         2.    Mr Benet Hytner QC and Mr Timothy King of Counsel,
                instructed by the Hillsborough Steering Committee, appeared
                on behalf of the bereaved and injured.

         3.    Mr John Jackson of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Hill
               Dickinson, appeared on behalf of the Football Supporters'
               Association.

         4.    Mr John Dyson QC and Mr David Gibson-Watt of Counsel,
               instructed by Messrs Freshfields, appeared on behalf of the
               Football Association.

         5.    Mr Richard Maxwell QC and Mr Michael Murphy of Counsel,
                instructed by Messrs Keeble Hawsons, appeared on behalf of
                Sheffield City Council.

         6.    Mr Edwin Glasgow QC and Mr Stuart Catchpole of Counsel,
               instructed by Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper, appeared on
               behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

         7.    Mr William Woodward QC and Mr Patrick Limb of Counsel,
               instructed by Messrs Hammond Suddards, appeared on behalf of
               the South Yorkshire Police.

         8.    Mr Franz Muller QC and Mr Andrew Robertson of Counsel,
               instructed by Messrs Crutes, appeared on behalf of the South
               Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

         9.    Mr Michel Kallipetis QC, instructed by Messrs Dibb Lupton
               Broomhead, appeared on behalf of Trent Regional Health
               Authority.

         10.   Mr Roger Toulson QC, instructed by Messrs Reynolds Porter
               Chamberlain, appeared on behalf of Dr W. Eastwood.
