MEETING OF THE SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE,
   THE SCOTTISH FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
        AND LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


          FORUM HOTEL, GLASGOW
     THURSDAY, 26TH OCTOBER, 1989
                                INTRODUCTION




      The Scottish Football League, together with The Scottish Football
Association welcome the constructive elements within the Interim
Recommendations of the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor.


      It is important, however, to appreciate that these Recommendations
were largely based upon a particular situation arising at a particular
ground, and that whilst many of the Recommendations are applicable in
a wider sense, there are several which differ considerably from existing
policing practices in Scotland.


      The Scottish Football League responded quickly, together with The
Scottish Football Association in encouraging clubs to adopt the Interim
Recommendations, after consultation with the appropriate Certificating
Authority. Additionally, the Football Authorities conducted Liaison
Meetings with particular regard to the provision of Standby Ambulances,
and the upgrading of First Aid facilities within League grounds.


      The enclosures within this booklet hopefully serve to demonstrate
the current position within Scotland, and it is hoped that this may be
of some assistance to Lord Justice Taylor and his Inquiry Team in the
preparation of the Final Report.


      The Football Authorities in Scotland welcome the opportunity of
discussing the salient differences in the staging of football matches,
and hopefully, will demonstrate that a different atmosphere prevails
on big match occasions, and indeed, at the other less populated matches
within Scotland.




Jack Steedman,                                                    Peter Gardiner,
President,                                                             President,
The Scottish Football League.                  The Scottish Football Association.
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER, l^TH APRIL, 1989
   INQUIRY BY THE RT. HON. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                  INTERIM REPORT
q                            CHAPTER      2 A    - THE      RECOMMENDATIONS


    315. The       recommendations which                follow are the m i n i m u m necessary
    to ensure       that    existing football grounds can for the present be
f   safely    used,        based    upon        the    evidence      which      I have      heard   at
    Sheffield and other information I have received.                             They complement
    the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out after his
    inquiry at Bradford.


    316. Those which are asterisked should be c arried out before the
    1989/90 season starts.                The rest should be started forthwith and



    •
    completed as soon as possible.

•
    Maximum      Capacities for Terraces


    1.     where a viewing teirace Is divided into pens or areas which
®   are   self—containe-d,          the    Safety          Certificate       should    specify      the
    roa-ximum number of spectators to be admitted                            to each such pen or
    area.


®   A pen or area           is to be deemed                "self-contained" notwithstanding
    that it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen                                      or
    area and whether such gate or* gates be open or shut.


P   2.     Each      figure    for majcinum              capacity      should    be    assessed      in
     accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide
     figure") subject to the following <jualifications;—


®          (a)      in     arriving at          "the       Green   Guide    figure",       proper   and
                    realistic allowance must be made for all factors which
                    should     reduce           the    permissible         density    in    accordance
                    with      the     range           of     maximum       figures     specified     in
^                   paragraphs 221 end 222 of the Green Guide;


             (b)     after    assessing "the Green Guide figure",                          a deduction
                     of 15% should be made to improve the safety margin.
•                                                          117
3.    Arrangements should be »ade:-


       (a)   to H a l t    the nimber of opectatora entering each self-
             contained pen or axea to the aaxioum capacity figure
             assessed      in        iiccordance   with     Recommendation        2    above
             either electronically, tsechanically, by a                        ticketing
             arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and


      (b)    to close off further access to such pen or area when
             its maximum capacity is about to be reached.



Filling and Monitoring Terraces


4.    There should be a written agreement between the club and the
police   setting out           their respective responsibilities             for crowd
safety   arid control          and    in particular       for the    filling      of each
self-contained pen or other terraced area and the monitoring of
spectators     in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.                             Any
variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match oust
be agreed in writing in advance.


5.    At each match,           there should be on the perimeter track, for
each self-contained pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the
club is i&onitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police
are laonitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions
in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period   the    area      is    occupied      by    spectators.         Whoever       is    so
appointed should be in addition to sufty other steward or police
presence.      He should         have    ready     access   to the      police    officer
authorised under       Recommendation            9 below,      and by    radio        to the
control room.


Fences and Gates


6.    All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to
the   terraced    areas         and     especially     those    with     duties        under
                                            118
Recommendation 5 aJbovft, should t>« fully briefed and txnincd with
regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition
Of   signs     of distress       and   to crowd dynamics.             Training   should
include demonstrations at the g-round and photographs, designed to
enable     stewards       and    officers       to      recognise   different     crowd
densities.


7.      All gates       in radial or pcriaoter fences of pens or other
celf-contained areas should be painted in different colours froa
the rest of the fcnce and »arked "Emergency Exit".


8.      Where    there are       perimeter fences,         all gates      to the pitch
should be kept fully open during the period when spectators are
on the terrace.


9.      There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence
 (or group of gates if they are close together) a police officer
authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a
gate     to    relieve     overcrowding.          The    officer    so    authorised   in
respect of        each gate      should be        identified    for      each match and
known     to    be   so   by    all    stewards      and police     officers     in that
vicinity.         He    should    be   able    to make radio        contact with       the
control room either himself or via an officer close at hand.


 10.     Suitable and sufficient cutting e-quipment should be provided
by     the club at each ground where there axe perimeter fences to
 permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers
 of spectators if necessary.                  Agreement should be reached aa to
 whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade
 or stewards.           Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so.
 Whether       to use     it   should b£ a decision of a nominated senior
 police officer at the ground.


 Crush Barriers

 11.     All    crush   barriers should be visually inspected immediately
 for signs of corrosion.               Any barrier found to be affected by a
 significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.
                                              119
12.     The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should
bo     reviewed        immediately           to    ensure     that      it    coaplics    with       the
criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.                                      If it does
not,    the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen
or     terraced       area,       in    accordance         with     Recommendation         2    above,
should reflect the fact.

ftafety Certificates


13.    There      should           be    an       Immediate        review      of   each        Safety
Certificate       by        the    responsible         local       authority,       which       should
consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued,
the    police,        the    fire       service,      the     ambulance         service       and    the
building authority.                Such a review should include an inspection
of    the   stadium.              Its    object       should       be    to    ensure     that       the
operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to
add or substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter
of    urgency     following            the    findings       and   recommendations             in   this
report.


14.    Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports
stadium     designated             under       the    1975     Act      for    which     no     Safety
Certificate           has    yet    been       issued       should      proceed     forthwith          to
remedy the situation.


15.     Every    Safety       Certificate            should    be       reviewed    by    the       local
authority        at    least       once       annually       and    each      Certificate       should
require to be renewed annually.


16.     Each     local       authority            should     review      its    arrangements          for
issuing, monitoring,                enforcing, reviewing,                amending and renewing
Safety      Certificates.                Such       review    should         require     that       there
exists      or   is     provided         an       accountable      administrative          str-ucture
whereby the           functions of the local authority are regularly                                  and
effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and
decisions        are        properly         taken     in     accordance        with      the       local
authority's rules.
                                                     120
17.     To assist the local authority in cxercising its functions,
it    should     set    up   oji    Advioory     Group    consisting       of    appropriate
members of its own staff, representatives of the police,                                  of the
fire    and ambulance services,             of    the building authority,                 of   t-he
club and of a recognised supporters'                     club.     The Advisory Group's
terms    of reference should encompass                   all jaatters concerned with
crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance at matches,               The Advisory Group should have a chairman
from     the    local    authority,        and    an     effective        procedure.           Its
resolutions       should       be    recorded     and    it   should       be   required        to
produce    regular written reports                for consideration by the local
authority.


^j^uties of each Football Club


 18.     Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of
 flow measured.          Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to
 ensure        that     each        turnstile      remains       capable        of    admitting
 spectators at the rate anticipated.


 19.     The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and
 the    turnstiles       serving it should be such as to ensure that al 1
 the spectators         intended to be admitted to that viewing area can
 pass through the turnstiles within one hour.                             If that cannot be
 done,     the    capacity          of   that    viewing      area    should         be   reduced
 accordingly.


  20.    Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of
  the area served by them is about to be reached and arrangements
  should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with
  turnstile operators for this purpose.


  21.    Closed       circuit       television    should      be     so    installed       as    to
  enable crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas
  and in pens and other standing areas,                    to be monitored before and
  throughout a match.
    *
                22.       All ^ p o s t i n g        for spectator,, both outside and Inside the
                ground         should     bo     comprehensively              reviewed.           It        should,    in
                relation to the arrangements for cach inatch, bo unaj»blgvoU3, eye
                catching,          simple and clear and should be designed to ensure
                rapid      movement      of spectators to their .pproprl.t. viewing area.


                23        Information       on       ticket*      should        be     unambiguous          simple    and
    *
                clear        and       should    correlate         absolutely ' with              the       info^at.on
                provided          in respect of             each « t c h      both outside         and                 h
                Lound.              retained          ticket      stubs         should     contain          information
#               necessary          to guide spectators once inside the ground.


    *
                24.        information          on    tickets r e v e s t i n g        spectators             to    be in
                position          by     a particular time should be reviewed by <*“* « »

• •             conjunction             with the police to ensure that it corresponds with
                 the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.


                 25        Each club S h o u l d consult with a recognised supporters’ club
                 as       to      the    provision           of   pre-match            entertainment           armed    at
                 attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


                 Policc Planning

                 26.        The    Chief Constable of each police forcc in whose area there
        *
                 is one         designated      stadium or more should nominate a chief of                             cer
                 to       liaise with the management of                         each    football       cl      on          ^
                 authority             concerned       in    respect       of    the     safety     an        con r

                  crowds.

                     27     The    Operational Order for cach match at a designated stadium
•           *
                     ^      the    pre-match         briefing of all officers on duty there shoul
                     alert        such    officers           to   the      importance        of     Preventing          ,
                     overcrowding         and, if any is detected, of t a k m g approprrate steps

                     to remedy it.
t

                     20        The operational Order for each match at a designated stadium
            *
                      should enable the police to cope with any foreseeable pattern in
                      the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure.
                                                                        122
should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment
of officers to be made at any polnt inside or outside the ground.




 29. The option to postpone kick-oCf should be in the discretion
 of the officer in command at the ground. Crowd safety should be
 the parajoount consideration in deciding whether to exercine it.

 30.    There    should     be    available      in     the police     control roo»        the
 results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
 inside the ground and the record of any electronic or cechanical
 counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to a-ny
 area   of    the   ground.         Officers      in    the   control    rooa    should        be
 skilled in the interpretation a/id use of these data.


Communications


 31.    There should be sufficient operators in the police control
 room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
 and    answered.         The    radio     systea       should   be    such     as   to   give
 operators in the control room priority over, arid the capacity to
 override,      others      using   the    same    channel.          Additional      channels
 should be used,         where necessary,          to prevent overcrowding of the
 airwaves.       Consideration           should be given         to sound-proofing             the
 control room against excessive crowd noise.


 32.    To    complement         radio    communications,         there       should      be     a
 completely      separate        system    of    land    lines   with    telephone        links
 between the control rocxa and key points at the g r o u n d .


 33.    Within      the control room,           there should be a public address
 system      to cocamunicate with          individual areas outside and inside
 the    ground,      with    groups       of    areas    or   with    the     whole ,ground.
 Important announcements should i>e preceded by a loud signal                                   to
 catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in
 the ground.        This arrangement should be prominently advertised on
 every programme sold for every match.

 34.     Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising
                                                123
boards to address the crowd.                    Consideration should also be given
to the use by police officers of a fiimplc code of hand signals to
indicate to the control room the existence of certain emergencies
or requirements.


Co-ordination of Fmergency Service?*


35.     The     police,        fire    and     ambulance      services      should       maintain
through       senior      nominated           officers      regular   liaison          concerning
crowd safety at each stadium.


36.     Before cach match at a designated Gt.adium, the police should
ensure that the fire oervice and ambulance service are given full
details       about      the    event,       including      its venue,      its    tining,       the
number of spectators expected,                       their likely routes of entry and
exit,     and     any    anticipated or potential               difficulties           concerning
the     control     or movement of the crowd.                    Such details           should be
readily available              in the control rooms of each of the emergency
services.


 37.    Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium
of emergency vehicles from all three services should be reviewed.
 They    should       include         routes    of    access,    rendezvous        points,       and
 accessibility within the ground itself.


 38.     Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should
 be     briefed     as     to    the     contingency         plans    for    the       arrival    of
 emergency services and should be informed when such services are
 called as to where and why they are required.


 F i r s t Aid,   M e d ical Facij itiejj^nd^Xj^uIance_s


 39.     There should be at each stadium at each match at least one
 trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.                            The club should have
 the responsibility for securing such attendance.


 40.     There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms.
 The     number     of    Buch        rooms    and    the   equipment       to    be    maintained
                                                     124
ft
V




         within     the*    should     be    specified   by    the   local   authority      after
p        taking        profess ional        medical   advice    and    should      be     made    a
         requirement of any Safety Certificate.


     *   41.     The club should employ awedical practitioner to be present
0        at each aatch and available to               deal with any tedical exigency at
         the ground.        He should be trained and competent in advanced first
         aid.     He should be present at the ground at least an hour before
         kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of
^        the    laatch.     His whereabouts           chould    be known     to   those    in    the
         police control room and he should be immediately contactable.


     *   42.     At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate
^    a   ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with
         an expected crowd of 5,000 or irtore.

         43.     The    number of ambulances          to be    in attendance       for matches
         where larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local
*        authority        after   consultation        with     the ambulance       service       and
         should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.



ft




ft




ft




ft




ft                                                    125




ft
LIAISON BY FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES WITH

          H.M. GOVERNMENT
                                                             28 April/0761/ 89


                         MICHAEL FORSYTH MEETS
                         FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES



     Mr Michael   Forsyth MP,    Scotland's   Sports   Minister,   Louay   met
representatives of the Scottish Football Association and the Scottish
Football League to discuss current practice on sports ground safety, and
the question of all-seater stadia in Scotland.


     In a meeting in Edinburgh with Mr Ernie Walker, SFA Secretary,
Mr James Farry, SFL Secretary, and Mr David McLaren, SFA Security
Adviser, Mr Forsyth sought assurances that the voluntary code set out in
the Government's Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide)
was being fully observed.     He asked for their views on how the Guide -
which deals among other things with crush barriers, fire safety, and
crowd control - might be improved.


     Mr Forsyth said:-


     "I have been encouraged to hear what measures are being taken by
     the football authorities to review safety provisions at grounds in
     Scotland, including the review of first aid being carried out by the
     SFA medical committee.


     "I fully recognise that the clubs themselves are best placed to
     ensure that all necessary steps are taken to provide for the safety
     of spectators.   That is why I wanted to hear from the governing
     bodies of football their suggestions about what needs to be done to
     help bring about improvements.                                 x
     "I also raised the issue of all-seater stadia.       In view of the
     progress already made in Scotland, and confirmation today from the
     football authorities that this is the right way to go, I wanted to
     explore what advantages there might be in increasing the numbers of
     all-seater grounds, in the interests particularly of crowd safety and
     security.


     "I have therefore asked the football authorities to come back with
     their ideas on the best way forward, taking into account safety
     considerations.   They have undertaken to do that.


     "In addition, we discussed the need for effective liaison between the
     clubs, and the emergency services (including first aid) at big
     matches."




Keith Hailey:


April 28, 1989
                           SCOTTISH EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
                                      New St Andrew’s House
                                       Edinburgh EH1 3SY
                                         Telephone 031-556 8400 ext




J Farry Esq
Secretary
Scottish Football League
188 West Regent Street
GLASGOW
G2 4RY                                                                JZD/12/31

                                                                      4 August 1989


Dear Mr Farry

I enclose for     your information a copy of the Interim Report       of
Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough
football ground, Sheffield, on 15 April. The Report has been published
today. I also enclose a copy of a statement which the Home Secretary
has made today, responding to the Report on behalf of the Government.

The Scottish Office is today writing out to Regional, Islands and District
Councils, Joint Police and Fire Authorities, Chief Constables, Firemasters
and to the Clubs in the Football and Highland Leagues and the Scottish
Rugby Union (among others) drawing their attention to the Report and
the Government's response. The letter urges the responsible bodies to
implement with all possible speed      those recommendations which     are
addressed to them.

Some of the recommendations, for instance onthe terms of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds, are addressed to Government and the
Department will be consulting as appropriate on these.

This is an Interim Report, produced speedily in order that implementation
might commence     before the startof the 1989/90 football season (which
begins sooner     in Scotland than in England); Lord Justice Taylor will
produce a final report, and a final set of recommendations on safety, in
due course.

Yours sincerely




MISS M MA C LEAN




B0201602.089
                                                                             4 August/1334/89



                              M R FORSYTH URGES IMPROVEMENT AT
                      SPORTS G R O U N D S AFTER HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

»   •                                           ----------

              Following publication today of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report of
        the   Hillsborough      Inquiry,   Mr Michael Forsyth         MP,     Scotland’s   Sport
^       Minister, said:

              "This Report        holds lessons      for all who have responsibility for
              spectator accommodation.         The tragedy is that these are not new and
^             that lives need not have been lost on this occasion if the lessons
              learnt in the past had been properly applied.                 It is vital that an
              improvement in the record of safety at sports grounds be achieved
              for the future.

              ’’The   Scottish Office is today writing to Regional,                Islands and
              District    Councils,     Joint     Police    and     Fire    Authorities,   Chief
              Constables,      Firemasters and        to the      Clubs in the Football and
^             Highland Leagues and the Scottish Rugby Union (amongst others)
              drawing     their    attention    to    the   Report    and    the   Government's
              response.       The letter urges the responsible bodies to implement the
              Report's recommendations with all possible speed.


              "Lord Justice Taylor has produced his Interim Report quickly in
              order to have his recommendations published and implementation
              commence before the 1989/90 football season.                    While the    season
^             begins in England on 19 August, League fixtures in Scotland start
               on 12 August and I recognise that this gives the responsible toodies
               little time.    But they must tackle the problem urgently.
                                                                                   Secretary: JA M ES FARRY



    The Scottish Football League
    188 WEST REGENT STREET, GLASGOW G2 4RY    Telephone: 041-248 3844   Telex: 779312   Telefax: 041-221 7450

       ° u r Ref.   Jp/LW

       Your Ref.    jzd/12/31




                                                                        7th August, 1989

                    Hisu H. Maclean,
                    Scottish Education Department,
                    New St. Andrew's House,
                    EDINBURGH, EH1 3SY




                    Dear Miss Maclean,

                    Thank you very much for your letter dated H h August, 1989,
                    with which you enclosed a copy of the Interim Report of Lord
                    Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.

                    I also acknowledge receipt of the Statement released by the
                    ilome Secretary.

                    I would confirm that I have contacted the member clubs of
                    The Scottish Football League, and have forwarded a copy
                    of the interim recommendations for the attention of each
                    individual club.

                    The Scottish Football League will co-operate to the full in
                    advising clubs to implement the relevant recommendations as
                    quickly as is reasonably practicable. I am certain that all
                    concerned will acknowledge the short time span available and
                    that certain of the recommendations cannot be approved by
                    the clubs, these will require instruction and guidance with
                    the local Certificating Authorities. It is my understanding
                    that several Regional Authorities are already implementing a
                    revision of Safety Certificates and The Scottish Football
                    League is encouraging clubs to implement same with all possible
                    speed.

I                   I trust that this will be of some assistance.

                                             Yours sincerely,



I


                                                    Secretary


    Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                              V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY

Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's report, the
Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd, CBE., MP., said:

    "I am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for* completing the
    first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report before
    the start of the football season.
    It is an excellent report which pulls no punches about the causes of
    the disaster.

    The Government welcomes the report and its recommendations. They
    include a number of matters which should be dealt with without delay
    pending the longer-term findings of the inquiry which will be
    published in the final report,

    A Home Office circular is to be sent out immediately to local
    authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with the
    organisation of football matches, urging them to take action on the
    report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into effect as
    possible before the beginning of the season. Similar steps are being
    taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland,

    I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any major
    shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though clearly
    the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and
    the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at sports
    grounds (The Green Guide) in the light of the inquiry.

    Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
    Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The report reveals
    serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the part of the
    police, of the club and of the local authority responsible for the
    safety certificate.

    The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies in the
    layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground which should
    have been recognised and corrected.

    The South Yorkshire Police             \



    It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to consider
    the conduct of individual officers and the South Yorkshire police
    collectively in the light of the inquiry and the investigation carried
    out by the West Midlands police. I shall look to the Chief Constable
    of South Yorkshire initially for a report on the action he proposes to
    take.

    Supervision of Safety Certificates
    Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
    Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority with
    powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry out
    their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in due


MEG216L4
                           ,is Consldered necessary in the light of Lord Justice
              LayJor’s final report.

             The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the past
             rhlxr   n pr<jPeply aPPlied. It is for everyone concerned to ensure
             they are applied in the future,"




•   •




        MEG216L4
   PROVISION OF STANDBY AMBULANCE

CORRESPONDENCE WITH VARIOUS AGENCIES
i/. ROBSON
ijief Ambulance Officer
™ ater Glasgow



Irea Headquarters                                                               Admin.   04 1-3 32 6001
1AITLAND STREET, GLASGOW G4 OHX                                                 Ops.     041-332 7080




    WR/LP

     18 August 1989

     Queens Park Football Club
•    Hampden Park
     Glasgow
     G42 9BA

     Dear Sir

*    ^ L S B O R O U G H STADIUM DISASTER                                             -INTERIM REPORT                           BY      THE   RIGHT
     HONOURABLE LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

     Following the publication of the RightHonourable Lord Justice
     Taylor's interim report, I felt the Scottish Ambulance Service of
     Greater Glasgow should assess the current situation with regards
     to ambulance attendance at football venues within the Greater
     Glasgow Area.

     My Officers have visited the major football grounds and assessed
     what,  in the professional Ambulance Services case, would be an
^    appropriate   ambulance provision for     the various   estimated
     attendances,  and I enclose a copy of our intended guidance note
     for your stadium and our basic recommendations for ambulance
     provision, should they be required by the Licencing Authority.

     Please note,  that these costs are provisional and do not reflect
^    any future salary increases or inflation.

     I would hope that you would view our recommendations in the light
     of the interim report and if I can be of any further assistance,
     please do not hesitate to contact me at the above address.

q    Yours faithfully




9    Chief Ambulance Officer


     Encs




                          A   .   I   t   .   .h o   rnM M OM   c i r n v i r r c ;        o f   th o   S c o ttis h   HonltH Sorvicn
                    SCOTTISH AMBULANCE SERVICE

                          GREATER GLASGOW

                             HAttBJiEN P A M           KHU

         npavahinnal   Brief Ambulance Officer 13.00 hones


     Attend      Vict oria    Infirmary,       check   service      Radio
     (V H F ). Radio check control.

     Install  Hand Portable (UHF) in main casualty ^department,
     plus message pager for Accident and Emergency Consultant.

     Attend Hampden  Park with 2 Accident a n d _Emergency  units,
     one    major   incident  equipment      vehicle.    Establish
     communications  with control UHF/ V H F repeater.

     Liaise  wit h    medical facili ties deploying  two   Ambulance
     personnel     if   available,   with  defibrillator,     pnuepao
     resuscitator Ambulance aid rucksack and h.-'-n'1 portable,    in
     close vicinity to casualty reception *!•<.•a.     Portable hand
     radio  to be sited in First Aid room,      to allow the    staff
     there to contact the incident Officer when an ambulance is
     required. (A & E UNITS to have     De-fibs on Vehicles.)

     Establish incident post and ambulance parking point as per
     diagram.     Ambulance Officer will gain contact with Police
     Conti’ol Room via the main stand.     Medical Room to the left
     of   the main entrance.     Ambulance    Ufficer should at    all
     times advise     Police Control    Room of   his- attendance   on
     site.    Each    Ambulance crew to    be   equipped ^ with    UHF
     hand      portable,    call   sign, station      prefix,     (ie)
     SIERRA   1    ETC.   Ambulance Incident     Officer,   Ambulance
     Support Officer

     M ai ntain close liaison wit h on site Police Officers  to
     accommodate mutual co-operation, and Police escorts if and
     w hen required.

     Establish Patient Movement Log in accordance with            service
     procedure.

 8   Senior   Officer to act as site incident Officer            informing
     G lasgow Control of  any unusual occurrence.

9    All personnel to be in designated          service dress and    crews
     should remain in radio contact at           all times.

10   Should a Major Incident occur the Ambulance Parking Point
     will    be   located  to the rear   of  incident   post.    (RRU)
     appr oach via Aitkenhead Road,     Mount Annan. Drive/Kinghorn
      Drive   Attendant   to  report to   parking   point     Officer.
      Driver    remain in vehicle.
                          SCOTTISH AMBULANCE SERVICE




        RECOMMENDED AMBULANCE RESOURCE FOR FOOTBALL STADIUM ATTENDANCE



        CROWD SIZE         COVER REQUIRED              Cost


        5,000 & Above           1 A&E Unit (crew of 2)             £200 + VAT
                                1 Officer


•   t

        25,000 - 45,000         2 A&E Units (crew of 2)        £500 + VAT
                                1 Officer (co-ord)
                                1 Officer (field management)
                                Control Assistant
                                Communications Vehicle
                                Major Incident Equipment Vehicle
                                Facilities for 50 casualties



        45,000 & Above          3 A&E Units (crew of 2)          £600 + VAT
                                2 Officers
                                Control Assistant
                                Communications Vehicle
                                Major Incident Equipment Vehicle
                                PLUS Additional Officers
                                determined by local circumstances
                                and Police intelligence.




        THE ABOVE PROVISIONAL COSTS ARE SUBJECT TO THE        PENDING   SALARY
        INCREASE AND INFLATION.



•       WR/LP
        August 1989




                                       1
             Your Ref.                                                                         CASTLE
             Our Ref.    JDB/G-03
                                                                                               AMBULANCE
                                                                                AMBULANCE      SERVICES LTD
                                                                                               Independent Ambulance
                                                                                               Service & Suppliers of
                                                                                               Medical, Nursing &
                                                                                               First Aid Equipment
        28th August.,                                                                          Dundonald House
                                                                                               5/7 D undonald Street
                                                                                               Edinburgh EH3 6RX
                                                                                               Tel. 031-661 6668 (24 hours)
                                                                                               Telex 72689 QED G
        Mr. Farry,                                                                             Fax: 031-556 0215
        Scottish Football League,                                                              221 Crookston Road
                                                                                               Glasgow G52 3NQ
        188, West Regent Street,                                                               Tel. 041-810 5492 (24 hours)
        Glasgow G.2.



        Dear Mr. Farry,                                                     -


        Following our telephone conversation lastweek, I have pleasure in giving you
        some details of the Services available from this Company, which has Ambulances
        based in Edinburgh and Glasgow.   Similar information has .been sent to, Hearts,
        Hibernian and Rangers Football Club, during JUly, 1989.

•   9            CASTLE MEDICAL SUPPLIES

               (a)       We supply a full range of Emergency Equipment and first aid products
                         as required by the provisions of the Health and Safety at Work Act.

               (b)        Furnish and equip Nursing Homes arid clinics up to intensive care standard.

•              (c)       Suppliers to the British Red Cross Society and the Royal National
                         Lifeboat Institution.

        An advantage to the client using Castle Medical Supplies, is that as we operate
        an Ambulance / Medical personnel division, we can advise clients on Technical
        Information regarding the type of purchase they should make at a competitive price.

        2.       CASTLE AMBULANCE SERVICES

                 provide: -

                 (a)       A local and national Ambulace Service to the Private Health Sector,
q                          and individuals.    Each Ambulance is equipped with the most sophisticated
                            modern equipment which includes:

                            (i) Cardio-scope with defibrillator

                            (ii)Pneu-Pac portable ventilator

                          (iii)Oxygen complete with nebuliser
                          (iv )Entonox

                          ( v )Intra-venous equipment

                          (vi )Intubation equipment

                          (vii)Local radio communication;: system and cell-net telephone

                         (viii)Wide range of first-aid equipment, ie, splints, strapping, etc

                 (b)       Medical and Nursing and Para-Medical Teams for stand-by at sporting
                            events with or without specialised road or air transport.

                 (c)        Aero-Medical International Services.                            DIi£WS(<"*;
                                                                                            Mr M nM ftiA w t»Pon
                                                                                               Mr J.D. Bowie (Managing)
                                                                                               Mrs M. Bowie
                                                                                               Mr S. Cunningham
                                                                                               Mr J.G. Thom pson
                                                                                               Medical Advisor:
              /ZA        M ember of Medical A ssistance Trade Association                      Dr B.T. Potter BSc MB ChB
                                                                                               MRCGP

•
  /cont.

 The rate for a 2 man Ambulance is £ 25 per hour on site, plus 0.50p. per mile
 if the venue is more than 10 miles away from the appropriate Ambulance base.

 I hope that you will find the information of some use to you in the setting-up
 of your emergency arrangements for the forth-coming season.

 If our Company can be of any help either in a technical or commercial way
 please do not hesitate to contact me at any time on our Edinburgh telephone number,
 031 661 6668.

 All our services are available 24 hours a day, throughout the year.




^ ^ u r s faithfully,




 J.D. Bowie,
 Managing Director.
                                                                                    Secretary: JAM ES FARRY



    The Scottish Football League
    188 WEST REGENT STREET, GLASGOW G2 4RY    Telephone: 041-248 3844   Telex: 779312    Telefax: 041-221 7450


       °ur Ref-          JF/LW
       Your Ref.


                                                                             29th August, 1989

                    J.D. Bowie, Esq.,
                    Managing Director,
                    Castle Ambulance Services Limited,
                    Dundonald House,
                    5/7 Dundonald Street,
                    EDINBURGH,
                    EH3 6RX




                    Dear Mr. Bowie,

                    Thank you for your letters dated 28th August, 1989, addressed to
                    myself and Mr. Kirkpatrick, and I will retain these details
                    here, and will establish further contact with you again in due
                    course, should The Scottish Football League require your services.

                    I am appreciative of your bringing these services to my attention.

                                                 Yours sincerely




                                                     Secretary




►   Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                               V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
                                                                                 Secretary: JAM ES FARRY



The Scottish Football League
188 WEST REGENT STREET, GLASGOW G2 4RY    Telephone: 041-248 3844    Telex: 779312    Telefax: 041-221 7450

   Our    Ref.        Jp/LW
   Your   Ref.
                                                                    6th September, 1989

                 Dr. Neil Fojut,
                 Room 130D,
                 The Scottish Home and Health Department,
                 St. Andrew's House,
                 EDINBURGH,
                 EH1 3SY



                 Dear Dr. Fojut,

                 I refer to our telephone conversation, and I enclose a copy of
                 correspondence received from Messrs, Castle Ambulance Services
                 Limited.

                 It is the opinion of The Scottish Football League Management
                 Committee that the ambulance equipment provision as detailed
                 therein is satisfactory and if the level of trained personnel
                 is equally satisfactory, then the Management Committee of
                 The Scottish Football League can see no real reason why
                 individual clubs should be prevented from contracting with
                 such an independent provider as Castle Ambulance Services.

                 My Management Committee is satisfied that if the regional
                 certificating authority approves the level, of ambulance
                 service, i.e. equipment and personnel and presumably the
                 vehicle, then this is in accordance with the spirit and
                 indeed, the purpose of the Interim Recommendations by Lord
                 Justice Taylor.

                 It is the view of The Scottish Football League that the
                 important role performed by The Scottish Ambulance Service
                 should be continued, in the provision of an Ambulance Incident/
                 Liaison Officer, but this is not necessarily directly linked
                 with the provision of a standby ambulance or ambulances.


                                                                      Cont *d/...«




Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                                V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
It is the intention of The Scottish Football League to seek
advices from The Scottish Ambulance Service as to what would
constitute a fully equipped ambulance, and I would be grateful
to receive formal advices from your department as to the
position of member clubs, The Scottish Football League and
The Scottish Football Association in the provision of such
independent ambulance services, should this be thought
necessary.

I am particularly anxious to have the position clarified,
in view of the suggestion that an earlier directive from
The Scottish Home and Health Department which conferred upon
The Scottish Ambulance Servicers monopolistic type position
with regard to ambulance services.

I thank you for your assistance in this respect.

                        Yours sincerely,




                           Secretary
»   J. M . WILBY. F.A.S.I.. M.Inst.T.A.
    Director



    National Headquarters                                                                 Tel. No. 041 -332 6001
    MAITLAND STREET. GLASGOW G4 OHX                                                       Fax No. 041 -332 3299
I
        JMW/AB

        7 September 1989

§       Mr J Farry
        Secretary
        Scottish Football League
        188 West Regent Street
        GLASGOW



        Dear Mr Farry

        INQUIRY BY LORD                          JUSTICE TAYLOR -                       INTERIM               REPORT HILLSBOROUGH
        STADIUM DISASTER

        I write to clarify the Scottish Ambulance Service position in
        regard to the recommendations contained in the interim report of
        the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry following some negative
        responses from Scottish Football League Clubs.

•      The Secretary of State has directed that appropriate bodies in
       Scotland should act without delay on the interim recommendations
       pending the longer term findings of the Inquiry's final report.
       I have carefully considered the full implications for the
       Ambulance Service and have pursued the necessary action,      in
        liaison with the Police and voluntary agencies, to ensure the
&      Ambulance Service meets its obligations with effect from the
        start of the football season.

       You    will   recall that the main thrust of        the   Report's
        recommendation was to ensure a professional Ambulance Service
        presence which could immediately identify      potentially life-
®      threatening or injurious situations and effect an immediate and
        appropriate paramedical response.   This entails more than merely
        the attendance of professional ambulance crews.        Rather it
        includes the effective co-ordination of ambulance and first aid
        facilities, the provision of on-site advanced treatment, the
        maintenance of medical and paramedical communication on the
®      ground and between the ground,ambulance control and the receiving
        hospitals. To achieve this the presence of ambulance officers is
        necessary to closely liaise with the Police and club medical
        officer and in the event of a major incident ensure a fast back­
        up response and on-site paramedical command and control.

•      /



                                    A d i v i s i o n of t h e   C O M M O N SFRVICES AGFNCY   of   the Scottish Health Service
I

      2

      7 September 1989

      Mr J Farry
      Secretary
      Scottish Football League


      In the light of recent criticism of an Ambulance Service response
p     (yet to be fully investigated), it is important to emphasise that
      routine individual emergencies will continue to be handled by the
      Service    as before.    Whilst immediate advanced aid will be
      rendered   where necessary by on-site ambulance crews,        the
      ambulance(s) present will only be used to convey patients to
      hospital when there is an immediate and continuous threat to
9    life.

      The Service's mandatory and continuous presence (and hence    the
      additional cost incurred) is dictated by the crowd size and   the
      associated risk of a mass casualty situation developing.

9     tf^As the "Ambulance Authority" referred to in the Report,    the
    ^^Scottish    Ambulance Service provides professional advice to the
      Licensing Authority regarding what conditions should be attached
      to the Licence for an appropriate Ambulance Service presence. You
      will therefore appreciate that there is no question of the
      Ambulance Service "negotiating" direct with clubs as to what they
B    consider is an adequate level of resource.       However, to assist
      clubs in determining the likely costs a schedule of ambulance
      resources    (as recommended in the Report) together with the
      associated costs has been circulated to clubs by Chief Ambulance
      Officers following an inspection of facilities and the receipt of
      information concerning anticipated crowd attendances.        These
9        charges which are inclusive of VAT reflect the actual   overall
      costs associated with providing the level of attendance required.

      To avoid any further misunderstanding and the possibility of
      adverse media reaction I would be pleased to receive the
      League's formal acknowledgement that the Ambulance Service's
&    prompt   response in addressing the recommendations contained in
      the Hillsborough Inquiry Interim Report reflects its spirit and
      intent and is primarily aimed at avoiding a repetition of the
      Hillsborough Disaster or any similar occurrence.

      Yours sincerely




      DIRECTOR
                                                                                       Secretary: JA M ES FARRY
                                                                     \ /

The Scottish Football League
188 WEST REGENT STREET. GLASGOW G2 4RY     Telephone: 041-248 3844         Telex: 779312    Telefax: 041-221 7450

   Our Ref.
                    JF/LW
   Your Ref.


                                                                           8th September, 1989

                 J.M. Wilby, Esq., F.A.S.I., M.Inst., T.A.,
                 Director,
                 Scottish Ambulance Service,
                 Maitland Street,
                 GLASGOW, G4 OHX




                 Dear Mr. Wilby,

                            INQUIRY BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - INTERIM REPORT
                                     HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                 I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 7th September, 1989.

                 The Scottish Football League accepts the desirability of an
                 appointed Ambulance Liaison Officer at major spectator occasions
                 and indeed encourages clubs to liaise effectively with Police
                 and officials of the certificating authority to ensure an
                 effective plan.

                 The Scottish Football League does not accept that a standby
                 ambulance requires to be provided by Scottish Ambulance Service,
                 but does accept that any standby ambulance provided, must be
                 approved by the certificating authority, i.e. the Regional
                 Council concerned.

                 My Management Committee was extremely disturbed to learn of
                 a recent incident at Tannadice Park and I have addressed this
                 matter with you on a separate basis.

                 My Management Committee does not accept that the standby ambulance(s)
                 will only be utilised to convey patients to hospital when there is
                 in your words "an immediate and continuous threat to life". There
                 are many other instances whereby an ambulance may be required at
                 the request of the client, i.e. the football club to convey a
                 seriously injured player or spectator to hospital. The Scottish
                 Football League thereby refute your contention that the ambulance
                 is only on standby, it is there for use, as and when required by
                 the client. In the event of any such use, I would imagine thatt
                 the Ambulance Officer will radio for a replacement ambulance or
                 ambulances to ensure adequate cover.
                                                                  Cont'd/...



Address all Correspondence to T H E SECRETARY'                                     V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
I am not necessarily convinced that The Scottish Ambulance Service
is the "Ambulance Authority" or "Ambulance Service" referred to
in the Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor but in saying this,
I am not disputing the role of your organisation in providing
an advisory service and where required, professional services
on any mutually agreed basis.

I understand the areas of concern and in order that you may be
quite clear as to the views of The Scottish Football League,
I would confirm that the member clubs are being advised to
ensure that where a standby ambulance is required, such ambulance
should meet the requirements of the certificating authority.
It is possible that such services may be obtained from companies
other that Scottish Ambulance Service and possibly at a more
competitive rate.

I can assure you that there is no misunderstanding within The
Scottish Football League, and following upon enquiries within
Scottish Home and Health Department, I am re-assured that the
view adopted by my Management Committee is capable of being
supported. I readily acknowledge that our view may change as
a result of further information being made available.

In conclusion, may I concur with your desire to avoid any
misunderstanding, and I am unaware of the possibility of any
adverse media reaction.

I would confirm, on behalf of The Scottish Football League, that
we greatly appreciate the extremely prompt response of our friends
in The Scottish Ambulance Service in its recognised advisory role
and we await further advices from the responsible certificating
authorities.

I do hope that this will be of some clarification.

                        Yours sincerely,
J. M . WILBY. F.A .S.I., M .Inst.T.A.
Director



National Headquarters                                                        Tel. No. 041 -332 6001
MAITLAND STREET. GLASGOW G4 OHX                                               Fax No. 0 41-332 3299



 Our Ref:            JMW/MB

 8 September 1989


 Mr. J. Farry
 Secretary
 Scottish Football League
 188 West Regent Street
  JLASGOW
  \2 4RY


 Dear Mr. Farry

 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS -
 USE OF PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICES

 My letter of 7 September which addressed the main issues raised by the
 League and yours of 6 September have obviously crossed.       However,
 pending the completion of investigations into the incident on Saturday
 26 August,   I am responding to your concern about the use of private
 ambulance services for the purposes of meeting the recommendations of
 the Hillsborough Inquiry Interim Report.

 I must emphasise, once again,   that it is for the Ambulance Authority
 to satisfy itself that the resources provided meet those currently
 available to the general public and that they can be efficiently
 controlled and deployed in the event of a major incident.          The
 Regional Ambulance Officers' Group, which is formally responsible for
 advising Health Authorities on the provision of ambulance services,
 has recently produced a recommended Code of Practice for private
 ambulance services and it is hoped that this will soon be adopted in
 Scotland.

 In the meantime, where necessary, the Scottish Ambulance Service will
 contract with private companies who satisfy our standards.    You will
 appreciate therefore that clubs who contract direct with private
 ambulance   services   cannot guarantee they are      fulfilling   the
 requirements of their licence.

  I trust this has clarified the position in so far                                                        as   the   use   of
  private ambulance services is concerned.

  Yours sincerely



  Direc'tor



                                 A division of the C O M M O N SERVICES AGENCY of the Scottish Health Service
                                                                                    Secretary: JAM ES FARRY



    The Scottish Football League
    188 WEST REGENT STREET, GLASGOW G2 4RY    Telephone. 041-248 3844   Telex: 779312    Telefax: 041-221 7450

*      Our Ref.           JF/LW
       Your Ref.


                                                                        11th September, 1989

                       J.M. Wilby, Esq., F.A.S.I., M.Inst., T.A.,
                       Director,
                       Scottish Ambulance Service,
                       Maitland Street,
                       GLASGOW, GH OHX




                       Dear Mr. Wilby,

                            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS -
                                      USE OF PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICES

                      Thank you very much for your letter dated 8th September, 1989,
                      and I am aware of the role of the Scottish Ambulance Service in
                      providing an advisory role to responsible bodies.

                      In this connection, I would be grateful if you could let me
                      have, by return, details of the standards operated by the
                      Scottish Ambulance Service, which will be applicable to
                      ambulances from the private companies.

                      I consider that the responsibility for approving standby
                      ambulances rests eventually with the certificating authority
                      and not the Scottish Ambulance Service, although the role of
                      the Scottish Ambulance Service in an advisory capacity is
                      recognised.

                      If you could let me have the composition of a standard ambulance,
                      i.e. facilities, equipment etc., this will enable The Scottish
                      Football League to provide advices to member cluba when
                      approached by private companies.

                      Your co-operation is greatly.appreciated.

                                                 Yours sincerely,




                                                     Secretary



®   Address all Correspondence to T H E SECRETARY'                              V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
 W. ROBSON
I Chief Ambulance Officer
  Greater Glasgow



A rea Headquarters                                              Admin.   041-332 6001
 MAITLAND STREET, GLASGOW G4 OHX                                Ops.     041-332 7080




                Our Ref:      TP/MT


                Mr. J. Farry
                Secretary
                The Scottish Football League
                188 WEst Regent Street
                Glasgow G2 4RY


                Dear Mr. Farry

                I have been asked by Mr. Robson, Area Chief Ambulance Officer, Greater
                Glasgow to forward you equipment schedules for ambulance vehicles
                which may be deployed at football matches.    Please find these
                attached.

                Should you wish to view any of our vehicles or require a demonstration
                of any of the equipment, please do not hesitate to contact me.

                Yours sincerely




                            '-OVAfjn

                Area Training Officer.




                Encs.




                            A division of the C O M M O N SERVICES AGENCY of the Scottish Health Service
     0




V)
                        SCOTTISH AMBULANCE SERVICE

                              SERVICE PROFILE


INTRODUCTION
The Scottish Ambulance Service is the largest of sixteen Divisions of the
Common Services Agency of the Scottish Health Service.   Serving an area
equivalent to one-third the land mass of the United Kingdom with a
population of 5.2 million, it last year handled more than 2 million
patients of which 300,000 were accident and emergency cases.   Its 2,200
staff operate over 900 vehicles out of 159 ambulance stations which are
presently deployed from 27 control centres.

ORGANISATION

The Service is administered from National Headquarters in Glasgow and
operationally managed by eight Chief Ambulance Officers whose Areas serve
one or more of the fifteen Scottish Health Boards.

A two tier Service - accident and emergency and patient transport service -
is currently being developed throughout Scotland.   A major organisational
 hange of the Officer structure will take place over the next two years or

(p>.   This principally entails the re-deployment of large numbers of
 ontrol Officer posts to field management.

MANAGEMENT PHILOSOPHY

Management effort is concentrated on ensuring that Ambulancemen and women
receive maximum support in their primary task of patient care.    A
participative management style is therefore being developed together with
appropriate delegation at all levels.    The management structure is
designed to achieve the benefits of central direction and specialised
support services coupled with local management sensitive and responsive to
users' needs.

A national Senior Management Team, comprising the Director and Chief
Ambulance Officers, has been established and there are similar arrangements
at Area level.

ADMINISTRATION

The National Headquarters' Administration comprises Secretariat, Management
Information, Supplies and Insurance services.   It has close links with the
Common Services Agency Headquarters' staff.   Chief Ambulance Officers each
have a small clerical and secretarial support staff.

FINANCE

With running costs of over £30m - nearly half the Common Services Agency
budget - the financial management of the Service assumes an increasing
importance.    General financial support is provided by the Agency's
Finance Department. Direct financial advice to the Director and Senior
Management Team is provided Tby the Finance Officer at National Headquarters
Budgets are in the process of being devolved to Chief Ambulance Officers
and will eventually be devolved to District Ambulance Officers.
    TRAINING/PERSONNEL

    The combined training and personnel functions ensure a co-ordinated
    approach to the recruitment, training and development of all Scottish
    Ambulance Service staff.    A residential Ambulance Training Centre in
    Glasgow propvides Basic, Post Proficiency, Driving and other specialist
    training for ambulance staff.    Area Training Officers are regularly
    seconded to the Centre and in-Area training will be increased with the
    appointment of additional instructional staff.

    OPERATIONS

    This division of the Service is responsible for the management of
    operational resources, i.e. vehicle crew staff, vehicles and equipment.
    Headed up in each Area by an Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer
    (Operations), the key managers will be District Ambulance Officers
    responsible for the management of large ambulance stations or groups of
    smaller stations.   They will also liaise with the emergency and other
    public services and hospital departmental heads.

    CONTROL

    The 27 ambulance control centres are to be rationalised with the
    establishment of one centralised control for each of the eight Areas.
    Assistant Chief Ambulance Officers (Control) will be responsible for the
    efficient deployment of operational resources.   Control Officers supporter
    by a team of Control Assistants will be responsible for the management of
    control rooms during their tour of duty.

    There are plans to replace Ambulance Service telecommunications with a co­
    ordinated NHS system and to introduce appropriate computer technology.

    FLEET MAINTENANCE

    The Service has a Central Repair Workshop in Glasgow and 25 Area workshops
    with an establishment of 70 staff.   There is a mixed fleet of Accident &
    Emergency ambulances, Patient Transport vehicles, staff cars and vans.
    Some maintenance is undertaken on behalf of Health Boards and fuel is
    dispensed to other NHS disciplines.

    CONCLUSION

    One of the world's largest Services, the Scottish Ambulance Service,
    supported by the Scottish Air Ambulance Service, Ambulance Car Service,
    and Private Contractors, delivers pre hospital care to rural, urban and
    metropolitan areas.    It therefore offers unique experience and career
    opportunities in one Service over a wide range of operational and
    managerial activities.




    ADMIN/MH/LW/2S/11
    June 1988




#
                             AMBULANCE    VEHICLES




1.   ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY UNITS:   These vehicles comprise the
                                     "Front Line" in todays Scottish
                                     Ambulance Service and are
                                     specifically designed for the
                                     care of those patients who
                                     require resuscitation and/or
                                     nursing care at the scene and
                                     en route to hospital.   They
                                     are manned by Qualified Accident
                                     and Emergency crews.   Accident
                                     and Emergency units are equipped
                                     with some of the most advanced
                                     equipment available, including
                                     defibrillators and cardiac
                                     monitors.




2.   PATIENT TRANSPORT VEHICLES:         Are designed for the transportation
                                         of patients requiring only basic
                                         care to and from hospital.   They
                                         are equipped with a carry chair,
                                         first aid kit, blankets and two way
                                         radio.




ADMIN/MH/FW/25/11

JULY 1988
EQUIPMENT    SCHEDULE

ACCIDENT     AND EMERGENCY     UNIT       (A E U)


                                            HARDWARE

OYXGEN   THERAPY:                     1 X   Size 'F' Cylinder and Key
                                      1 X   Variable Flow Meters
                                      3 X   Size 'D' Cylinders
                                      1 X   Sabre Saturn Unit and Key

ANALGESIA:                            2 x Size 'D' Cylinders (Entonox)
                                      1 X Entonox Unit Complete (Minus
                                          Carry Case)

RESUSCITATION:                        1 X Pneupac Unit Complete
                                      1 X Adult Bag and Mask Unit (Minus
                                          Case)
                                      1 X Infant Bag ?nd Mask Unit
                                          (Minus Case)
                                      1 X Vitalograph Aspirator and
                                          Catheter
                                      1 X Laerdal Aspirator with 12v Lead

SANITARY:                             1 x Bed Pan and Insert
                                      1 X Urinal

FRACTURE     IMMOBILISATIONS          1 X Frac Pack (X5 straps,X1
                                          padding)
                                      1 X Frac Immobiliser (Box Splint)
                                      1 X Trac 3 Splint
                                      1 X Long Leg Inflatable Splint*
                                      1 X Short Leg Inflatable Splint*
                                      1 X Long Leg Vacuum Splint
                                      1 X Arm Vacuum Splint
                                      1 X Long Wooden Splint
                                      1 X Kendrick Extrication Device
                                      1 X Downes Cervical Collar
                                      1 X Loxley Cervical Collar

TRANSPORTATION:                       1     x Pair of F W Stretcher Poles
                                      1     X Pair of Spreader Bars
                                      2   X P V C Carry Sheets
                                      1     X York 4 Super Trolley Cot
                                      1    X York 4 Trolley Cot
                                      2   X P V C Ambulance Pillows
                                      6   X Green Ambulance Blankets
                                      1   X Wooden Rescue Board
                                      1   X St’ Ir Chair with Straps
                                      1   X Folding N A T O Stretcher
                                      2   X Re-Usable Survival Blankets

*   Only available until end of present supplies.



                                          f ^ 0 0 '
                                                             CL
ACCIDENT   AND    EMERGENCY   UNIT (A E O)



                                     HARDWARE

MISCELLANEOUS:                   1 X Oxy Clip and Satchel
                                 1 X Trolley Cot I V Pole
                                 1 X Cantilever Case (Immediate
                                     Response)
                                 1 X Light Rescue Tool Roll, Complete
                                 1 X White Knight Handlamp.and
                                     Charger
                                 1 X Redi-Pack Unit
                                 4 X Redi-Pack Cases
                                 1 X Attendants Jump Seat with
                                     Securing Bracket
                                 2 X Trolley Cot, Floor Brackets
                                 1 X Vehicle, Water Flask
                                 1 X Vehicle Spot Lamp

ADMINISTRATION:                     Vehicle Log Sheets
                                    Equipment Schedule
                                    R T A Service Vehicle-Action
                                    Card
                                    Vehicle Inspection/Cleaning
                                    - Action Card
                                    "Ambulance Called" Card


                                     SOFTWARE

CONSUMABLES:                         Rubber Gloves
                                     Ambulance Dressings, Burn Sheet
                                     Burns Dressings
                                     Micropore
                                     Incontinence Pads
                                     Emesis Bowl
                                     Paper Towel Roll
                                     Air Freshener
                                     Suction Catheters
                                     02 Masks and Tubing
                                     Oropharyngeal Airways 0,1,2,3
                                     Sterile Water Sachets
                                     Appropriate Cleaning/
                                     Disinfectant Agents
                                     Protective Clothing Kit (See
                                     Appropriate List)
                                     Obstetric Kit (See Appropriate
                                     List)
                                     Nebuliser and Drugs*

* As Applicable
                                           Proposed Management structure    -   Ayrshire & Arran and IXmfVies and Galloway. - Argyll & Clyde




                                                                        Chief
                                                                  Ambulance Officer




                                       Higher                                                    Personal
                                       Clerical                                                  Secretary
                                       Officer




                                       Staff Officer
                                       Training
                                       (AOii)




                          Assistant Chief Officer                                                    Assistant Chief Officer
                                (Operations)                                                                 (Control)
                           (ASAO)                                                                    IASAO)        ________




                                                                                                        Control Officers

                                                                                                         (AOi)    x

                                                                                Ambulance
              Ambulance      District Ambulance        Relief/                  Car
Private                                                Trainers
              Reserve            Officers                                       Service
Contractors                                         lAOlj----
                             (AOi)__________ __
                                                                                                             Control
                                                                                                             Assistants
                                                                 SCOTTISH     AMBULANCE       SERVICE

                                               proposed   management   structure   - Forth & Lanark - Greater Olaappw




                                                                                CHIEF
                                                                          AMBULANCE OFFICER


                                                     HICHER                                             PERSONAL
                                                     CLERICAL                                           SECRETARY
                                                     OFFICER



                                             STAFF OFFICER
                                             (AOll) (TRAINING)




                          ASSISTANT CHIEF OFFICER                                                                      ASSISTANT CHIEF OFFICER
                               (OPERATIONS)                                                                                    (CONTROL)
                          (ASAO)                                                                                       (ASAO)




                                                    DISTRICT                                            PLA!IMi:iC OrTICER                   CONTROL OFFICERS
                                 RELIEF/                               AMBULANCE
PRIVATE       AMBULANCE                             AMBULANCE
                                 TRAINERS                              CAR                              (AOi)                                (AOi)
CONTRACTORS   RESERVE                               OFFICERS           SERVICE
                                 (AOi)
                                                    (API)


                                                                                                                                                 CONTROL
                                                                                                           CONTROL                               ASSISTANTS
                                                                                                           ASSISTANT
                                                 RANK STRUCTURE


APPENDIX J (REVISED)   -   6 JUNE 1988




                                                                      SHOULDER          CAP
DESIGNATIONS:                                                         INSIGNIA        INSIGNIA


Assistant Chief Ambulance Officers (Control & Operations),                        Single row of
Chief Training Officer                                                            silver oak leaves



Principal Training Officer, Emergency Planning Officer,
Divisional Officers (Control & Operations),                                       Single row of
Divisional Ambulance Commanders - Fife, Lothians & Borders                        silver braid



Area Training Officers, Senior Training Officers, Control Officers,
Planning Officers, Liaison Officers - Fife, Lothians & Borders,                   Single row of
Forth Valley & Lanarkshire and Greater Glasgow                             < $>   black oak leaves




District Ambulance Officers, Control Officers, Planning Officers
and Liaison Officers - all other Areas, Training/Relief Officers                  Plain cloth peak
 ■t




••

           INVERNESS


      c>                                 ABERDEEN




                             DUNDEE




                  GL'ASGOW
                             EOINBURGH

                  MOTHERWELI




                       SCOTTISH AMBULANCE SERVICE

               AREA HEADQUARTERS i CONTROL CENTRES-
    «

    t'




•   •



                     ^ k



                                    4521611
                           S )?      /j>      l 84411761


                                                           1189(1541




                       985(17901




                                   DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
    Note:   Numbers inside the brackets refer to population density
            people/sq. km. Other values are population in thousands.
REACTION OF SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE TO THE

CENTRAL PROVISION OF STANDARD FIRST AID EQUIPMENT TO BE RECEIVED

     BY ALL 38 MEMBER CLUBS OF THE SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE
                                                                                         Secretary: JA M ES FARRY



    The Scottish Football League
    188 WEST REGENT STREET, GLASGOW G2 4RY         Telephone: 041-248 3844   Telex: 779312     Telefax: 041-221 7450
m                       JF/LW
        Our Ref.

       Your Ref.
                                                                                    10th October, 1989



                   TO: ALL MEMBER CLUBS




                   Dear Sir or Madam,

                                         FIRST AID PROVISION AT LEAGUE GROUNDS

                   I would confirm that my Management Committee, following upon discussions
                   with The Football Grounds Improvement Trust, has arranged to bulk purchase,
                   at no cost to your club, specified First Aid equipment, following upon
                   advices received from The Scottish Football Association s Medical Sub-
                   Committee and St. Andrew's Ambulance Association.

                   I would confirm that your club will receive three separate deliveries
                   of the following equipment within the next four weeks;

                   1)   A First Aid Pack encompassing the following;

                              50 x Gauze swabs 7-5 x 7 -5cm 12ply 5 per pack (Sterile)
                              50 x Cotton Wool Balls Hospital Qual. Large - 5 per pack (Sterile)
                              50   x    Gallipots 60ml (Sterile)
                              50   x    Iso Propyl Alcohol wipes
                              12   x    HIBIDIL Sachets
                               3    x   Saline for eye irregation sterile 300ml
                               6   x    Crepe bandage 5cm
                               6   x    Crepe bandage 7 -5cm
                               1   x    100 latex gloves large
                               1   x    Clinifix 2.5cm (Hypoallergenic adhesive tape)
                              12   x     Eyepads (first aid pack) sterile
                              24   x     W.O.W. bandage 5cm
                              24   x     W.O.W. bandage 7 .5cm
                              12   x    First Aid Dressings - (12 x 4 sizes)
                               1   x     Tube gauze (suitable for fingers) shortest length available
                               1   x     Tube gauze (suitable for ankles and knees) shortest length
                              available                                        _     .
                               2 x Elastic adhesive dressings (composite pack mixed sizes)
                               1 x 25 Triangular bandages (not calico, but non woven disposable)
                               1   x    Safety Pins (pack)                                                 '
                              50   x    Sterile Forceps
                              24   x    W.O.W. bandage 10cm
                               1   x    Box Kleenex Tissues
                                                                                             C o n t 'd / ....




9   Address all Correspondence to ‘THE SECRETARY’                                    V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
                                         -2-




     This First Aid Pack will be delivered in a stout cardboard box, and it
     will be your club's responsibility to check the contents, and to ensure
     that a stock record is maintained, and any items utilised, replenished
     immediately.

     2)    1 York 2 tilting Trolley and Mattress.

     3)    1 Ambu Resuscitator Unit.

     Three different agencies are being utilised to provide this equipment,
     and for your information, the First Aid Pack is being supplied direct
     to your club by;



••                      Mr. Lawrence W. Park,
                        Alkeda,
                        35 West A v e n u e ,
                        Ca rlu ke,
                        ML 8 5AE              Tel. No. 0555-71968

     The Trolley and Mattress are being provided direct by the manufacturers,
     Messrs. F.W. Equipment Co. Ltd. at the undernoted address;

                        F.W. Equipment Company Limited,
                        Hanworth Road,
                        Low Moor,
                        Bradford, BD12 OSG    Tel. No. 0274-601121

     The Ambu Resuscitator Unit will be supplied by the following;

                        R.L. Dolby & Company Limited,
                        Monitor H o u s e ,
                        Anderson Street,
                         Dunblane, FK15 9AJ     Tel. No. 0786-822333
                                                Fax      0786-822267
                                                Telex    779365

     I have requested that each of the above agencies obtain from your club a
     signed receipt of safe delivery and I would be grateful if you would take
     the necessary steps internally to ensure that members of your staff are
     aware of these proposed deliveries and if your office or the front door at
     the ground is not manned during normal office h o u r s , I would suggest that
     advance contact should take place with the above agency/agencies to ensure
     safe delivery to an alternative a dd res s, as I have insisted that the items
     are delivered to your registered ground, and not your club's registered
     office.

     I trust that the foregoing will be of some assistance, and should you have
     any queries, please do not hesitate to contact me at this office.

                                  Yours faithfully,




                                       Secretary
                                                                                         Secretary: JA M ES FARRY



    The Scottish Football League
    188 WEST REGENT STREET. GLASGOW G2 4RY         Telephone: 041-248 3844   Telex: 779312    Telefax: 041-221 7450

•      «   n ,                   JF/LW
w      Our Ref.

       Your Ref.


                                                                                    10th October, 1989



                   TO:   ALL PREMIER DIVISION CLUBS




••
                   Dear Sir,

                                         FIRST AID PROVISION AT LEAGUE GROUNDS

                   I refer to the enclosed letter regarding the supply of First Aid equipment,
                   and the Management Committee of The Scottish Football League has agreed
                   that Premier Division clubs should receive an additional Trolley with
                   Mattress, and this will be the subject of a separate delivery as an
                   insufficient number of Trolleys were available on the first order.

                   Therefore, for your club's purposes, please note that The Scottish Football
                   League will be providing you, on a one-off basis, with 2 Trolleys, to
                   augment your club's existing facilities.

                   I trust that this will be of some assistance.

                                                   Yours faithfully,




                                                        Secretary




                   Enc
                                                                                                         \




•   Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                                    V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
   CONCERN BY FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES REGARDING THE RATING BURDEN
ON SPORTS STADIA, POLICE COSTS, AND THE EFFECT OF THE 15% REDUCTION
             IN STANDING CAPACITIES AT LEAGUE GROUNDS
                                                                                        Secretary: JA M ES FARRY



       The Scottish Football League
       188 WEST REGENT STREET. GLASGOW G2 4RY    Telephone: 041-248 3844    Telex: 779312       Telefax: 041-221 7450


^         Our Ref.         JF/LW

          Your Ref.


                                                                           12th September,      1989
•
                      Dick Douglas, Esq., M . P . ,
                      Secretary,
                      The All Party Parliamentary Scottish Sports Group,
                      Braehead House,
ft A                  51 High Street,
                      Auchtermuchty,
                      FIFE.




                      Dear

                      I refer to our conversations with representatives of your Group,
                      held within the Royal Scottish Automobile  Club yesterday, and on
                      behalf of The Scottish Football League and The Scottish Football
                      Association, I would thank you and your colleagues most sincerely
                      for taking the time to speak with us on matters of mutual interest.

                      I would confirm that our wide ranging discussions homed in on
                      certain main areas as follows:-

                      1)     Rating

                      The Football Authorities remain extremely concerned that despite
                      earlier promises by George Younger whilst Secretary of State for
                      Scotland to "alleviate the rating burden on sports stadia",
                      nothing of any significance has occurred for senior League clubs,
                      and we are anxiously awaiting the 1990 Revaluation, but remain
                      somewhat sceptical as to the ou tcome. I instanced the predicament
                      of St. Johnstone F.C. with the new purpose built stadium at
                      McDiartnid Park, Perth, where it is likely that if the original
                      assessment were to be accepted, St. Johnstone F.C. would have a
                      rates bill in the region of £48,000, plus £7,500 for the nearby
                      community use artificial surface.

                      We also discussed the disincentives for clubs to construct seating
                      in existing covered standing areas, and the resultant increase in
                      the rateable value and the view of the football authorities remains
                      that it is important for The Scottish Office to look at areas such
                      as police costs, rating, safety and to produce, if possible, a
                      co-ordinated incentive based prograunte for clubs to meet the ever­
                      growing aspects of H.M. Government legislation.

                                                                                    C o n t 'd / ....


^      Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                                V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
2)     P o lic e C o a ts .

I enclose a copy of details of police costs as at September, 1988,
together with enclosures produced by our colleagues at The Football
T r u g t , which may be of some assistance, and you will see that the
leading clubs in Scotland are at something of a disadvantage in
comparison with our colleagues in England.       I would confirm that
these figures are subject to an additional 9*252* increase, envisaged
to be incorporated within the next four weeks.       You may be interested
to learn that the normal charge-out rate is for four h o u r s .

3)     Interim Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor following Tragic
       Events at Hillsborough

We discussed in particular the 15/1 reduction recommended by Lord
Justice Taylor and the Implications for League clubB in view of
their planned programme of safety improvements which incorporates
computerised turnstiles, improved access and egress, additional
crush barriers, improved walkways, concrete re-grading work etc.
Viewed against this background, the imposition of the Vj% reduction,
which was applicable to penned areas, has caused the Management
Committee of The Scottish Football League, at the top level,
some concern, because certain club3 having carried out the
programme of works, anticipate an increase in capacity rather
than a reduction, and it is to be hoped that Lord Justice Taylor
will accept an invitation to visit Scotland when we can impress
upon him the differences in attitude this side of the border,
the differences in crowd control, including policing requirements,
segregation etc., and that the 15# will not be a feature of his
Final Report, because if it were to be so, there is a major
difficulty for leading clubs.

4)     E.B.C. Freedom of Movement

We discussed the position whereby Scottish football takes the view
that because players in Scotland enjoy freedom of movement, we are
actually more advanced that our colleagues in the European Economic
Community.  As you know, the player is free at the end of his
contract to move to the club of his choice, and if this is another
Scottish Football League club, and the clubs are unable to agree a
fee, the matter is arbitrated by The Scottish Football League
Compensation Commission, comprising Lord McCluskey, a representative
of The Scottish Football League and a representative of The Scottish
Professional Footballers' Association.  In the event that the
player elects to move to England or Ireland, and the clubs are unable
to agree a fee, then the matter will be referred to The International
Football League Board Compensation Commission, whereby an independent
Chairman, i.e. from a League other than the League® ofthe clubs
in the dispute, will be appointed, and a representative of each of
the Leagues of the clubs in dispute, i.e. a three man commission
will adjudicate upon the appropriate Compensation Fee.

                                                           C o n t 'd / ....
E.E.C. Freedom of Movement (cont'd)

In the event that the player elects at the end of his contract to
move to a club In Europe, U.E.F.A. determines the fee by means
of a multiplying table, i.e. as per the enclosed example.

In view of all of this information, you will appreciate that football
in Scotland does not have any problems, but neverthless, if the
commissioners are pushing towards 1992 and introducing legislation
to ensure the complete unrestricted free mobility of labour within
the E.E.C., then naturally, we will seek the support of H.M. Government
to protect the interests of our sport.

You will be aware of the deep-rooted concern of the officials of
The Scottish Football League and The Scottish Football Association
in this respect.

I trust that the above is a fair reflection of our discussions
and in summary fora may be of some assistance to your colleagues,
and I will arrange to let you have a draft of a letter regarding
the E.E.C. aspect in due course, following upon our discussions
with our sister Leagues at Lytham on 28th September.

In the meantime, I thank you for your willingness to assist us
in these delicate areas.

                         Yours sincerely,




                             Secretary
c m o s s VCR «SB SERVICES CP KXJCE CFPZCKRS

!*>lice Circular 8/80 discontinued the practice of the             i d NMftomL       Krnmm
Secretary of State for Scotland periodically                       CBKRGB
recommending minimum charges for the service of police
officers.

ft>lice Authorities are now allowed to fix charges vtaich          LOCAL ADIBQRXTY
reflect their own particular costs. Charges should be              teremiNES causes
revised after each pay award or any other major
increase in expenditure.

R>lice Circular 8/80 provides details of the formula               pc o c e   c n c a t A R 8/   bo
previously used by the Secretary of State, (ibis is                v x m a e s FORMULA
revised periodically and was last vpdated by Police
Circular 3/83).

Using the formula to reflect Strathclyde costs at                  PROPOSED CHARGES
1 September 1988 the proposed charges are:

                                                 GRD2J#\KY RAIE           FfZ.c>ry7
                                                                               I .q.^ s
                                                           Amount
                             fexistinq        Proposed       of            %
                             Charge           Charqe      Increase      Increase
     '


CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT         £30.58           £32,65      £ 2,07        6,8%

SUPERINTENDENT               £28.36           £30.26      £ 1.90        6.7%
                                       . 4.

CHIEF INSPECTOR              £21,54           £22.85      £ 1.31        6.1%

INSPECTOR                    £19.43           £20.68      £ 1.25        6.4%
SERGEANT                     £17,21           £18.30      £ 1.09        6.3%
CONSTABLE                    £13.68           £14.46      £ 0.78         5.7%
                                              ^ 6 ^ 1 0      H O M
                                                          Amount
                             Existlnq         Proposed      of              %
                             (Sarge           Charge      Increase       Increase
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT         £30.58           £32,65      £ 2.07        6,8%

SUPERINTENDENT               £28.36           £30.26      £ 1.90         6.7%

CHIEF INSPECTOR              £34.89'          £37.19      £ 2.30         6,6%
 INSPECTOR                   £31.31           £33.52      £ 2,21         7,1%
 SERGEANT                    £27.58           £29.50      £ 1.92         7.0%

CCNSTABI£                    £21.58           £22.99      £ 1,41         6.5%
