     FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY
  GUIDANCE ON SAFETY CERTIFICATES
  Response from the All-Party Parliamentary Football
  Committee.




  1.1 The issuing of draft guidance on safety certificates by the
  Football Licensing Authority is a welcome step and provides firm
  evidence of the value of the FLA's role, In particular, the work
  of the FLA in seeking to promote greater harmonisation and
  consistency of procedures and standards at football grounds,
  which has long been called for by the All-Party Football
^Tommittee,   can only be to the benefit of the game,


  1.2 Whilst providing general guidelines for clubs, it is
  essential that there should remain some degree of flexibility
  available to enable clubs to adapt to their own individual
  oircmustances.  The recognition of this reality by the FLA is
  both positive and laudable. 1


  1.3 This response does not seek to approve or verify each
  individual paragraph in the FLA draft guidance, but to offer
  general suggestions and comments on the specific role which the
  f l a has sought to project for itself through the document. It is
  to be read, therefore, not as a detailed checklist of each point
  made in the guidance, but more as a broad-brush commentary.



  1) Developing facilities for coromunity-use


  2.1 Whilst it is recognised that the document concerns itself
  specifically with the procedure and content of             safety
  certificates for football clubs, the discussion of such amenities
  as catering facilities, provision for disabled supporters and
  toilets shows that the FLA is willing to play a role in promoting
  better standards at grounds beyond the immediately apparent remit
  of spectator safety. This is a valuable development of the FLA's
  role as set out in the Football Spectators Act and is to be
  supported.2



       ^   Introduction (111)

       2
           Section 13 t Amenities tor apfictatora
2,2 Given the range of issues discussed in the guidance, it is
perhaps surprising that no mention is given to the development
of stadia as community clubs, incorporating facilities for use
by the local population such as gymnasia, training support and
social rooms.

2.3 Recently-published planning policy guidance on the subject
of Planning for Sport and Recreation has made it clear that for
clubs wishing to redevelop or build new stadia, the degree to
which community use is incorporated in their plans will affect
their chances of obtaining planning permission.3


2.4 Furthermore the number of clubs developing schemes for use
of their stadia by the local community has been growing steadily
in recent years and seem set to continue. In particular, the
startling success of the Football in the Community scheme gives
an indication of the positive benefits that can accrue from this
scheme.


2.5 Given the likelihood that the breadth of activity within and
•
around football stadia will undoubtedly increase, it is suggested
that safety certificates should include a specific detailing of
facilities within the stadium complex where use by the community
is a regular feature. The safety inspectors should ensure that
these   areas  comply with     appropriate health    and   safety
regulations.


3^ All-Seated Stadiums - a Rethink for Divisions Three and Four?


3.1 The advice contained in the guidance document that the FLA
is the sole body to oversee moves towards the development of all­
seated stadiums is, of course, correct under Section 13 of the
Football Spectators Act 1989. (Subject to the powers of the
Secretary of State under Section 11 of that Act). As such, the
FLA is in the position to ensure consistency throughout football.
This is an important and valuable role for the Authority.


3.2 Yet as the draft guidance makes clear, the FLA also has the
potential to act as an informed and authoritative source of
guidance for clubs as to positive developments which football
needs to promote. Moreover such advice will obviously be taken
into account by the Secretary of State in formulating his
policies for football stadia safety. The advice that clubs should
encourage the reduction of segregation within grounds is one
example, as is the FLA's stated opposition to the maintenance of
perimeter fences.4


                      Department of th« Environment." Planning Policy Guidance Note on Sport and    FFQ   17,
" " I 't o in b ir   1991


                 *    P a ra   4 .4   attd F a r *   0 .1




                 '14 9 118 8 2
                                                                   0 1 . 2 3 . 1 '? ■=! 2   12:45
3.3 The FLA will be aware that there is considerable debate
currently as to the wisdom of requiring clubs in the Third and
Fourth Divisions to convert to all-seated stadia or to admit
spectators only to seated areas from 1999.


3.4 Whilst any ^incontestable threat to safety would obviously
override questions of the cost of implementing this policy, it
is unclear as to whether the undeniable cost that would result
from forcing clubs in the Third and Fourth Divisions to develop
all-seated accommodation represents a sensible use of the scarce
resources open to these clubs - resources which could be spent
on, for example, upgrading toilet facilities or developing
accommodation for the disabled or for use by the community.


3.5  Furthermore, evidence of rising police costs shows that,
notwithstanding the additional costs of redevelopment, clubs are
already experiencing severe financial pressures. Figures supplied
by the Football League to the All-Party Football Committee show
that police costs have more than doubled since the season 1987-
88. One club, Fort Vale, has seen its police bill rocket by a
•
staggering 905% between the season 1987-88 and 1990-91 i5


3.6 These costs look set to continue in the light of the Home
Office decision to direct police forces to introduce 1full
economic charging' for policing by 1996 at the latest. It is thus
clear that for many smaller clubs, it is not a question of
competing claims on available resources, but rather an inability
at present to meet their bills, regardless of the future cost of
developing all-seated accommodation.5


3.7 The Home Affairs Select Committee, during its inquiry into
"Policing Football Hooliganism" considered this problem and
concluded that the requirement that smaller clubs in the Third
and Fourth Divisions should develop all-seated stadia should be
reconsidered. That is an argument which the All-Party Football
Committee has been advancing for some time and was pleased to see
endorsed.7


3,8 The logic of requiring smaller clubs to go all-seater has
received a further blow with the announcement    from the Home
Office that the Government does not intend to extend mandatory
all-seating to rugby league and rugby union grounds.8



        ^   PreaU               th* All-Farty Football Committee; 4th September 1991.

        6
            Latter from Earl farrerB   to Tom Fendry; 5th Jun® 1991

        7
               S«cond Report from th« Horn* Affair* S&lect Committee: Session 1990-91 - "Policing F o o t b « H
Hooliganism"

        e
            Parliamentary Answer to Tom pendry MP: 16th January 1992
3.9 As Lord Justice Taylor said in his Report "A well attended
Rugby match of either code may attract numbers in excess of those
attending many Football League matches. There would seem little
reason for requiring a fourth division League club to convert to
seating whilst permitting major Rugby clubs to keep their
terraces indefinitely»" 9


3,10 It is, therefore, suggested that the Football Licensing
Authority gives its urgent attention to the desirability of
advising the Government that the all-seated requirement for clubs
in the Third and Fourth Divisions be reconsidered.



    The ..encouragement jdf responsible spectator behaviour

4,1 Recent years have seen the arrest rate at football grounds
plummeting. Last season the number of arrests at football grounds
fell by 31% and the number of ejections fell by 27%. This was the
fourth season in a row that the arrest rate has fallen and
•
provides firm evidence that football grounds are becoming ever
safer and more pleasant places in which to watch the game.10


4.2 There is, furthermore, considerable anecdotal evidence that
'terrace culture' is moving away from confrontational attitudes
amongst ’rival' spectator groups and towards a more communal
feeling amongst football fans as a group.


4.3 In particular, the growth of the 'fanzine' movement, through
such non-club specific publications as When Saturday Comes and
the development of the Football Supporters Association have
signalled a determination and a willingness amongst football
supporters to adopt a responsible and self-policing attitude
towards the game.


4.4 In this atmosphere, the encouragement given by the FLA to
the controlled de-segregation of the terraces wherever possible
is to be warmly welcomed. Of course, the added proviso that
safety certificate holders should, nevertheless, be required to
provide where necessary for the segregation of home and away
supporters is an important safeguard which should be retained at
all costs.11




     9
          Lord Juntlea T*yl6r: Final Report Into th« Hillsborough Stadium Diaaster;    Paragraph 85

     10
            Source;   Parliamentary Answer from Peter Llayd to Tore Petidry: 24th July 1950


     11   Para 4.4
            4.5 Nevertheless it remains essential that legislation should
            continue to provide an effective deterrent to the diminishing
            minority who might seek to disrupt football matches or indulge
            in unwelcome or inappropriate behaviour at football.


            4.6 In this context, the introduction of the Football Offences
/?<?/ -     Act 1991^, creating criminal offences of chanting obscene or
            racist abuse; throwing a missile; or going onto the pitch without
            reasonable excuse is an important added power available to both
            police and clubs* Early figures show that this Act is already
            proving useful to the police - up until and including 16th
            October 1991, there had been 73 arrests made at football grounds
            under this new Act. 12


            4.7 It is worthwhile noting that support for the introduction
            of this legislation was universally given by clubs, police and
            supporters organisations during the inquiry by the Home Affairs
            Select Committee into ’Policing Football Hooliganism'.


          ^4.8   The further successful operation of this Act, however, will
            depend on the degree to which those responsible for maintaining
            safety within football grounds are made aware of its provisions
            and powers. It is therefore suggested that training for stewards
            in the law concerning the maintenance of order at football -
            including the Fublic Order Act and the Football Offences Act -
            is included in the FLA's guidance to clubs. 13


            4.9 Given the likelihood that the ratio of stewards to police
            will continue to increase, in the light of the rise in costs for
            polcicing outlined earlier, such a need for training of stewards
            as to the law surrounding the behaviour of football crowds
            assumes an even greater importance. It is therefore suggested
            that the FLA specifications as to the requirements for training
            of stewards should be made mandatory.




            TOM PENDRY MP
            Chairman


            January 1992



                 12
                      Parliamentary Answer frora Pet*r i,l<?y<3 to Toro Pendry;   17th October 1991


                      Far* 5.11
                       H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                           L O N D O N SW1A OAA




  Norman Jacobs,
  Football Licensing Authority,
  27 Harcourt House,
  19 Cavendish Square,
  London W1M 9AD,                                   22nd January 1992




  Thank you for sending the Football Committee a copy of the
  Licensing Authority's Draft Guidance on Safety Certificates which
^fias been read with much approval and interest.

  I enclose the Committee's response to this document, which I hope
  you will find of some value. Needless to say, as was evident from
  your highly successful (I thought!) recent visit to us, you know
  that there is a great deal of goodwill and support for the FLA
  amongst our members. I hope that our, hopefully, constructive
  comments will be accepted in that light.

  Thank you for the work you and the Committee have carried out so
  far within our national gams, I am sure it is a unanimously held
  view that football is better for your efforts!

  Many thanks for your attention to this, I look forward very much
  to seeing you again in the near future.


  Yours sincerely,




  Tom Pendry MP
  Chairman; The Parliamentary All-Party Football Committee.
