The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State for the Home Department



     SCRUTINY OF EVIDENCE RELATING TO THE HILLSBOROUGH
                 FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER


                                      REPORT

Introduction

1.     On 15 April 1989 an FA Cup semi-final soccer match between Liverpool and
       Nottingham Forest was to take place at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, the
       home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Play was stopped after six
       minutes when it became apparent that Liverpool spectators on the standing
       terrace behind one of the goals had been seriously crushed. Ninety-five
       people died and over 400 required hospital treatment. A ninety-sixth victim
       died in 1993.

2.    This tragic incident - in terms of deaths the worst in the history of British sport
      - occasioned a series of investigations and other proceedings. Lord Justice
      Taylor conducted a public inquiry, for which the West Midlands Police, acting
      as an independent investigating force, collected a massive amount of evidence.
      The Director of Public Prosecutions considered laying serious criminal
      charges against police officers and others. The Police Complaints Authority
      considered complaints which had been laid against the chief officer of the
      force and against other police on duty at the ground. There were Coroner’s
      inquests, whose conduct was itself later considered by the Divisional Court.

3.    On 30 June 1997 you appointed me to conduct a scrutiny into whether there is
      any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures
      and decisions that have been taken. My terms of reference are as follows:

       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;

               (a)    to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

               (b)    to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
                      General fo r the purpose o f discharging their respective
                      statutory responsibilities; or

               (c)    to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                      police disciplinary matters;
and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State fo r
the Home Department o f a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
(c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I now submit my report.

My report is divided into seven chapters, with Appendices. Chapter 1 sets
out the background to the Hillsborough disaster and the sequence of events
since. Chapter 2 deals with allegations about video evidence relating to the
disaster. Chapter 3 discusses allegations about the inquest and the rescue
operation following the disaster. Chapter 4 is about suggestions that improper
pressure has been put on witnesses to the disaster. Chapters 5 and 6 deal
with issues that have been put to me by the relatives of victims and some other
miscellaneous points. Chapter 7 summarises my findings.

I should like to record my sincere thanks to my secretary Chris Bone and my
Clerk Graham Catherall who have greatly assisted me throughout my scrutiny.
I should also like to thank Mike Ward who has also helped me from time to
time.
