                        Northern Regional Health Authority t:
                                      filnl /        1ul    "t"tl   I        v iV i         (i\


                             N O R T H U M B R I A A M B U L A N C E SERVICE



Tel: (091) 273 1212                                                                   Ambulance Headquarters,
Fax: (091) 273 7070                                                                   Interlink House,
                                                                                      Scotswood Road,
                                                                                      Newcastle upon Tyne.
                                                Our Ref:            LMC/DB            NE4 7BJ
                 Mr. L. M. Caple
Please ask for                                  Your Ref:

                 22nd May, 1989


                 The Honourable Mr. Justice Taylor,
                 The Hillsborough Inquiry,
                 Sheffield Town Hall,
                 Sheffield,
                 South Yorkshire.


                 Dear Sir,

                 I write on behalf of the Regional Ambulance Officers' Group who represent
                 the professional advisory group on Ambulance issues for the National
                 Health Service with membership drawn from all the English Health Regions,
                 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

                 At our meeting last week, we considered the evidence submitted by the
                 Association of Chief Ambulance Officers (copy enclosed) to your Inquiry
                 and resolved that we should write and endorse the recommendations made by
                 the Association.

                 It is our hope that your recommendations will include a strengthening of
                 Ambulance Service Involvement within the terms of the Safety at Sports
                 Ground Act.

                 Yours faithfully,




                 L. M. Caple
                 SECRETARY
                 REGIONAL AMBULANCE OFFICERS' GROUP
     Inquiry into the Hillsborough
           Stadium Disaster


              Subm ission by
The Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
                                         1



                                  Subm ission


1         The Association of Chief Ambulance Officers ("the Associa­
tion") wishes to subm it the following views concerning the needs
of safety at sports events in the light of the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster.

2.        The Association was founded in 1949 to, inter alia, prom ote
and maintain efficient and economical ambulance services within
the National Health Service. The sixty or so m em bers of the
Association comprise all of the Chief Ambulance Officers in post in
the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland and the Channel
Islands. The views expressed here are, however, directed at
matters within the United Kingdom.

 3.       The Association understands that ambulance service resources
 at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989 comprised thirty St. John's
    Ambulance Brigade personnel w ith two ambulances, and two
    officers from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Serv­
    ice ("SYMAS") w ith a similar num ber of ambulances and their
    crews.

    4.     N o direct information is available to the Association concern­
    ing contingency planning, first aid and casualty evacuation equip­
    ment, or life support training of stadium staff at Hillsborough.


    5.   In terms of ambulance service resources, if perhaps not other
    matters of medical provision, those at Hillsborough were greater,
    in the A s s o c i a t i o n 's experience, than are to be found at m any sports
    events which attract large crowds. W hether they were adequate,
    indeed whether medical resources as a whole were adequate, are,
     however, different questions.

     6.     That said, the adequacy of medical resources at Hillsborough
     is a question for the Inquiry to consider on the basis of evidence
     from those directly involved. The points which the Association
     wishes to raise are rather that:

             (a) if the resources were adequate, then that was essentially
             fortuitous;
         (b) if the resources were inadequate, the extent to which
         that situation might have been prevented would also have
         depended largely on chance.

7.     The reason w hy the Association takes this view lies in the
absence of statutory support for the provision of medical resources
comparable to that available to the police and fire services.


8.     The support referred to is that given by the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, as am ended by the Local Government Act 1985
and the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, ("the
Act").

9.    The Inquiry will know that safety certificates issued under
section 2 of the Act are required generally to "contain such terms and
conditions as the local authority consider necessary or expedient tosecure
reasonable safety". The section goes on to specify certain particular
requirements, including terms and conditions as to "the number,
size and situation of entrances to and exits from the stadium [or regulated
stand] or any part of it (including means of escape in case of fire or other
emergency) and the means of access to any such entrances or exits".


 10. On the face of it, section 2 of the Act w ould appear to embrace
 the possibility of a safety certificate including terms and conditions
 as to the provision of medical resources. In practice, however, the
 operation of section 2 is limited by the consultation provisions of
 section 3, and now sub-section (2A) of section 2 introduced by
 amendment. The requirement as to consultation extends only to
 "the chief officer of police and where the local authority is in Greater
 London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
 the building authority". Where a certificate contains a condition as
 to the provision of police services, the sub-section referred to
 reserves the extent of such provision "for the determination of the chief
 officer of police".


 11.     An incidental effect of these provisions is that they address
 the pocket of a "person concerned with the organisation or management
 of a sports stadium". Such a person can be compelled to lay out
 money on fire precautions and pay for the attendance of police
 officers. M oney is not necessarily the answer to everything—but
questions of funding police resources and fire precautions are in
this way answered to some degree.

12. The principal effect, however, is that the police and fire
services are given substantial "clout" in dealing w ith organisers or
managers. In terms of advance planning and equipm ent, as well
as levels of m anning and organisation on the day, police and fire
officers are in positions of authority from which to impose their
professional judgments in matters of public safety.

13.      N otw ithstanding that public safety is in the Association's
experience receiving more attention today than ever before, the
position is wholly otherwise with regard to ambulance services.
The chief ambulance officer has no part in the issue or refusal of a
safety certificate. He has no authority, and no m eans of compelling
an organiser or m anager to co-operate in the provision of medical
cover, let alone pay for it.

14.      This is not to say that the provision of ambulances and crews
on the day, or the general advice of ambulance officers, is entirely
neglected.

15. The St. John's Ambulance Brigade or the Red Cross are a
customary and welcome presence at almost every sporting and
similar event. Likewise, NHS ambulance services will often make
voluntary provision at larger events.


 16.     Again, there is some voluntary co-operation at local level.
 Am bulance services are able to advise m anagers and organisers in
 such m atters as first aid equipment, basic life support training for
 stadium staff, and the setting aside of facilities to receive casual­
 t i e s —and there are instances of such advice being taken and acted

 upon.

 17.     Nevertheless, the operative w ord is "voluntary". Thus the
 Association understands that SYMAS placed officers and ambu­
 lances at Hillsborough on its own initiative, while the St. John's
 Ambulance Brigade is of course an entirely voluntary organisa­
 tion.
                                 4



18. The fortuitous nature of things is in fact well illustrated by
w hat happened at Hillsborough. There are practical limits to the
num ber of ambulances and crews that can attend throughout an
event. A major incident will inevitably involve mobilising addi­
tional resources, and doing so quickly. It is the universal experi­
ence of the Association's members that the first problem faced by
the ambulance service in a major incident is the communication of
reliable information on which to base its response.

19. The Association understands that it was the two officers from
SYMAS w ho initiated mobilisation at Hillsborough. It was fortu­
nate indeed that they were present and in a position to do so. It
m ight be asked whether mobilisation was in any way handicapped
by the fact that the SYMAS officers w ere present voluntarily and
thus not at the centre of operations, for example in the police
com m and post. But be that as it may, the material point is that,
w hatever role the SYMAS officers were able to play, no means
currently exists of ensuring that professional officers will be in a
position to act similarily at future sports events.


20. As for the funding of ambulance resources, the Association
understands that SYMAS acted w ithout payment, while the St
John's Ambulance Brigade would have received no more than a
contribution to its expenses at the rate of £5 per 5,000 spectators,
thus around £35 in all. That is not a criticism of Sheffield W ednes­
day Football Club— at some events the brigade receives nothing at
all. But it can hardly be described as funding in any real sense.



21.   Having regard to the foregoing, the Association respectfully
invites the Inquiry to find:

       (a) that on-site medical resources, provided on the basis of
       professional advice and judgement, are an essential element
       in meeting the needs of safety at sports events; and


       (b) that the provision of such resources can only be secured
       by statutory means.
    r                                      5
%




        22.   The Association futher respectfully invites the Inquiry to
        recom m end am endm ent of the Act to provide:

               (a) in section 2 sub-section (2)(c) that a safety certificate
               shall include term s and conditions as to the provision of first
               aid facilities and training in use of the same;


               (b) in section 2 subsection (2A) that no condition of a safety
               certificate shall require the provision of the attendance at
               the ground of any members of an ambulance service unless
               the extent of the provision of their at tendance is reserved for
               the determination of the chief ambulance officer of the



               (c) in section 3 subsection (3) that the local authority shall
               send a copy of an application for a safety certificate to the
               chief ambulance officer for the area in question (and that
               accordingly the duty of the local authority to consult shall
                extend to such officer); and

                (d) for such further and consequential amendements as are
                appropriate.




                                   V N Jolliffe
                                   National Secretary
                                   Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
                                   Dorset Ambulance Service H eadquarters
                                   Ringwood Road
                                   St Leonards
                                   Ringwood, BH24 2SP


                                   5th May 1989
