    h s .7.4/taylor.peb


                                             cc   Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Hammond
                                                  HMCIC
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Turney
                                                  Mr Addison
                                                  Miss A Edwards
                                                  Mrs Catto
                                                  Mr C a n e ^
                                                  Mis&*«8<$ose
                                                  Mr Cogbill


    Mr Goddard



    TAYLOR REPORT:   POLICE ISSUES

    Thank you for your note of 26 June.         I have a number of
w   suggestions to contribute to the brief but because some of them
    relate to matters which are primarily the responsibility of other
    Divisions, I am afraid that they do not come in exactly the form
    in which you have asked for them. My contributions, in the order
    of the items listed in your note, are as follows.

    Closed Circuit Television (CCTV)

    A background note and line to take are annexed.

    Ground Commander Training

    I hope that in this context it will be possible to probe ACPO
    about the content of the proposed training.       Is there, for
    example, input about how spectator capacity is calculated by the
    club and the local authority for the purpose of the safety
    certificate? Or the importance of not taking police action which
    will cause the authorised capacity to be exceeded and the club
    to be in breach of the terms of its safety certificate? Or for
    means of egress to be available for use in emergency even if it
    is necessary for measures to be taken to prevent unauthorised
    ingress?  Or on the importance of the police not taking action
    unilaterally in relation to crowd measures at football grounds
    which may have implications for the terms and conditions of
    safety certificates?

    Is there a case for having the Home Office/local authority input
    to the training courses for this purpose?

    Football Supporters Clubs

    A background note and line to take are annexed.
Police Reserve

Will it be possible to consider either under this item or under
that on charging for police services the practice of police
forces in charging for reserve officers held outside the ground
against the possible need to deploy them inside or vice versa?
This has been raised with my Division as a source of grievance
on a number of occasions.   There ought to be a common practice
if clubs are not to feel that they are the victims of
discriminatory action.  There seems to be no case for requiring
clubs to pay for reserves held, whether inside or outside the
ground, to deal with trouble outside.

The Green Guide

A background note and line to take are annexed.




                                             P E BOLTON
                                             G2 Division



4 July 1990



Encs
    CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION (CCTV)

    Background Note

    Mr Anderton's letter provides a comprehensive description of the
    work which has gone into the production of the booklet which has
    now been published by the Police Scientific Development Branch
    of the Home Office on the procurement of closed circuit
    television for public safety at football grounds. A copy of the
    document is annexed for the Minister's information.

    Recommendation 35 of the Taylor final report was that closed
    circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd
    densities outside the ground within concourse areas and in pens
    and other standing areas to be monitored before throughout and
    the end of a match. Recommendation 51 included that there should
    be available in the police control room the results of all closed
    circuit television monitoring outside and inside the ground.

It will not be necessary to discuss the content of the document
which is well produced but it may be prudent to express concern
if police forces were to require all football clubs to install
CCTV regardless of need. The object of giving more money to the
f
Football Trust was to permit clubs to increase the level of
comfort and amenity for spectators.   We would not wish to see a
disproportionate amount of those funds diverted to the provision
of CCTV, particularly in some of the sparsely attended grounds
outside the football league, if it is not absolutely necessary.

    Line to take

    1.   Commend ACPO on their initiative in producing this guide.

    2.   Acknowledge that it should result in an improvement in the
    standards of CCTV coverage.

    3.   Stress the    importance of paragraph 2 of the guidance
    (assessing   the    risk   and  establishing the  operational
    requirement).

4.   Remind ACPO that the provision of CCTV equipment is only one
of the demands on the funds of the Football Trust which are still
limited despite the funds made available by the reduction in
Pools Betting Tax. We would not wish to see money wasted on CCTV
equipment for sparsely attended football grounds if it is not
absolutely necessary.

5.   We shall be taking steps ourselves to circulate the guidance
booklet to local authorities responsible for safety certificates
and to the local authorities associations.
FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' CLUBS

Background Note

Lord Ferrers will recall that when he met representatives of the
Football Supporters' Association and the National Federation of
Football Supporters' Clubs, some of the points that were raised
with him concerned the police. They included unjustified police
action to deal with enthusiastic behaviour by fans which did not
amount to misbehaviour or hooliganism; reluctance by local police
to agree to the removal of perimeter fences where there was no
realistic risk of crowd invasion of the pitch (eg in front of all
seated areas occupied by season ticket holders); and the danger
that high profile policing itself caused an anti-police feeling
amongst spectators which was more likely to cause trouble than
to avoid it.

It seems very desirable to encourage ACPO to provide an avenue
for these organisations to be able to express their worries and
concerns to the police direct. They may not see eye to eye with
ACPO on a number of issues but in our experience they are as
anxious as we are to see improvements in crowd behaviour and
improvements in conditions at football grounds.

Line to take

Pleased to note that ACPO have opened up avenues of discussion
with the Football Supporters' Association and the National
Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs.
THE GREEN GUIDE

Background Note

The ACPO note indicates that the Home Office are currently
revising the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide)
and that the views of ACPO have been sought.     ACPO's comments
have in fact now been received.     The technical working group
which the Home Office has set up to review the Green Guide has
already had its first meeting.         Commander Speed of the
Metropolitan Police attended to represent ACPO and we are
grateful to ACPO for their co-operation.

Line to take

1.   Say that we have now received ACPO's comments on the Green
Guide and that these will be taken into account during the course
of the current review.

2.   Say that the technical working group which has been set up
to review the Green Guide had its first meeting last week
(2 July) which was attended by Commander Speed.

3.   We are very grateful to ACPo for their co-operation.
