                                    South Yorkshire Pollcm
                                                                                /A/'
PRESS                               poue*      m ia o o u a « t i m
                                    •h » o h j l l
                                    •M IP P I1U 3 U t L Y
                                                                                /K t
                                                                                       .
                                                                                           * i< s S 5
                                                                                           N oiuus

R E LE A S E                        TlW iPH O N i (07*1) 7SSI12
                                    T«U«XM9tM
                                                                           \
                                                                            J
                                                                                tf M U t
                                                                                 nsfAoVM.
                                                                                 / K r S&zUis)
                                                                                  m r <SmcH--
                                                                      4 August 1989


   STATEMENT OF PETER WRIGHT, CHIEF CONSTABLE, SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE.
   IH RESPONSE TO THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY REPORT

   The report of the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor has been received by
   &e. and I have noted the criticisms that have been directed against
   members of the South Yorkshire Police both individually and collectively.

   To make it clear to all concerned X would say at the outset that I
   accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry insofar as they
   relate to the South Yorkshire Police.

   The fact that we are held to have contributed to the terrible tragedy
   of Hillsborough is a matter of profound sadness to all aeabers of
   fores, and both personally and on their behalf I once again extend my
   heartfelt regret to those who have lost loved ones or suffered Injury.

   Lord Justice Taylor and all .concerned may be assured that the South
   Yorkshire Police will pursue every action available to then to ensure
   that such an event could not occur again.     I am grateful for the
   consents he has made regarding the manner in which the Force has
   handled crowd control and public order events generally and for his
   recognition of the heroic efforts of many of my officers on the day.

   The Home Secretary has asked me for a report on the action I propose
   to take in the light of the Inquiry and this will be pursued. Before
   responding to the Home Secretary it will be necessary for me to consult
   with members of my Police Authority, the Director of Public Prosecutions,
   the Police Complaints Authority, and others.

   Ir. ay report to the Police Authority on 21 April 1989 I Indicated that
   I accepted full responsibility for police action in connection with
   this event. In pursuance of this responsibility, and in the light of
   Lord Justice Taylor's findings, I have written to my Chairman and
   offered ay resignation to the Police Authority so that members will
   have the opportunity to consider my continuance as Chief Constable,
   and my Office is now at their disposal.




   Embargoed until 1.00 pm, A August 1989
