I




    E.R                                                                       r>
          Note for the record                 cc   Mr Boys-Smith
                                                   Mr Addison
                                                   Miss Ransford
                                                   Mr Durbin o.r
                                                   Mr Thompson
                                                   Mr Scholey


          HILLSBOROUGH: PAYHENT OF SPECIAL GRANT

          Mr Brook (Treasury) discussed with me my letter of 25 August
          about the mechanics for paying special grant to the South
          Yorkshire Police Authority. Given the comparatively small amount
          required for the first tranche of special grant (£120k) Mr Brook
          doubted whether it would be proper to adopt the emergency measure
          envisaged at paragraph 4(c) of my letter. Such a procedure was
          unusual, and could well attract the attention of the Public
          Accounts Committee.    He thought it far better, if we could so
          manage, to rely on option (b) described in the same paragraph.

          2.   There is no problem about our making early payments of the
          51% specific grant share of the bill. We can therefore arrange,
    *     as soon *as we wish, to make that payment to South Yorkshire
          either at the time we provide our normal monthly advance of grant
          or at any other time of the month.     This would imply that we
          could tell South Yorkshire that we are ready to make an initial
          payment as soon as they have made their first payment to West
          Midlands. The initial payment would represent 51% of the total
          invoice.   We would make it clear that the balance (ie £126 k)
          would be paid over as soon as we have announced the arrangements
          to Parliament (when it reassembles early in November) and have
          the necessary authority to pay the special grant (the special
          grant would be paid from the contingencies fund, to be repaid in
          due course through a supplementary estimate.)
          3.   Following Mr Boys-Smith' letter of 31 August, the ball is
          for the moment in South Yorkshire's court.     We should not pay
          over any of the grant due on the West Midlands invoice until we
          know that South Yorkshire are definitely going to pay it.      I
          think it might be helpful if Police Department could be in touch
          with South Yorkshire, perhaps later this week, to find out how
          they are proposing to react to Mr Boys-Smith' letter and what
          their plans are for dealing with the West Midlands invoice. Once
          we have that information, Finance Division 2 will, as promised,
          make the arrangements with South Yorkshire for payment of the
          initial tranche of extra grant.

          4.   In the event that South Yorkshire claim to be so short of
          money that they cannot reimburse West Midlands without receiving
          the entire Home Office payment due to them, we shall need to
          consider the matter further.     The Treasury would however be
          reluctant to see us advance the entire amount of grant due on
          the initial invoice before there is Parliamentary authority.


          FINANCE DIVISION 2                       N A   n I&LER
          4 September 1989
