SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM                                                   _________
                                      For the attention of               Your
  To                                                                     Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer
                                      Please contact                     Our    06/2/2
 From     StnO Swain J. 274
                                      Tei.                               Ref.   JS/MR
          Rivelin Valiev

          Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium               Date
Subject
          on the 15th April 1989                                                17.4.89




          On the 15th April 1989, I was Officer in Charge of Rivalin One
          appliance when we were mobilised to a major incident at Sheffield
          Wednesday Football Club.  On receipt of the call at 1516 hours, I
          proceeded to the Leppings Lane end of the ground. On arrival I was
          unable to enter nearer than the iron railings at that end of the
          ground because of the large numbers of police, public and ambulances
          at the site.  I contacted control and requested that Darnall Road
          appliances attend at Penistone Road end.

          As I dismounted from the appliance to speak to a police inspector at
          the gate and an immediate request was made for a resuscitator in the
          rear of the ambulance which we applied.

          I asked the inspector what he wanted me to do and he attempted to
          contact his superior by radio but with no success.

          I then sent Fm        down the road at tl.e rear of the stand to
          attempt to find a more senior police officer.   He returned to inform
          me the most senior officer down there was a sergeant.   Further
          conversations were made between myself and the police inspector as to
          his requirements and at ons stage he wa3 of the opinion that our
          services were no longer required.

          I then sent L/Fm           and 1 Fm to look onto the pitch whilst the
          inspector made further attempts to contact his superiors.

          A police officer then emerged from the ground in some state of shock
          requesting resuscitators to be taken into the ground as there were
          dying people on the pitch.  In view of this message I contacted
          control by radio and made pumps 10 for resuscitation equipment.

          At this time ADO Robjohns arrived and I briefed him of the situation
          and he took of over the incident at this stage.

           He then went into the ground to assess the situation for himself and
           left me at the gate to lease with oncoming crews.  I then directed
           five crews to the ground as instructed by ADO Robjohns and DO
           Lockwood.  I also directed some ambulances to the Penistone Road end
           of the ground in the absence of anybody knowing the ambulance
           requirements and Mr Robjohns repeated requests for ambulances to be
           sent to that side of the ground.  I then sent with DO Lockwood and
           ACO Hornsby into the ground and cleared five crews from the pitch
           back to their appliances as there was some concern that the crowd was
           getting restless.
i


                                                                            46
    I cleared all personnel from the pitch and then went to the gymnasium
    to prevent further personnel from going onto the pitch until
    instructed to do so.  I then returned to my appliance and returned to
    base at 1730 hours.




    StnO Swain J. 274
    Rivelin Valley
