NOTE OF A MEETING ON THURSDAY 4 JANUARY AT 11am WITH THE BRITISH
GREYHOUND RACING BOARD


Present

Mr Whalley            Mr Cearns, Chairman NGRC Promoters Ltd
Mr Sweet              Mr James, Secretary NGRC Promoters Ltd
Mrs Wither            Mr Littlewood, Managing Director Owlerton
                        (Sheffield) Stadium

                      Mr Newhouse, Chief Executive, BGRB
                      Ms Soames, Parliamentary & Political
                        Consultant, BGRB



Mr Newhouse said that most of the points they wished to make were
contained in their letters of 8 and 29 December and memorandum.
Basically, until Hillsborough, the Greyhound Racing Board was
given guidance by the Green Guide and the Home Office advisory
circular to Licensing Authorities 96/88.    However since the
publication of the Interim Report, the local authorities have
been following the recommendations of the Report untempered by
either the Green Guide, HO circular or the particular needs of
greyhound racing.    As a result of this strict interpretation, the
Sheffield Owlerton stadium was closed down for a period.


2.   Mr Whalley pointed out that recommendations in the Final
Report would subsume earlier recommendations in the Interim
Report.     It would be up to the Government to decide whether to
accept Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.     It was therefore
necessary for the BGRB to make their point to the Home Office.
But he would be pleased to pass on to Lord Justice Taylor points
which the BGRB wanted to make to him.


First Aid


3.   Mr Littlewood cited the example of Sheffield as it had been
taken as a guide by other local authorities.     At Owlerton the
capacity limit is 1480 but, even so, it was put to the General
Purposes Panel to decide whether an ambulance was necessary.
They decided it was not.
4.   Regarding the recommendation that a medical practitioner
should be present at each match, Mr Littlewood said it had taken
them two weeks to find a GP and apart from being costly (£28 per
hour + VAT), it was difficult to find a suitably qualified doctor
who was available for four hours, three nights a week.       He said
at certain crowd levels this was advisable but at under 2,000, it
was an unnecessary imposition.


5.   Mr Newhouse said there was ample first aid already and that
while the Borough of Merton did not think it was required at
Wimbledon Stadium they wondered whether they should apply the
5,000 criteria.     He said because of football sports grounds,
greyhound racing was singled out for special requirements while
at the Crucible Theatre where 2,000 attend, two first aiders was
felt to be sufficient.


6.   Mr Littlewood also said that when the SYMAS representative
came to look at the first aid room at Owlerton which is a 100ft2
the representative said it was adequate apart from needing three
blankets and redecoration.     However,   10 days before the Safety
Certificate was granted, a SYMAS representative and the Council's
Health and Consumer Services representative said that the room
was not big enough and that if a Certificate was to be granted,
they would have to guarantee to submit plans within 28 days for a
room of 250ft2 to be built.     However he checked the football
grounds in Sheffield and found Sheffield Wednesday had a room of
234ft2 but Sheffield United had a room of only 60ft2 .      Mr
Newhouse said he was concerned that requirements at Sheffield
would be taken as guidelines in other areas.


7.   Mr Jones said the London Ambulance Service had asked the
Wimbledon ground to enter an agreement exonerating the
consequences of the actions or non-actions of their employees but
they declined to agree.     The Ambulance Service also want the
ground to undertake to insure the effects of indemnity for £50
million.     They said that they would adopt the wording agreed by
SYMAS.     However, so far, the question of indemnity has not been
mentioned by Sheffield.
Greyhound Racing Statistics


8.    Mr Cearns said th^re are 35 NGRC tracks and 54 independent
tracks throughout Britain.       The 54 are content for the NGRC to
negotiate on their behalf.       The annual attendance at 89 tracks is
5.4 million.     There are 10,800 meetings with an average
attendance of 500 people.     There are less than 40 occasions in
each year where attendances at any one meeting exceed 5,000.          At
NGRC tracks the average attendance in 1988 was 811 with averages
of 660 in the provinces and 2,000 at the four London evening
tracks.     Public house restrictions apply to the provision of
refreshment and alcohol.     The racegoers are either sitting down,
having a meal, in the bar, placing a bet, or moving from place to
pla ce .


9.    The average number of bookmakers at the four London evening
racecourses is 15, with an average of eight bookmakers standing
at NGRC     provincial tracks.


10.   Mr James said Wimbledon was originally built for 25,000
capacity but they would not contemplate that now and they are
trying to get a 13,000 capacity agreed.       There are 5,000 seats
but occasionally a handful of racegoers also sit on wooden
terraces.     The average attendance is 2,000 so there are ample
seats available.     Four or five times a year there are more than
5,000 attending.


11.   The racegoers are constantly moving up and down and
laterally but under no circumstances were they allowed on to the
track (the border of which is marked by a very low fence of
2ft6inches.)     There are close circuit television sets throughout
the stadium and at Wimbledon some racegoers only watch the race
by television.     They pointed out that in 60 years there had never
been a crowd disaster or incident which had led to death or
injury to patrons.


12.   At the Derby final in Wimbledon there are 12,000 present.
Special provisions made in consultation with the local
authorities apply in these circumstances.
Safety


13.   Mr James said in 1975 a special services agreement was made
at Wimbledon with the police to come to every event.    This ran
for 12 years but the police declined to renew it as the crowd
behaviour was exemplary and they felt no policing objectives were
used by attending and their resources were better employed
elsewhere.    However, at large events, they ask the police to look
in and they generally do so.


14.   Mr Whalley asked if, for a crowd of 12,000, there would be
any problems about stewarding or crowd control.


15.   Mr James said that the stewarding would be multiplied for
big events and that their own safety team would be supplemented
by other stewards.    They sometimes borrow the safety team of
Wimbledon FC in these circumstances.    The stewards are generally
of working age and work in the evening to supplement their
income.    They must be regular in attendance and complete the
training courses.


16.   London Fire Brigade has provided training in basic fire
fighting and all stewards hold a Fire Brigade Certificate.
London Ambulance Service also train and award St John First Aid
Certificates.    Mr Whalley then asked about training in crowd
control and Mr James said the safety team came in for advance
familiarisation and briefing and were given written instructions.


17.   Mr Whalley asked how much of the stadium was wooden and
whether there was any fire risk.    However, Mr Cearns said that
after Bradford all grounds had been inspected by the local
authorities for their Safety Certificates and this was not a
problem.


18.   Mr Littlewood said that Sheffield stadium was as big as
Wembley and had been built in the 1940s to hold 39,000.    A limit
of 4,000 was imposed after Bradford but the limit was now 1480 4-
- 400 on the first floor;    200 on the lower floor and 880 on the
terrace.   The Council said that since there was unrestricted
access from terrace to bar, they should apply a 400 limit to the
whole stadium.   Unless control of numbers was imposed, they would
apply 400 capacity.   As a result they published different
coloured programmes for each area to prevent overcrowding and
posted a steward between each area.


19.   Sufficient bookmakers had to be provided under statute and
the track decided where the bookmakers should be situated.      They
were usually on the home and back straight but not on the bends.
The only crowding would be round the bookmakers who were regular
with a permanent pitch.   Tote machines outnumbered bookmakers by
three to one and were situated throughout the ground.


Green Guide


20.   Mr James asked that one single document be recommended to
provide guidelines in future in order to avoid confusion.    Mr
Whalley said that the Technical Working Party to the Inquiry had
been looking at ways in which the Green Guide could be
strengthened and clarified.   The BGRB welcomed this.
