                                 '   *                                              r                                                  ,    : •

■■ A      -       ....                   ..... . ■ :
                     •. :■           - '           ■.   -1   ■   . 1.   -   - ' -       ~        ».        '!•-   k-   •'   .    ' ; • ■    -     '

                                                                                            ■ ’V.5 V ' '
   ■ ■„       .              .                                                                                                                        :.V
              _

                                                                                                                                           H o m e O ffice
                                                                                                                                    QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                                                                                      LONDON SWIH 9AT

                                                                                                                                273 2798

R U Whalley Esq
'Secretary •
Inquiry into the Hillsborough
  Stadium ■Disaster :
50 Que^n A n n e »s Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                                                                                                 24 May 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Thank you for your letter of 23 May inviting the Home Office to
make a submission in writing to the Inquiry.  We propose to make
such a submission.  We aim to get it to you by 12 June, but it
may take us a few days longer than that to do so.
Or
         INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                          15 APRIL 1989




                      HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE

               SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS EVENTS




Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE : Safety and Control at Sports Events



Foreword



     This constitutes the response of the Home Office to the
Inquiry's request for written evidence.     We understand   that what
the Inquiry would find most helpful at this stage is a factual
account of the provisions and operation of the Safety at Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and its relationship to other relevant
legislation, together with a commentary on the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (the "Green Guide").     Also included is an account
of policing and crowd control issues.


     If the Inquiry would like further information on any point
the Home Office will of course provide it where it can.




A H TURNEY
Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
12 June 1988
CONTENTS                                             Paragraph No.


PART I - BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT
Introduction                                         1
Popplewell Inquiry                                   5
The Legislation                                      7


PART II - THE SCOPE AND OPERATION OF THE SAFETY
           OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)
General                                              19
Fire Safety and Safety of Places
 of Sport Act 1987                                   20
Designation under the 1975 Act                       21
Safety Certificates                                  24
Appeals                                              33
Offences                                             36
Serious risk to spectators                           41
Duty of enforcement                                  44
Exercise by local authorities of
 their powers and duties                             45
Other powers of the Secretary of State               48
Power to modify the 1975 Act                         52
Statutory Guidance by the Secretary of State         53


PART III - FIRE AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
General                                              54
Regulated Stands                                     55
Statutory Guidance under Part III                    57
Regulations under Part III                           58


PART IV - THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS   (THE GREEN GUIDE)
Origins                                              59
Application of the Guide                             62
Popplewell Inquiry                                   64
Revised Guide                                        65
Other developments                                   67
Pitch Perimeter Fencing                              68
Crush Barriers                                       69
PART V - CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING
Introduction                                              71
The Criminal Law                                          78
The Courts                                                93
The Police                                                95
Responsibility for Crowd Control at
     Football Matches                                    105
Control on admission                                     110
Matches overseas - restriction orders                    121


ANNEXES


Annex A:     Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Venues
             Consultative document Home Office/Scottish Office
Annex B:     Home Office Circular No 71/1987
Annex C:     The Safety of Sports Grounds      (Designation) Orders
Annex D:     Home Office Circular No 72/1987
Annex E:     Safety at Sports Grounds Managers' Guide
Annex F:     Home Office Circular No 96/1988
Annex G:     Home Office Circular No 97/1988
Annex H:     Home Office Circular No 7/1986
Annex J :    Home Office Circular No 68/1988


ENCLOSURES
Guide to     Safety at Sports Grounds (1973)
Guide to     Safety at Sports Grounds (Football)     (1976)
Guide to     Safety at Sports Grounds (1986)
PART I


BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT


Introduction


1.   Specific legislation in the form of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) for securing the safety of
spectators at sports events was introduced to implement the main
recommendations of the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at
Sports Grounds by Lord Wheatley (Cmnd 4952) set up after an
accident at Ibrox Park, Glasgow, when 66 people died.      The terms
of reference for that Inquiry were:


     "To make an independent appraisal of the effectiveness of
     existing arrangements for crowd safety at sports grounds in
     Great Britain, and of the improvements which could be
     brought about within the (then) present framework of the
     law: and to consider the nature of any alterations in the
     law which appear to be needed."


2.   The   accident had no relation to   crowd misbehaviour, but
resulted simply from an unexpected revived interest in the game
when a goal was scored after substantial numbers of spectators
had already begun to leave the stadium, and then turned back.
Previously the only major soccer stadium disaster since the war
had been at Burden Park, Bolton, on 9 March 1946 when 3 3 people
died and many more were injured.    The cause of that incident was
essentially over-crowding and crowd pressure which caused crush
barriers to collapse (Report by R Moelwyn Hughes KC Cmd 6846).


3.   The   main concern of the Wheatley Report was with crowd
safety in the context of the hazards     of uncontrolled crowd
movement, with the measures appropriate for mitigating such
risks, and with a regulatory system to ensure that necessary
safety measures were taken.


4.   The statutory framework of the 1975 Act, providing for local
authority certification of designated stadia,     follows broadly the
pattern outlined in the Wheatley Report; and the specific range
of detailed safety measures     (relating to such matters as
gradients, crush barriers, gangways and flow-rates)       in the
accompanying Technical Report formed the basis of the (non-
statutory) guidance subsequently incorporated in the initial
version of the Guide to Safety     at Sports Grounds, the "Green
Guide" first published in 1973     (see Part I V ) .


Popplewell Inquiry


5.   The fire at Valley Parade     Football Ground, Bradford,      on 11
May 1985 led to an examination     of sports ground safety by the
Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
Grounds led by Mr Justice Popplewell      (Interim Report Cmnd 9585,
Final Report Cmnd 9710).


6.   The Popplewell Inquiry commented that the 1975 Act had been
operating satisfactorily at designated grounds but recommended
changes to make the legislation more effective and for the
extension of safety controls.     The Government's response was
published in a Consultative Document in June 1986 (see Annex A)
(including proposals for changes to the Fire Precautions Act
1971), which was subsequently reflected in the changes brought
about by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.


The Legislation


7.   The position found by the Wheatley Inquiry is set out in
detail in paragraphs 13 - 18 of its Report:       in essence it was
that the patchwork of legislation then existing might have
provided some protection for spectators but was inadequate.           The
procedure set up by the football associations requiring clubs
with a ground capacity of over 10,000 to submit an annual
inspection certificate and the voluntary consultations which took
place with the police over attendance levels were also considered
by Lord Wheatley to be defective, despite what was acknowledged
as the generally responsible approach of the clubs and football
authorities.   The present day position is summarised below.
Outdoor sports events


8.    The main controls for securing safety of spectators at
outdoor sports grounds are those imposed by the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) and the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987      (the 1987 A c t ) .     Part II of the 1987
Act amended the 1975 Act with effect from 1 January 1988            (see
paragraph 20 be lo w ) .


9.    Part III of the 1987 Act, which came into force on 1 January
1989, is free standing of the 1975 Act.             It introduces a system
of safety controls at sports grounds which are not designated
under section 1 of the 1975 Act       (see paragraphs 54-58 below).


10.   Both the 1975 Act and Part III of the 1987 Act apply only to
outdoor sports grounds defined as:


      "any place where sports or other competitive activities take
      place in the open air and where accommodation has been
      provided for spectators consisting of artificial structures
      or natural structures artificially modified for that
      purpose".


(The Acts apply to England, Wales and Scotland but do not apply
to Northern Ireland.       The 1975 Act and Part III of the 1987 Act
do not apply to the Scilly Isles but may be extended to do so by
Order of the Secretary of State.)


Indoor sports events


11.   Public entertainments held indoors such as music and
dancing, have for some time been the subject of a separate system
of licensing under the London Government Act 1963 and the Local
Government   (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982.           (In Scotland,
the current legislation is the Civic Government (Scotland) Act
1982).


However, certain specified exceptions apart, the licensing
regime, administered by District Councils or London Borough
Councils did not extend to indoor sports.      Part IV of the 1987
Act changed this with effect from 1 June 1988 by extending the
licensing requirement to any premises used for sporting events to
which the public are invited as spectators.    Except where sports
complexes are concerned, a licence is only required if the sports
event which constitutes the entertainment is the principal
purpose for which the premises are being used.     Licensing
authorities may attach such terms and conditions as they think
fit.


Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974


12.    Separate evidence will be submitted by the Health and Safety
Executive   (HSE) of technical aspects of spectator safety at
sports grounds   (eg. safety of crush barriers).   The HSW Act could
also be used to enforce general spectator safety at sports
grounds.    Section 3 of the HSW Act is wide-ranging in that it
places a duty on an employer to conduct his undertaking in such a
way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that
persons not in his employment who may be affected thereby are not
exposed to risks to their health or safety.    A sports or other
entertainment 'undertaking' would fall within this category.
However, it is the stated policy of the Health and Safety
Commission that, as a general principle, they and the Executive
wish to avoid duplication of enforcement with other authorities.
The HSE would not therefore generally attempt to enforce the
requirements of section 3 of the 1974 Act when they overlap with
duties imposed by other more specific legislation where other
authorities have responsibility for policy and enforcement.       The
Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 represents more specific
legislation and HSE does not enforce section 3 of the HSW Act to
secure the safety of spectators at sports grounds.     This
arrangement is agreed between HSE and the Home Office.


13.    In practice HSE are concerned primarily with the health and
safety of employees at a sports ground (eg players, ground staff,
contractors) using Section 2 of the HSW Act.     HSE would normally
take the lead on the protection of spectators from the effects of
the event taking place in the arena (eg stock car and motor
racing).    HSE also have policy and enforcement responsibilities
at sports events held elsewhere than at a sports ground defined
under the 1975 Act     (eg motor cycle scrambles).


Building Act 1984


14.   Section 71 of the Building Act 1984 makes provision for
local building authorities (District Councils and London Borough
Councils)   to take action in respect of ingress and egress,
gangways and passages after consultation with the fire authority.
As identified by the Wheatley Inquiry (paragraph 13 of the report
in relation to the provisions of section 59 of the Public Health
Act 1936) the extent to which these powers can be applied to open
terracing in sports grounds is open to question.     Provision is
also contained in sections 77 and 78 for a local authority to
take action to make safe buildings which appear to be in a
dangerous condition.


15.   In practice, whereas Building Act powers may have been used
occasionally in respect of sports grounds they are in general not
needed because of the specific powers contained within the 1975
Act   (which provides for the exclusion of sections 24 and 71 of
the Building Act to a sports ground or stand which is the subject
of a safety certificate).


Fire Precautions Act 1971


16.   The Fire Precautions Act 1971 (1971 Act)   (as amended by the
Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 and the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987),    is the main legislative
instrument for controlling fire safety in occupied buildings in
Great Britain.   It is intended to provide for the protection of
persons from the risk of fire and its central feature is the
requirement for occupiers of premises, put to uses designated by
order of the Secretary of State, to obtain a fire certificate
from the local fire authority.


17.   Under the Act a use of premises can be designated if it
falls within at least one of the following classes of use: as, or
for, any purpose involving the provision of sleeping
accommodation; as, or as part of, an institution providing
treatment or care? for purposes of entertainment, recreation or
instruction or for purposes of any club, society or association;
for purposes of teaching, training or research; for any purpose
involving access to the premises by members of the public,
whether on payment or otherwise; or as a place of work.


18.   The provisions of the 1971 Act could therefore be applied to
buildings, such as stands at sports grounds.   However it was
always recognised that the burden certification would impose on
fire authorities and those to be certificated meant that a policy
of selective designation would have to be followed, having regard
to the classes of occupancy which had given rise to significant
fire casualties.   In the case of sports grounds it has also been
recognised that fire safety for spectators could be achieved
through the general provisions for spectator safety contained in
the 1975 and 1987 Acts set up specifically for that purposes.
PART II
THE SCOPE AND OPERATION OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
(AS AMENDED)


General


19.   The main provisions of the 1975 Act     (as amended by Part II
of the 1987 Act) are -


      a.     A power, exercisable by the Secretary of State by
order,to designate sports grounds which in his opinion have
accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators.       Once designated,
a ground will require a general safety certificate from the local
authority.


      b.   A power for the Secretary of State to vary the
             threshold figure of 10,000.


      c.   An obligation on the local authority to issue a general
             safety certificate, and a discretionary power to issue
             a special safety certificate (see paragraph 25 below).


      d.   A discretion for the local authority to set terms and
             conditions in the certificate which are necessary or
             expedient to secure reasonable safety at the ground.


      e.   A right of appeal to the courts,    in relation to the
             issue of safety certificates and their contents, the
             procedure for which is set out in regulations made
             under the Act.


      f.   Rights of the police and either fire authorities or
             building authorities, to consultation, access to
             grounds and information and to appeal against terms and
             conditions in safety certificates.
      g.    A power to local certificating authorities to
            restrict or prohibit the admission of spectators to a
            sports ground (or any part of it) if there is a serious
            risk to spectators.


      h.    Powers of entry and inspection to sports grounds; and
            prescribed offences.


      i.    A duty on local certificating authorities to enforce
            the provisions of the Act and arrange annual
            inspections of designated sports grounds.


Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act)


20.   Part II of the 1987 Act amended the 1975 Act in the
following ways:-


      *(a) The distinction between a sports "stadium" and sports
            "ground" originally made in the 1975 Act was abolished
            (section 19 of the 1987 A c t ) .   This resulted in
            consequential amendment to section 2 of the 1975 Act
            which no longer provides for mandatory terms and
            conditions and the insertion of a new section 15A which
            enables modification of the 1975 Act to be made in
            respect of different classes of sports ground.


      (b)   A new power was given for the Secretary of State to
            vary the 10,000 threshold at which a sports ground may
            be designated (section 20 of the 1987 A c t ) .


      (c)   Where safety certificates contain terms/conditions on
            police presence at a sports ground specific provision
            was made for the extent of that presence to be reserved
            for determination by the relevant Chief Police Officer
            (section 21 of the 1987 A c t ) .


      (d)   All appeals were re-directed from the Secretary of
            State to the courts    (section 22).
      *(e) A new power was given to local certificating
            authorities to issue (subject to a right of appeal to
            the courts) a notice prohibiting or restricting the
            admission of spectators to a ground, or part(s) of it,
            if there is a serious risk to their safety (sections 23
            and 24 of the 1987 A c t ) .   This power replaced the
            earlier emergency procedure.


      *(f) A duty was placed on local certificating authorities to
            enforce the 1975 Act's provisions and, for that
            purpose, to arrange inspections of designated grounds
            at least once a year in accordance with any guidance by
            the Secretary of State (section 25 of the 1987 A c t ) .


All these changes came into effect from 1st January 1988.            Home
Office Circular 71/1987     (see Annex B) introduced these provisions
to local authorities.


* Denotes a recommentation of the Popplewell Inquiry


Designation under the 1975 Act


21.   The power to designate a sports ground with accommodation
for over 10,000 spectators as requiring a safety certificate is
exercised by the Secretary of State by order subject to the
negative resolution procedure of Parliament.        For Scotland this
is done by the Secretary of State for Scotland.         For Wales, the
Secretary of State for Wales has been content that designation of
Welsh grounds should be covered in the same designation order as
English grounds.    That order is made by the Home Secretary.


22.   A summary of the effects of designation of a ground on the
ground operator is summarised below.


      (a)   The management must apply for a safety certificate and
            no spectators may be admitted until such an application
            is made (s. 1(1) and s.12 (l)(a)).
        (b)   An applicant must furnish the local authority with
              appropriate information in order for a safety
              certificate to be issued (s.3 (4)(5) and s.12 (l)(a)).


        (c)   The holder of the safety certificate must comply with
              its terms and   conditions (s.12 (l)(d)).


        (d)   The holder   is required to give access for entry and
              inspection   of the premises and records (s.12   (6)(d)).


        (e)   The holder   is required to inform the issuing authority
              of any proposed changes which are likely to affect
              spectator safety (s.8 (1) and s.12 (6)(c)).


        (f)   If the owner/occupier is aggrieved by the inclusion or
              omission of a particular clause in a certificate he has
              the right to appeal within certain time limits
              (s.5(3)).


A breach of the requirements at (a) to (e) above can lead to the
commission of an offence under s.12 of the Act.


23.     Designation was initially applied in phases, beginning with
major international stadia       (eg Wembley, Twickenham)   and grounds
used by football clubs in Division 1 of the Football League.           The
second phase in 1979 extended designation to grounds used by
clubs in Division 2 of the Football League.        Thereafter, until
1985 grounds of clubs promoted to Division 2 were designated each
year.    The fire at Valley Parade, Bradford led to the extension
of designation to all football league and rugby league grounds
able to accommodate over 10,000 spectators.        Designation was
later extended still further to all football grounds (ie "non-
league" grounds), rugby union, rugby league and cricket grounds
identified as having accommodation for over 10,000 spectators
(Popplewell Inquiry, Final Report, recommendation 2).          A list of
designated grounds is at Annex C.
Safety certificates

24.      The main instrument of control under the Act is the safety
certificate issued by the local authority.      A general safety
certificate is needed in respect of every ground which is the
subject of a designation order.      The certificate enables the
local authority to impose such terms and conditions as are
necessary or expedient to ensure a reasonable standard of safety
at the ground in question.


25.      Safety certificates are of two kinds, general and special.
A general safety certificate is the main continuing form of
control and is issued for an indefinite period in respect of a
specified activity or activities regularly taking place at the
ground.     A special safety certificate may be issued at the
discretion of the local authority for a special event or other
circumstances not covered by the general safety certificate.
Such an event might be an evangelistic rally which might call for
special arrangements if, for example, seating were provided for
the congregation on the playing area.      A special safety
certificate can be issued only in respect of a sports ground for
which a general safety certificate is already in force.


26.   Designation of a sports ground by the Secretary of State
requires the occupier to apply for a general safety certificate
if spectators are to be admitted to the ground.      The local
authority must then determine if the applicant is a "qualified
person"     (ie someone who is likely to be in a position to prevent
contravention of the terms and conditions of a safety
certificate), and if they do so determine they must issue a
general safety certificate.      In this respect the general safety
certificate is different from a fire certificate issued under the
Fire Precautions Act 1971: the latter is issued only after
necessary safety works have been completed, whilst the safety
certificate under the 1975 Act can be issued almost from the
outset and is an instrument of continuing control.      (In practice
local authorities and clubs often discuss arrangements for safety
and set voluntary crowd limits until remedial work is carried
out) .
The issue of a special safety certificate, however, is left to
the discretion of the local authority because only they can judge
whether it is appropriate to issue it for the special occasion in
question.


Local certificating authorities consultation


27.   The local authorities in England and Wales responsible for
the issue of safety certificates were, until April 1986, the
county, and metropolitan county councils and the GLC.       They were
required to consult the police and the local authority
responsible for building control    (the building authority) about
the contents of safety certificates.     Following local government
reorganisation in 1986 certificating responsibilities under the
1975 Act in London and the metropolitan county areas were
transferred under section 16 and schedule 8 paragraph 7 of the
Local Government Act 1985 to the London borough councils and the
metropolitan district councils    (who are building authorities).
As a result the consultation requirement was also changed, so
that in London and metropolitan county areas the certificating
authority is required to consult the police and the fire
authority.     Elsewhere the certificating authority,   ie the county
councils,    is also the fire authority: the requirement there is
for the police and building authority to be consulted.       These
changes were circulated to local authorities, joint fire
authorities,    chief fire officers and chief officers of police by
Home Office circular 7/1986 which included advice on
certification and the 1975 Act as it then was (see Appendix H ) .


Modification/cancellation/transfer of certificates


28.   The local authority has power to amend or replace a safety
certificate; and, by the same token, the holder can apply to the
authority for amendment or replacement.


29.   The only circumstances in which an authority can cancel a
safety certificate is if the holder dies or (if the holder is a
body corporate)   is dissolved.   But the holder of a safety
certificate can surrender the certificate to the local authority,
and then it ceases to have effect.


30.   Similar procedures to those for applications for a safety
certificate apply to the transfer of a safety certificate.     An
application may be made by the existing holder or the prospective
new holder.    The issuing authority has to determine if the new
holder is a qualified person and, if so, there is discretion
given to the authority to transfer the certificate.    The
authority has to copy the transfer application to the appropriate
Chief Officer of Police and either the building authority or the
fire authority (see paragraph 27 above).


Alterations to certificated stadia


31.   The holder of a safety certificate must give notice to the
local authority of any proposals for alterations or extensions to
the stadium if such works are likely to affect the safety of
spectators.    This requirement is particularly aimed at
alterations to exits or entrances including means of escape in
the event of an emergency.


Procedures and fees


32.   The procedures and time limits for applications for general
and special safety certificates are set out in the Safety of
Sports Grounds Regulations 1987   (SI No 1987/1941); these include
provision for the local authority to have discretion to charge
fees for the issue of safety certificates at a level that covers
the administrative costs.


Appeals


33.   There are four decisions by the local certificating
authority against which an appeal may lie:-


      (a)   Determination by the local authority that an applicant
            for a safety certificate is not a "qualified person" -
            (s.5 (1)).
      (b)   Refusal by the local authority to issue a special
            safety certificate (s.5 (2)).


      (c)   Inclusion or omission of anything in or from a safety
            certificate (s.5 (3)(i)).
      (d)   Refusal by the local authority to amend or replace a
            safety certificate (s.5 (3)(ii)).


The procedures and time limits for appeals are laid down in the
Regulations   (SI 1987/1941).


34.   The applicant for a safety certificate may appeal against a
local authority decision    under (a) to (d) above.   Appeals under
(c)   and (d) above can also be made by the Chief Officer of Police
and either the building authority or the fire authority (see
paragraph 27).     Anyone else who is or may be concerned in
ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate may also appeal under (c) and (d) above.


35.   If a local authority serves notice that an applicant is not
a qualified person, he is deemed to have withdrawn the
application for the safety certificate.     An appeal against that
decision suspends the withdrawal at least until the appeal is
determined.    Similarly, while the outcome of an appeal is
pending, the condition appealed against does not apply (s.7 (3)).


Offences


36.   There are a number of offences in connection with safety
certification which can be committed by the management of a
sports ground and/or the holder of a safety certificate.       Once a
designation order comes into force, it is an offence:


(i)   if spectators are admitted


      (a)   at a time when no safety certificate has been applied
            for (s.12 (1)(a)); or


      (b)   if an application for a certificate has been made but
              withdrawn or deemed to have been withdrawn (s.12
              (1)(a); or


      (c)     to an activity at the ground not covered by a safety
              certificate   (s.12 (l)(b); or


      (d)     on an occasion following surrender or cancellation of a
              certificate, when no certificate is in operation (s.12
              (1)(c) .


(ii) to contravene any term or condition of a safety certificate
      (s.12    (1)(d)) .


37.   It is also an offence for spectators to be admitted to a
sports ground in contravention of a prohibition notice issued
under s.10      (s.12 (1)(e)) - see paragraphs 41-43 below.


38.   A person found guilty of an offence under these provisions
may be fined up to the statutory maximum on summary conviction
and on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for not more than
2 years or a fine, or both.


39.   There is a defence provision for a defendant to prove that a
breach took place without his consent and that he took all
reasonable precautions and exercised due diligence to avoid the
commission of such an offence by himself or any person under his
control.


40.   The above are penalty provisions bearing upon the management
of a stadium/holder of a safety certificate.      There is also
provision for (somewhat)     lesser offences in relation generally to
the certification procedures.      Thus an offence is committed   by
any person who does not provide information to the Secretary of
State for the purposes of his estimating the crowd capacity of a
stadium or who provides to the Secretary of State or a local
authority false information; or who fails to notify a local
authority of proposed alterations to a stadium; or intentionally
obstructs a person authorised to enter and inspect the premises
or otherwise fails to answer the questions in the exercise of
these powers (s.12(6)).   Offences in this category attract on
summary conviction a fine of up to the statutory maximum
(s.12(6)).


Provision also exists for any regulations introduced to provide
that a breach of those regulations constitutes an offence
(s.12(5)).


Serious risk to spectators


41.   The certification procedures described above provide the
main framework for securing the reasonable safety of spectators
under the 1975 Act.   There is also a general, reserve power under
section 10 of the Act for local authorities to issue a notice
prohibiting or restricting the admission of spectators to a
ground, or any part of it, if the risk to their safety is judged
to be serious enough to justify doing so.


42.   There is a right of appeal to a magistrates court against
such a notice (which must be copied to the police and building
authority or fire authority) by an aggrieved person - a defined
term intended to cover those who would be expected to have
responsibility for safety at a sports ground.    A further right of
appeal to the Crown Court may be expressed against any order of
the magistrates court by the aggrieved person, the local
authority, the police and either the building authority or the
fire authority.   Time limits in which to appeal are laid down in
the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987.


43.   Paragraphs 13-20 of the Annex to HO Circular 71/1987   (see
Annex B) contain advice to local authorities on how the section
10 power might be exercised.


Duty of enforcement


44.   New section 10B of the 1975 Act provides for local
certificating authorities to enforce the Act's provisions and,
for that purpose, to arrange inspections of designated sports
grounds at least once every year in accordance with guidance from
the Secretary of State.       Guidance was issued under cover of HOC
72/1987   (see paragraphs 48 and 53 and also Annex D ) .


The 1975 Act contains power for local authorities, police and
either fire or building authorities       (see paragraph 27 above) to
authorise entry for inspection of a sports ground, and to examine
and copy records relating to attendances.       This power is also
extended to the Secretary of State (see paragraph 48 below).


Exercise by local authorities of their powers and duties


45.    The Home Office has only limited information on how local
authorities have exercised their powers under the Act.        The local
authority is informed when an Order is made designating a ground
in respect of which that authority will be responsible for the
issue of a general safety certificate; and explanatory background
information is provided on how the Act works and their
responsibilities under it.       Most local authorities have in the
past made a practice of furnishing the Home Office with copies of
safety certificates       (and sometimes of special certificates) that
they have issued (although there is no obligation on them to do
so).    It is not normally the practice for local authorities to
seek the advice of the Home Office about specific conditions
attached to safety certificates.       Technical opinion may be sought
by both authorities and ground operators       (or their professional
advisers)   from time to time on the interpretation of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds and how the Guide's principles may be
applied to the problems at a particular ground.        Home Office
involvement here has, by necessity, to be limited even where it
can be given because of the lack of knowledge of individual
grounds and the problems posed by their design and configuration
when in use.


46.     In general, the approach to certification and inspection
most favoured by local authorities is understood to be the team
approach.      This was acknowledged by the Popplewell Inquiry
(Final Report 3 - 6 9 )    as an effective method notwithstanding the
inherent difficulty of balancing the views/input of different
disciplines.      This approach also ensures the consultation
requirements of the 1975 Act (see paragraph 27) are fulfilled as
well as bringing different skills to bear on safety problems.


47.    The organisation of the teams is a matter left to local
authorities who are best placed to determine the arrangements
which most suit them.      The lead may vary:   for example,   in some
authorities the building control may be the lead department, in
others the engineering department may assume the lead role.
The legal or chief executive's office may co-ordinate the
required action.     Typically, a safety team is likely to consist
of personnel from building control, engineering,    fire, police and
may also include environmental health and electrical engineering.


Other powers of the Secretary of State


48.    As well as the authorities referred to in paragraph 44
above, the 1975 Act empowers the Secretary of State to authorise
entry for inspection of a sports ground and to examine and copy
records relating to attendances.    The reason for this power was
to ensure the Secretary of State could discharge the functions lis
an appellate authority (now discharged by the courts, see
paragraph 20d above) and also for designation purposes.


Regulations


49.    In addition to the powers connected with designation of
grounds, the Secretary of State has powers under Section 6(1) of
the 1975 Act to make regulations to:-


      (a)   prescribe the procedures for the issue, transfer and
      amendment of safety certificates; and



      (b) give authorities discretion to charge fees in respect of
      applications for issue etc of safety certificates; and


      (c) prescribe the time limits for appeals to the courts.


50.   Under section 6(2) the Secretary of State may by regulation
make provision for securing safety at sports grounds, and under
section 18 (1A)    (inserted by section 19 of the 1987 Act)      for
different provision to be made for different classes of sports
grou nd .


51.    Regulations have been made covering (a) to (c) in paragraph
49 above (SI 1987/1941).       The powers under Section 6(2) and
1 8 (1A) have not been used.


Power to modify the 1975 Act


52.   Under section 15A of the 1975 Act      (inserted by section 19 of
the 1987 Act)     the Secretary of State may modify the provisions
of the 1975 Act as applied to different classes of sports ground.
This power has not been used.       Along with the regulation making
powers of section 1 8 (1A), it was intended to allow maximum
flexibility in the way the Act, and certification measures under
it, was operated.      In this way, if particular safety
requirements were applicable only to a particular class of
designated sports ground,      it would be possible to include
suitable terms and conditions in any safety certificate issued
for a sports ground of that class without affecting the contents
of safety certificates for other sorts of sports ground.


Statutory Guidance by the Secretary of State


53.    Statutory guidance on annual inspection of designated
sports grounds by local authorities has been issued under cover
of Home Office Circular 72/1987      (See Annex D ) .   The aims and
objectives are set out in the supplementary notes to the
statutory guidance.     The inspections might best be described as
monitoring inspections which are in addition to, but do not
replace, the more detailed inspection regimes envisaged by the
safety certificate requirements, or those already carried out by
local authorities when amending safety certificates. The
statutory inspections ensure at least a minimum inspection of
grounds by local authorities, providing an opportunity to observe
and require to have remedied any obvious safety deficiencies at
the ground.
PART III


FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987


General


54 As mentioned in paragraph 9 above, Part III of the 1987 Act is
free standing of the 1975 Act.      It applies to grounds which are
not designated under the 1975 Act but which have covered stands
for spectators and as such complements the provisions of the 1975
Act.


Regulated Stands


55     The 1987 Act provides for stands    (as defined)   at non­
designated sports grounds which can accommodate at least 500
spectators under cover (either seated or standing) to require a
safety certificate for the stand.         Such stands are termed
regulated stands.     A summary of the system is described in a
Home Office publication giving advice to ground managers on the
effects of Part III of the 1987 Act        (see Annex E ) .   Local
authorities determine - subject to a right of appeal, but in
accordance with statutory guidance from the Secretary of State
(see paragraph 57) - which stands are regulated stands.               Notice
to this effect is served on the person who appears to qualify for
the issue of a general safety certificate.         Thereafter, the
system operates very much as that under the 1975 Act.
Application for a safety certificate has to be made if a
regulated stand is to be used to view activities at the ground.
The local authority, once they have determined who is qualified
to hold the safety     certificate, must issue a certificate
containing terms and conditions which the authority considers
necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety when the stand
is in use for viewing specified activities at the ground.              (Note:
the safety certificate does not have effect if the stand is used
for some other purpose, eg an exhibition held within i t ) .
Provision is made for consultation as in the 1975 Act, appeals to
the courts, offences, powers of entry and inspection and a duty
of enforcement.
A detailed account of Part III of the 1987 Act together with
general advice on certification was sent to local authorities
under cover of Home Office Circular 96/1988     (see Annex F ) .


Statutory Guidance under Part III


57.     There have been two sets of statutory guidance issued by
the Secretary of State


       (a) under section 26(8) of the 1987 Act, on the
       determination of a regulated stand and


       (b) under section 34 (2) of the 1987 Act, on inspections.


The first of these is intended to set a yardstick for calculating
the notional occupancy of the stand accommodation to determine
whether a stand requires a safety certificate.      The second lays
down guidance on inspections of regulated stands which is similar
to that in respect of inspections carried out annually of
designated sports grounds (see paragraph 53).      The frequency of
inspection is however variable depending upon the size of the
stand accommodation.     Home Office Circular 97/1988 covers both
sets of guidance (see Annex G ) .


Regulations under Part III


58    Regulations on the procedures for applications for and the
issue of safety certificates, appeals, and authorising local
authorities to charge to cover costs of work resulting from
applications were made in October 1988 (The Safety of Places of
Sport Regulations 1988, SI 1988/1807).     These regulations,
together with the Part III    of the 1987 Act came into force on 1
January 1989.
PART IV

THE GUIDE TO SAFETY A T SPORTS GROUNDS (THE GREEN GUIDE)


Origins


59.   In 1973 in the follow-up to the Wheatley Report and while
the 1975 Act was still in preparation, the first Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds was issued by the Home Office and Scottish
Office.   The Guide covered much of the ground originally outlined
in Appendix A to the Wheatley Report, but also took into account
further technical work and tests carried out on, for instance,
the strength of crush barriers   (see paragraphs 69-70 below).


60.   The booklet was published explicitly as a general guide to
measures for improving safety at any sports grounds, though the
point was made in the introduction that the recommendations had
been framed mainly with football in mind.


61.   In December 1976 a revised version was introduced in which
some of the technical material had been updated in the light of
experience; and an additional section was added at the end
(section 14 in the present Guide)    incorporating the
recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd Behaviour, under
the chairmanship of the then Minister for Sport.     Reflecting this
development the Guide was re-titled The Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds   (Football).


Application of the Guide


62.   The Guide was drawn up for (and continues to be aimed at)
safety in existing sports grounds.    The design, configuration,
location, age, condition and use of these can vary substantially.
The Guide therefore provides principles, together with some
technical advice on physical requirements, to achieve reasonable
safety.
This acknowledges that absolute safety in circumstances where
thousands of people are assembled in a (relatively) confined area
is not attainable - and not in fact required    by the 1975 Act.     In
this respect both the Guide and the 1975 Act    reflect the
principles of the Wheatley Inquiry (paragraphs 8-11, 20 and 68 of
Cmnd 4952) of flexibility in the application of guidelines to
individual grounds.


63.   For the above reasons the Guide is not a statutory code but
safety certificates issued under the 1975 Act    (or Part III of the
1987 Act in respect of regulated stands) may    call upon the
recommendations in the Guide in their terms and conditions.


Popplewell Inquiry


64.   The Guide was further reviewed by a Technical Working Group
set up in September 1985 by the Popplewell Inquiry.     The overall
conclusion of the group was that the Guide, whilst in need of
some revision and expansion, had stood up well to close
examination and justified the high regard in which it was
generally held (Popplewell Final Report, Appendix E ) .


Revised Guide


65.   A revised edition of the Guide,   in line with the Inquiry's
recommendations, was issued in October 1986.     Distribution
included the main representative sporting bodies, all then
designated grounds,   local certificating authorities, Chief
Officers of Police and Chief Fire Officers.


66.   Changes were made to the format and structure of the Guide
but it still relied (and continues to rely) heavily on the
technical material of the earlier Guide.    New sections on
management responsibility and stewarding were added and the
section on fire safety was substantially expanded.    Amendment was
also made to the crowd control section (now section 14).
Other developments


67.   Shortly before the fire at Valley Parade Football Ground,
Bradford following a serious outbreak of violence in the
spectators enclosure and pitch invasion at the match between
Luton and Millwall on 13 March 1985, the recommendations in the
Guide on crowd control were subject to review to see if they
needed to be strengthened and amplified to take account of crowd
violence hazards.    This decision was conveyed to the Football
Association in correspondence from the Prime Minister in April
1985 as part of an initial range of anti-hooligan initiatives,
including effective pitch perimeter fencing, that had been agreed
between the football authorities and the government in the light
of the Luton v. Millwall incident.     Specific reference was
subsequently made in the Guide to the need for a special police
presence (as determined by the Chief Officer)    inside major
football grounds in order for management to discharge properly
their safety responsibilities (paragraph 204 of the Guide).


Pitch Perimeter Fencing


68.   The Luton v. Millwall match drew into focus the question of
pitch perimeter fencing - that is fencing designed specifically
to prevent access to the pitch - and the disorder witnessed at
that game.   Pitch perimeter fencing is also addressed in the
Popplewell Report (Interim Report recommendation 24 and Final
Report Chapter 4. 136).    The Bradford fire demonstrated the need
for sudden access to the pitch in an emergency, whereas the
absence or inadequacy of the fencing at Luton (and later at
Birmingham on 11 May 1985) contributed to the disorder which
could so easily have led to a more serious loss of life - as
evidenced by the tragedy at Heysel and indeed, albeit to a lesser
extent, at Birmingham.    The present version of the Guide still
recognises these considerations and in seeking to reflect the
desire of the Popplewell Inquiry to be more explicit refers to
the possible need for pitch fencing.    At the same time the Guide
(paragraphs 214-215) also draws attention to the need to allow
full access to the playing area in an emergency.
Crush barriers


69.   Crush barriers are intended to combat known,   inherent
dangers which arise from crowd pressure and surging.     Such
barriers are essential to help control any build-up of pressure
in the crowd.


70.   The principles of their strength, spacing and location are
intended to limit this build-up.   Although uniformity of crowd
dispersal is unlikely ever to be achieved crush barrier
construction should be such that at the maximum overall level of
crowd density recommended in the Guide (54 persons per 10 square
metres) barriers will not collapse, suffer damage or fail in any
way such that those pressed against them in any crowd surge will
suffer serious injury - although they may experience some
discomfort.
PART V

CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING


Introduction


71.   This part of the Home Office evidence considers the control
      of crowds at football matches, and the involvement of the
      police in that.   Main sections below deal with the incidence
      of hooliganism (paragraph 75), the criminal law as it
      relates to football matches    (paragraph 78), the courts
      (paragraph 93), the police (paragraph 95), the allocation of
      responsibility for crowd control at football matches
      (paragraph 105), control on admission (paragraph 110), and
      matches overseas (paragraph 121).


72.   The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
      football matches and other sporting events are to ensure
      that necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist
      so that:


      - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably


      - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is as
      far as possible prevented and is dealt with if it arises.


73.   Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers
      of the events (in relation to football, clubs and the
      football authorities) and the police.    Ultimately, no
      arrangements can be entirely satisfactory without a large
      measure of responsibility and self-discipline amongst
      spectators.


74.   Unless otherwise stated the information in Part V relates
      specifically to England a n d -Wales.
      The incidence of football hooliganism


75.   The annual criminal statistics published by the Home Office
      show numbers of offences recorded by type of offence not by
      circumstance, so offences inside football matches or
      otherwise related to football are not recorded as a separate
      category.     However, as a guide to the level of trouble at
      matches, the Association of Chief Police Officers     (ACPO)
      collate for each football season the total number of people
      arrested at or ejected from Football League matches     (arrests
       ’at* meaning arrests inside grounds, or those made outside
      but directly connected with the policing of matches).      In
      recent seasons these have totalled:


           Season           Arrests          Ejections


           1985/6             4,143            4,356
           1986/7             5,531            6,466
           1987/8             6,106            6,542


76.   The figures for 1987/88 equate to an average of 3 arrests
      and 3 ejections at every Football League match - thus on
      average there were some 120 arrests and 130 ejections at
      League matches on Saturdays during that football season,
      assuming 40 such games took place.      This average level can
      very significantly be exceeded: on the last full day of the
      1988/89 season (13 May 1989) there were over 300 football
      related arrests comprising 180 at football grounds and over
      120 elsewhere,   including several violent incidents in which
      two people received serious head injuries.


77.   This level of disorder occurs despite the many efforts
      already being taken to reduce hooliganism, referred to in
      following paragraphs.    Police resources deployed on football
      duties are described below,     in paragraph 102.
      The Criminal Law


78.   There are several criminal offences for example of theft,
      assault and criminal damage that may relate to misbehaviour
      at football matches.        In addition the following paragraphs
      describe certain offences and powers relating to disorder,
      alcohol and exclusion from football grounds.


      Disorder


79.   The offences which football hooligans may commit       during
      bouts of disorderly activity vary greatly in type and
      seriousness.     At one end of the scale, section 5 of the
      Public Order Act 1986 makes it an offence for a person to
      use threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or
      disorderly behaviour, or to display any writing, sign or
      other visible representation which is threatening, abusive
      or insulting, within the hearing or sight of a person likely
      to be caused harassment, alarm or distress.        The offence may
      be committed in public places and, with a few exceptions,
      private places.      A constable may arrest without warrant a
      person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to do
      so.   On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
      fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).


80.   At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in
      section 1 of the Act.       This makes it an offence where 12 or
      more persons who are present together use or threaten
      unlawful violence for a common purpose and their conduct
      (taken together)     is such as would cause a person of
      reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his
      personal safety.      The offence attracts a maximum of 10
      y e a r s ' imprisonment.


81.   In between these two ends of the scale there are       the
      offences of violent disorder (section 2), affray        (section 3)
      and fear or provocation of violence (section 4) which
      attract maximum penalties ranging from 5 years'       imprisonment
      and a fine to 6 months'      imprisonment and a fine not
      exceeding £2000.   There is a specific offence in the Act to
      deal with threatening, abusive or insulting words or
      behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or is
      likely to stir it up.    A person reasonably suspected of
      committing the offence can be arrested without a warrant and
      on conviction can be imprisoned for up to 2 years and fined.


82.   There are many other offences, outside the scope of the
      Public Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during
      disorderly activity.    For example, the offences of common
      assault and malicious wounding.   These attract maximum
      penalties of 1 year and life imprisonment respectively.       The
      gravest incidents of hooliganism may involve murder or
      attempted murder for which the maximum penalty is also life
      imprisonment.   Criminal damage and possession of an
      offensive weapon in a public place are other offences which
      hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms of
      imprisonment.


83.   Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal
      for coping with hooligans.   Breaches of the peace may be
      dealt with using common law powers.    If a breach of the
      peace occurs or if the police reasonably apprehend an
      imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable
      steps which are necessary to control or prevent it,
      including arresting those responsible.   They may bring the
      offenders before the courts where they may be bound over to
      be of good behaviour for a period.


      Alcohol


84.   Various specific powers in relation to alcohol at football
      matches are contained in the Sporting Events (Control of
      Alcohol etc) Act 1985, as amended.    In addition there are a
      wide variety of general powers in relation to alcohol
      licensing which have a bearing on alcohol in the context of
      football.
85.   The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985
      prohibits the possession of alcohol on the way to matches on
      football special coaches and trains and makes it an offence
      to be drunk on them.     It also makes it an offence to try to
      enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol and to
      possess or consume alcohol within view of the pitch during
      the period of the match (from 2 hours before until 1 hour
      afterward), or to be drunk during the period of the match.
      Although there is provision for magistrates to grant
      exemption orders for premises with no view of the pitch, the
      police are empowered to close any bar in the ground should
      they believe that sale of alcohol there is detrimental to
      orderly conduct or the safety of spectators.        The Act also
      prohibits the possession of any bottle, can or other
      container capable of causing injury to a person struck by
      it.   All Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and non-
      League grounds when used for matches involving League clubs
      are designated under this Act.     The Act also gives the
      police the power to search someone reasonably suspected of
      committing an offence under the Act, and to arrest such a
      person.    Given the nature of offences under the Act this may
      include searching coaches or trains carrying passengers to
      or from matches or    on arrival as well as searching fans
      waiting to enter a    ground or inside a ground.


86.   Schedule I of the Public Order Act 1986 extends the Sporting
      Events    (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 to prohibit alcohol
      on minibuses on journeys to or from a designated sporting
      event, and prohibits the possession of a firework or similar
      item at, or while entering, a designated sporting event.


8 7 • Home Office Circular 68/1988    (Alcohol   and disorder)   (see
      Annex H) issued on    5 August 1988 gave wide ranging advice
      reminding courts and the police of relevant criminal
      offences and powers to regulate licensing,      including the
      power to close all licensed premises in an area when riot or
      serious disorder is expected.     (Section 188, Licensing Act
      1964).
88.   In addition to the powers already available to the police,
      the Home Secretary agreed last year to try out, on an
      experimental    basis, a bvelaw which prohibits the public
      consumption of alcohol in specified are as .   The seven local
      authorities involved have designated areas,    in consultation
      with the police,   in which the practice of drinking in public
      by groups of mainly young people had reached the state where
      other citizens found it both threatening and intimidating.
      One of the Councils involved, Scarborough, has included in
      its designated areas the roads leading to and surrounding
      both the (separate) local cricket and football grounds.       The
      byelaw will be tested for two years, during which time it
      will be closely monitored to see whether it can provide an
      effective remedy, without becoming oppressive, which can be
      made available as a model to other Councils.    Although it is
      early days, preliminary results in Coventry where the byelaw
      has been in force for seven months show that public drinking
      on the streets has effectively stopped.


      Exclusion of troublemakers


89.   Part IV of the Public Order Act 1986 gave new powers to the
      courts to impose exclusion orders, prohibiting attendance
      for a minimum period of 3 months at all prescribed matches
      of any person convicted of a football-related offence.       This
      includes offences committed not only inside or outside
      grounds, but also on journeys to or from matches.


90.   From   1 August 1987, when this power was introduced, to
      26 May 1989, 1,785 exclusion orders were recorded by the
      Football Association.


91.   This   power to impose exclusion orders is without prejudice
      to a club's own entitlement to choose whom to admit, or
      refuse to admit, to their property.    Conditions under which
      this will take place are set out in each club's Ground
      Regulations, which normally follow a model drafted by the
      Football League.    Ground regulations typically assert the
      club's right to exclude someone who refuses to be searched
      on entry.


92.   The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I
      of the Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace
      exclusion orders with a positive check on entitlement to
      admission and mandatory disqualification for fixed terms.
      See separate evidence from the Department of the Environment
      (DOE).


      The Courts


93.   The Government's role in relation to penalties is to ensure
      that the courts have available to them adequate powers.       For
      most offences applicable to disorderly behaviour at football
      matches custodial penalties are available.    Sentencing in
      individual cases is for the courts themselves.


      Responding to major outbreaks of hooliganism - "Swift
      Justice11


94.   Home Office Circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited
      the courts, the police and others to formulate contingency
      plans to bring very rapidly before a court those involved in
      large scale disorder.   Swift action was intended to deter
      further outbreaks and to demonstrate the determination of
      the agencies involved to deal with hooliganism.    The
      initiative envisaged disorder in general, but included that
      arising in the context of football.


      The Police


95.   Policing arrangements in England and Wales operate under the
      tripartite relationship governed by the Police Act 1964, the
      three parties comprising the Home Secretary, and local chief
      constables and police authorities.    Chief constables are
      responsible for the direction and control of their police
      force and police authorities are responsible for maintaining
      an adequate and efficient police force.    (Arrangements in
      the Metropolitan Police are different as the Home Secretary
      is the police authority for that force.)


96.   The Home Secretary's role is in approving certain actions by
      the police authority, such as the appointment of chief
      constables and setting the establishment for a force; making
      arrangements for common police services; and ensuring that
      adequate co-operation exists between forces.     He also has
      powers to intervene if matters are not proceeding properly.
      The Home Secretary is assisted in this task by Her Majesty's
      Inspectorate of Constabulary who conduct annual inspections
      of every police force.


      General police powers and duties


97.   The common law duties of a constable can be summarised as
      being to prevent the commission of crime, to prevent action
      he reasonably apprehends may result in a breach of the
      peace, and to protect life and property (see paragraph 320
      of Volume 36 of Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edition)).


98.   The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984    (PACE) sets out
      police powers to investigate offences,    for example to stop
      and search or arrest persons or to detain and question
      suspects.    Other statutes also confer specific powers on the
      police.     In addition the police have common law powers to do
      that which enables them to discharge their common law duties
      (above).    Any action by the police not in the exercise of
      their powers is dependent upon the consent of the public,
      but any such action cannot be enforced by the police.


      Police action in relation to football


99.   The police regularly provide substantial numbers of officers
      at football matches, to maintain public order, apprehend
      offenders and (outside grounds) to direct crowds.     The
      relationship between the police and clubs, and their
      respective duties, are considered in more detail in the next
      main section (paragraph 105).     Inside grounds the police
      often make use of video and closed circuit television
     systems to detect trouble and gather evidence for use in
     court.     British Transport Police often escort groups of
     supporters travelling to matches by train, and police
     reinforcements may be necessary eg in town centres where
     football supporters are expected to congregate, especially
     if they are likely to encounter opposing fans.


100. Besides operational involvement with football matches, most
     police forces have a liaison officer for football who
     exchanges information with other forces and with clubs in
     preparation for forthcoming fixtures.     Some forces maintain
     intelligence records on known football hooligans in their
     area, and various criminal investigations have been mounted
     against 'hard core' teams of hooligans.     These are matters
     on which ACPO may comment further in evidence to the
     Inquiry.


101. There is shortly to be established a National Football
     Intelligence Unit as a central police team (under Common
    Police Service arrangements) to promote the further
    development and co-ordination of local efforts and to take a
    central view on emerging national trends and issues of
    concern.


    Police resources


102. The cost of the police presence regularly provided at
     football matches - especially on Saturdays during the
    football season - is substantial.      Central records of police
    expenditure do not identify specific activities such as
    policing of football, but a sample by ACPO on two Saturdays
    last November revealed an average of 5,000 officers deployed
    on football duties, slightly more outside grounds than
     inside.    The police consider this sample to be broadly
    representative of the season as a whole.      The total cost of
    police resources devoted to this activity would depend on
    precise rates of pay and periods of duty of each officer
     involved, but an indicative cost might be in the range of
     £200,000 to £300,000 per 'football Saturday'.
103. As a 'special service' within the meaning of Section 15 of
     the Police Act 1964 the cost of police presence inside the
     ground, if the chief officer agrees to provide it, should be
     charged to the club.     Since it is for the chief officer to
     determine what is a satisfactory level of policing for a
     match, the chief officer in effect also sets the cost
     charged to clubs for policing inside the ground.


104. Expenditure on policing football matches not recovered from
     clubs has to be born from public expenditure.      Moreover,
     football duties often represent a substantial diversion of
     police effort from other police work.


     Responsibility for Crowd Control at Football Matches


105. Chapters 2, 13 and 14 of the Guide to Safety at Sports
     Grounds   ('the G u ide ') give guidance on the respective roles
     of the management and the police at football grounds and
     other sporting stadia.    As with other areas of safety, the
    management of the ground is responsible for the crowd
     control arrangements (paragraph 204 of the Guide ).


106. For management of a major football ground to discharge its
     responsibilities properly paragraph 204 of the Guide points
     out that a special police presence inside the ground may be
    necessary to deal with any problem of disorder which may
     arise, as well as to provide support and leadership in an
     emergency.   The number and disposition of the police must be
    determined by the chief officer of police who has sole
     responsibility for the direction of police operations      (see
     also paragraph 67 above).    So, to interpret the Guide, the
    police deployed inside stadia are not present to manage
    crowds unless the chief officer of police judges that
    disorder, crime or other emergencies might arise, in which
    case they may be able to provide assistance beyond the
    capability of the club's management and stewards.


107. Outside the ground, on public property, direction of crowds
     going to or from a football match is a matter for the chief
     officer of police.     Very often it is considered necessary to
     ensure strict segregation of opposing supporters, eg by
     close escort of visiting fans from railway stations to and
     from the football ground.


108. Paragraph 205 of the Guide emphasises the need for effective
     co-ordination between the club and the police (with specific
     reference to potential crowd disorder).     This extends not
     just to arrangements inside the ground but also those
     outside which are relevant to the match; and to advance
     planning, and to debriefing to evaluate existing
     arrangements and provide the flexibility to deal with
     different circumstances.


109. The detail of such arrangements is however for individual
     chief officers and clubs.    ACPO issues general guidance to
     its members on the policing of football matches and may
     comment further in their evidence to the Inquiry.


     Control on Admission


110. Under the 1975 Act the certificating authority has power to
     set an overall limit on ground capacity and limits on
     individual parts of the ground.    An important element in the
     safe conduct of football matches is adequate control on the
     numbers of spectators admitted within the authorised limit
     and, frequently, the segregation of opposing supporters in
     different parts of the ground to prevent conflict.     'All
     ticket' matches   (ie an announcement that spectators will be
     admitted only with tickets bought in advance, none being on
     sale on the day of the match) complement the physical
     segregation measures at the ground by ensuring as far as
    possible that tickets are allocated to different supporters
     for admission to certain parts of the ground only.     Part IV,
    above, refers to the use of perimeter fences to assist in
    segregation (paragraph 68).


111. Before tickets are offered for sale organisers may allocate
     a certain proportion between home and away supporters, and
     possibly others.     This allocation will have regard to
     expected demand and to arrangements for spectators' arrival
     and separate entry to the ground.


112. While an allocation of tickets that is acceptable to all
     groups is desirable, that may not be achievable,    for example
     if total demand for tickets significantly exceeds the
     overall capacity of the ground.     In those circumstances it
     is therefore important that supporters unable to obtain
     tickets accept that they will be unable to enter the ground.
     Suitable precautions may be necessary to deal with those who
     nevertheless try to enter.


     Unauthorised entry


113. Methods that may be employed to gain entry to football
     grounds without authorisation include rushing or forcing
     turnstiles or other points on the perimeter of the ground;
     bribing turnstile operators;     and snatching tickets from
     others.     The club and police at a ground may need to be
     ready to deal with such action appropriately.     Depending on
     circumstances the police may have the power under the common
     law, for the preservation of public order and safety, to
     control access eg in the vicinity of the ground, turning
     away those without tickets to prevent them approaching the
     turnstiles.


114. Unauthorised entry to a ground is of particular concern
    because that could lead to the ground being filled beyond
     its safe capacity.


    Unauthorised ticket sales


115. It is desirable for clubs to control the distribution of
    tickets so that as far as is practical they do not fall into
    the hands of known troublemakers or those known to have
    abused arrangements for the distribution of tickets in the
    past.      For some games tickets are only released for sale at
J




         the latest practical moment, to minimise the opportunities
         for circulation to ticket touts and forgers.


    116. Tickets being re-sold at increased prices is      commercial
         activity and is a response to market forces: and would-be
         purchasers will be clear if they are paying a premium over
         the face value of the ticket and are free not to buy if they
         consider the price too high.     A specific offence of ticket-
         touting may be thought desirable in order to curb the
         activity of   touts offering tickets for sale in the      near
         vicinity of   grounds.     Problems can occur when fans   are
         encouraged to travel to matches in the hope of buying
         tickets there.   If successful in obtaining a valid ticket
         they may breach segregation arrangements and be admitted to
         an area reserved for opposing spectators, and tickets may
         also be acquired by those the organisers would wish to
         exclude; if unsuccessful they may try to enter the ground
         anyway or cause difficulties outside.     On the other hand,
         although the existence of a touting offence might deter some
         ticketless fans from travelling to grounds specifically in
         search of a tout,   it might have very little effect against
         those who travel expecting the clubs to sell tickets or
         intending to gain unauthorised entry, perhaps in concert
        with others.


    117. There are a variety of powers which may already be used
         against ticket touts.    A club may eject a tout from their
        premises if    they wish.    The police may ask someone    who is
        unlawfully obstructing the highway      to move and, if
        necessary, may arrest him.      They may also act to prevent a
        breach of the peace.      If they have reasonable grounds to
         suspect that someone is carrying a stolen article they may
         stop him and search him and they also have power to arrest
        him if they reasonably suspect him of having committed theft
        or fraud or any other offence for which the maximum period
        of imprisonment is 5 years or more.


    118. It may well be that any further measures should come from
        tighter controls by the organisers of sporting events over
      the distribution of tickets, and the imposition of sanctions
      against those found abusing the controls; or by a more rigid
      policy on refusing to sell tickets at the gate once a match
      has been declared all ticket.


      Foraed Tickets


119. Forged tickets are a serious matter not only because of the
      criminal offences that may be involved but also because they
      could lead to serious overcrowding.     However practical
      difficulties arise both in detecting forgeries and in
      identifying the persons who print and distribute forged
      tickets.    It is important that clubs try to counter forgery
      eg by safeguards in the printing of tickets:    watermarks and
      even holograms have been used.    All seating areas also
      assist in detecting forged tickets since it is obvious when
      two people have tickets with the same seat number.


120. Where a person makes or sells a forged ticket he may be
      guilty of offences under Section 15 of the Theft Act 1968
      and Sections 1 to 4 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act
      1981 which carry maximum penalties of up to ten years'
      imprisonment.


      Matches Overseas - Restriction Orders


121   In response to disorder and violence involving supporters at
      matches abroad the Government have included in Part II of
      The Football Spectators Bill now before Parliament a power
      that would enable the courts to prevent a convicted football
      hooligan from travelling to key matches abroad in the
      future.    The court would impose a 2 or 5 year 'restriction
      o r de r1 on the offender, who would then be required to report
      to an agency in England or Wales when a relevant match was
      taking place outside those countries.    Failure to report as
      directed would be a criminal offence.    The Government and
      police already maintain effective liaison with other
      countries especially in Europe to counter football
      hooliganism.
                           /i




r

V*




          Home Office
         Scottish Office


     FIRE SAFETY AND
        SAFETY AT
      SPORTS VENUES
      HOME OFFICE

    SCOTTISH OFFICE




FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY AT

      SPORTS VENUES
CONTENTS                                                             Page No

Foreword - by Home Secretary and Secretary of    State forScotland       v
Introduction                                                             1

Chapter 1   Review of the Fire Precautions Act   1971                    2

Chapter 2   Final Report of the Committee of Inquiry into               11
             Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds -
             Recommendations on Safety

Summary of main conclusions                                             23

Annexes

A - List of organisations and individuals who commented on the
    consultative document on the Review of the Fire Precautions
    Act 1971

B - Summary of comments on the consultative document

C - Factors which might be taken into account when considering
    exemption from the requirement to hold a fire certificate

D - Effect of modified proposals on occupancies already designated
    under the Fire Precautions Act 1971

E - Safety recommendations in the Final Report of the Popplewell Inquiry
FOREWORD BY THE HOME SECRETARY AND THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR SCOTLAND

We are very grateful for the trouble which many people took to comment on the
consultative document on the Fire Precautions Act 1971 published by our
predecessors last July. This further consultative document responds to the main
concerns raised in the comments made to us in relation to the 1971 Act. It also
sets out the Government's proposals for giving effect to the safety
recommendations in Mr Justice Popplewell's Final Report on Crowd Safety and
Control at Sports Grounds (Cmnd 9710). Although their immediate focus is
different, both the 1971 Act and the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 are
concerned with securing public safety.

The Bradford City football ground fire and other fire incidents, forcibly remind
us all of the need for effective means of ensuring the safety of the public.
There is no room for complacency. But this does not mean that the burdens
imposed in consequence should be excessive or unreasonable. If the burdens are
too great, as the review of the 1971 Act has shown, they may inhibit the
effective use of resources rather than ensure it in ways that offer the best
prospect of protecting the public from the risk of fire.

Mr Justice Popplewell's findings were clear that some degree of further
protection was needed at sports grounds. Where necessary and possible under the
existing legislation, we shall be taking immediate action as this document
explains. At the same time, it has seemed sensible to recognise that the
proposed extended system of safety controls for sports grounds should be
aligned, and so far as possible integrated, with the fire precautions system.
The 1971 and 1975 Acts are already cast on a similar basis and our proposals
seek to retain that principle so that the respective safety codes complement
each other.

The Government attaches great importance to maintaining adequate safety
standards. It therefore intends to bring forward legislative proposals on the
lines set out in this consultative document at the earliest opportunity. It
follows that we shall welcome speedy observations on this document.




                                                            June 1986




                                       v
    INTRODUCTION

    1.    The purpose of this consultative document is to make further and, where
    relevant, integrated proposals for changes to the legislation affecting fire
    precautions on the one hand and safety at sports venues on the other. The
    former has already been the subject of one consultative document issued by the
    Home Departments in July 1985. It sought comments by the end of December 1985
    on proposals for changes for the system of fire precautions controls under the
    Fire Precautions Act 1971 (FPA).

    2.   Safety was considered by the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
    Control at Sports Grounds set up under the chairmanship of Mr Justice Popplewell
    following the events at Bradford City FC and Birmingham City FC on 11 May 1985.
    The Inquiry's interim report (Cmnd 9585) was published in July 1985 and its
    Final Report (Cmnd 9710) in January 1986. This document is concerned only with
    the recommendations of the Final Report on safety, a number of which bear
    importantly on the FPA.

     3.   In his statement to Parliament on 16 January 1986 when presenting the
     Inquiry’s Final Report, the Home Secretary said that a further consultative
^   document would be issued by the Home Departments which would propose ways of
     achieving the safety objectives of the Final Report, fitting this into the
     review already under way of the future of the FPA. The Home Secretary also
     announced that a further fact-finding exercise would be conducted by local fire
     authorities on stands and premises which were not already designated or due to
     be designated in 1986 under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA).

    4.   The present consultative document begins in Chapter 1, therefore, by
    presenting a considered view of the proposals in the consultative document
    issued in July 1985 on fire precautions in the light of the comments received on
    them. Chapter Two makes proposals to give effect to the objectives of the
    recommendations on crowd safety at sports venues made in the Popplewell Inquiry
    Final Report so that, inter alia, they mesh with and complement the general
    system of fire safety controls.

    5.     Written comments are invited on the proposals in either Chapter Oneor Two
    or both of this consultative document and these should be addressed to:

          The Under Secretary of State
          Fire and Emergency Planning Department
          Room 916
          Home Office
          50 Queen Anne’s Gate
          London SW1H 9AT

     or, in Scotland, to:

           The Secretary
           Scottish Home and Health Department
           Room 27M
           St Andrew's House
           Edinburgh EH1 3DE

     to arrive not later than 22 August 1986.




                                                1
CHAPTER 1

REVIEW OF THE FIRE PRECAUTIONS ACT 1971

Outline of previous proposals

1.1   The consultative document on the review of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
(FPA), which was published in July 1985*, made proposals to replace the present
certification system with a statutory duty on owners/occupiers of premises put
to adesignated use to achieve and maintain a reasonable standard of fire
safety.   The proposals were based on a review carried out within the machinery
of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils for England and Wales and for
Scotland (CFBACs).

1.2    The essential features of the proposed new system were as follows:

       (a) the person or persons having effective control of premises put to a
           designated use would have to register with the fire authority;

       (b) the responsible person would have a duty conferred on him by primary
            legislation to ensure that a standard of means of escape and other
            fire precautions designed to protect life, which were "reasonable in
           the circumstances of the case", was achieved and maintained;

       (c)   compliance with a code of guidance issued by the Secretary of State
             at the same time as the designation order, or the achievement of a
             standard at least equivalent to that laid down in the appropriate
             code, would be deemed to satisfy the required standard;

       (d)   the designation order would specify the timescale within which a
             reasonable standard had to be achieved; the timescale would be such
             as to allow persons in effective control of the premises sufficient
             time to meet their obligations; and

       (e)   premises put to a designated use on or after the date on which the
             designation order became effective would be required to apply for
             registration no later than the date on which the premises were
             brought into use.

1.3   The consultative document made a number of other proposals designed to
improve the present system of statutory fire precautions controls. Overall, the
changes were intended to produce a more flexible and discriminating system which
would enable fire service resources to be devoted to securing improvements in
the standard of premises which present significant risk without the need to
devote equivalent attention to premises where the fire risk is minimal.

1.4Apart from the need to make a more effective use    of fire service
resources, the consultative document also drew attention to the implications of
fire precautions legislation for business, and particularly small businesses,
and noted the conclusion of the inter-departmental scrutiny of the burdens
imposed on business by the administrative and legislative requirements of
central and local government+, that there should be increased flexibility in the


*   A Review of the Fire Precautions Act 1971: A Consultative Document
    Home Office/Scottish Home and Health Department

+   Burdens on Business: Report of a Scrutiny of Administrative and
    Legislative Requirements. HMSO 1985

                                          2
application of fire precautions controls to premises presenting minimal fire
risk.

Response to the consultative document

1.5   Copies of the consultative document were sent to a wide range of
organisations with an interest in the enforcement and operation of fire
precautions legislation. Over 180 responses were received including comments
from organisations representing the fire service, as well as from trade
associations, professional bodies, trades unions and individual businesses. A
full list of those who commented is at Annex A. Many of the responses contained
detailed comments and the Government is very grateful for the careful
consideration which has been given to the proposals by all those concerned. A
summary of the comments is at Annex B.

1.6   There was general support for a statutory system for exercising continuing
control over fire precautions in certain occupied buildings, provided this was
sensibly applied having regard to the risk posed. There were, however,
considerable differences of opinion over the form that the controls should take.
Some respondents thought that there should be little or no change in the
existing system. Others supported the proposals contained in the consultative
document. A minority of those who commented favoured a more fundamental change
possibly involving a transfer of responsibility to building control authorities.

1.7   Many of the comments from fire service sources drew attention to the
changes which had taken place since the CFBACs had begun their review in 1978.
In particular, it was argued that certification was no longer a substantial
burden on fire authorities. Apart from the fact that the great majority of
premises currently put to designated uses were already certificated, the process
had been streamlined in the light of experience and as a result of the
application of new technology. While there was a general agreement with the aim
of making a better use of fire service expertise, there were doubts about the
feasibility of the proposed new system and the extent to which it would in
practice release resources which could be redeployed more effectively.
Similarly, while there was support for the philosophy of placing responsibility
for fire safety more directly on the owners/occupiers of premises, there were
reservations about whether the proposed new system would achieve this.

1.8   The main reservations expressed about the essential features of the
proposed new system can be summarised as follows:

      (a)   It would be difficult to produce codes of guidance which would cover
            the wide range of premises within a particular occupancy and provide
            adequate advice on all the aspects of fire safety which would be
            within the scope of the statutory duty.

      (b)   Owners/occupiers would, in practice, be unlikely to seek to comply
            with the statutory duty unless and until they were told what to do by
            the fire authority.

      (c)   Owners/occupiers would be unwilling to undertake improvements unless
            their premises had been inspected. Fire authorities would
            consequently be overwhelmed with requests for advice.

      (d)   Fire authorities would still need to keep detailed records of fire
            precautions measures accepted in particular premises to enable
            changes to be identified during reinspections, particularly when
            these were carried out by operational personnel. Records would also
            be essential so that consistency could be maintained even though
            inspecting officers changed.

                                        3
      (e)   There was a danger that fire safety standards would be lowered.

1.9   Despite these reservations, many of the respondents welcomed the
flexibility which would be a feature of the proposed new system, both for the
fire service - who would be able to concentrate attention on the more serious
risks, and owners/occupiers - who would be given the opportunity to offer
alternative (and possibly cheaper) ways of meeting the necessary standard of
fire safety. As indicated in Annex B, there was also support for some of the
other changes proposed in the consultative document, which were seen as
important improvements in the arrangements for securing fire safety. Overall,
the response to the consultation exercise can be summed up as generally
supportive of the objectives of the review, but with differing opinions on the
best means of achieving these aims. The Government's task has therefore been to
find a way of reconciling these views while meeting the objectives.

Modified proposals

1.10 Against this background, the Government has carefully considered all the
comments made in response to the consultative document, taking account of the
related findings of the Popplewell Inquiry (see Chapter Two of this document)
and the aims of the continuing deregulation initiative, as set out in last
year's White Paper*. It has concluded that the present arrangements do not
permit the most effective use to be made of existing fire service resources.
Because of the way in which the certification system operates, some premises
receive more attention than they merit and, in some cases, the requirements
imposed on them are more onerous than is necessary having regard to the risk
which they pose. Although fire authorities endeavour to concentrate their
resources on higher risk premises, the limited room for manoeuvre sometimes
means that initial inspections are delayed for longer than is desirable and the
scope for reinspection (which is not currently a statutory requirement) is
reduced.

1.11 The review sought to remedy this situation by discontinuing certification
for all premises. However, in the light of the consultation exercise, which has
highlighted the extent to which the process of certification has been
streamlined, the Government is not persuaded that this is the right way forward.
In appropriate circumstances, certification is an effective and efficient way of
securing and maintaining reasonable standards of fire safety, and offers a
degree of certainty both to the fire authority and to the owner/occupier. The
difficulty is that under the present arrangements it has to be applied to
premises which, by virtue of a formula based mainly on the number of persons
employed and the layout of the building, are not exempted from the requirement
to be certificated, even though many of the premises constitute a low risk.
This is because numerical cut-offs cannot sufficiently discriminate between
degrees of risk.

1.12 To provide the necessary flexibility, while at the same time preserving
certification for normal and high risk premises, it is proposed to provide for
designation orders to confer a power on fire authorities to exempt certain
premises from the requirement to have a certificate. The existing power for
designation orders to provide for premises of a particular description to be
exempted from the certification requirements even though they were being put to
the designated use, would continue to be used in appropriate circumstances. The
new power would only be exercisable in respect of premises falling within
categories specified in the order. In practice the power would be exercised in
appropriate cases when owners/occupiers applied for a certificate, or when they



* Lifting the Burden: Cmnd 9571-HMSO July 1985
gave notice of a material change in premises already certificated. It would
also be open to the fire authority to consider exercising the power in
appropriate cases after routine reinspections of certificated premises. To
facilitate a consistent approach throughout the country, the Home Departments
would draw up national guidance in consultation with the local authority
associations and fire service representative organisations, on the exercise of
the new power. This would indicate the factors which might be taken into
account by the fire authority in determining whether particular premises
constituted a low risk and could therefore be exempted from certification. To
reach a decision, it would normally be necessary for the fire authority to carry
out a brief inspection of the premises, although some expansion of the current
prescribed application form might make it possible, without the need for any
inspection, to identify low risk premises. There would also be provision for
fire authorities to cancel an exemption where they decided that premises had
become a normal or high risk. For this purpose, premises exempted from
certification by the fire authority would be subject to a continuing
requirement, as certificated premises already are under Section 8(2) of the FPA,
to notify the authority of any material extensions, structural alterations, or
alterations to the internal arrangements, furniture or equipment, or the keeping
of explosives or highly flammable materials so that the decision to exempt from
certification could be reviewed. In addition, it would be necessary for the
fire authority to be notified of any significant (ie above a certain percentage)
increases in the number of persons employed in or using the premises.

1.13 The legislation would also provide for owners/occupiers of premises put to
a designated use which were exempted from the certification requirement, either
by virtue of the designation order itself or as a result of the exercise by the
fire authority of its power of exemption, to be subject only to a statutory duty
on fire safety. Because premises subject to such a duty would, by definition,
constitute a low risk, the duty would be confined to providing and maintaining
such means of escape in case of fire and fire fighting equipment as may be
reasonable in the circumstances of the case, and would not therefore extend to
such matters as fire warning systems and staff training. Failure to comply with
the statutory duty would be an offence. As proposed in the previous
consultative document, a code of practice would be drawn up to show how the
statutory duty could be met, and compliance with the code, in appropriate
circumstances, would be deemed to satisfy the duty. It would, however, be open
to owners/occupiers to seek to meet the statutory duty in other ways, provided
that the standard achieved was at least equivalent to that laid down in the
code. Because the duty would be confined to low risk, and therefore relatively
simple premises, the preparation of a code which would be suitable for use by
laymen would be a much more feasible proposition than the wide ranging code
originally envisaged, especially as it would be limited to means of escape and
fire fighting equipment.

1.14 Although owners/occupiers who failed to meet the statutory duty would be
liable to prosecution, the primary formal means of remedying deficiencies would
be the issue of an improvement notice, as proposed in the previous consultative
document. However, in the light of comments received on the document and
further consideration of the case for change, it has been decided that appeals
against improvement notices should lie to the magistrates' court (as is already
the case with "notices of steps to be taken" under the certification procedure),
rather than to an industrial tribunal. In Scotland appeals against improvement
notices would lie to the sheriff.

1.15 No major changes are proposed in the certification process itself,
although implementation of some of the other proposals in the previous
consultative document will have an impact on certification (see paragraph 1.25
below). There has been some criticism of the certification system in that it
relies on the fire authority to specify the fire safety measures required in

                                       5
particular premises and does not facilitate the adoption of alternative (and
possibly cheaper) measures by owners/occupiers. Following the scrutiny of
administrative and legislative burdens on small businesses, fire authorities
were reminded of the need to exercise flexibility when recommending action to
improve fire safety, and to take account of comparative costs when considering
alternative recommendations. Training on this subject in courses provided at
the Fire Service College has been strengthened.

1.16 Requirements should always be limited to what is reasonable. Regard
should, therefore, be had to different measures taking account of costs, so long
as safety standards are maintained. In the longer term, the Home Departments
will be revising the existing guides to fire precautions in premises put to uses
designated under the FPA, which are taken into account by fire authorities in
determining the appropriate standards for certification. As part of the
revision of the guides, further consideration will be given to ways in which
greater flexibility can be encouraged.

Issp a c t    on existing designated occupancies

1.17 Factory, office, shop and railway premises in which not more than 20
persons work at any one time or not more than 10 persons work elsewhere than on
the ground floor, would continue to be exempted from the requirement to have a
fire certificate. However, as at present, factories using or storing explosive
or highly flammable materials (other than those of a kind and quantity deemed by
the fire authority not to constitute a serious additional risk) would not be
exempt from the certification requirement by virtue of the numbers working
there. In the case of premises which at present require certification the
designation order would provide that the fire authority could exempt from
certification those falling within certain criteria. The precise criteriato be
included in the order would need to be considered further in consultation with
the fire service, but the Home Departments envisage that in the case of factory,
office or railway premises there would be a power to grant exemption from
certification where the premises consist of, or are comprised in, one or other
of the following parts of a building:

             (a)   a ground floor, or
             (b)   a ground floor and basement (whether or not separated by fire
                   resisting construction), or
             (c)   aground and first floor, or
             (d)   aground and first floor with abasement separated by fire resisting
                   construction.

In the case of shops the equivalent criteria might be:

             (a)   aground floor, or
             (b)   aground floor with basementseparatedby fire resisting
                   construction.

1.18 It would be for the fire authority to decide whether to grant exemption in
the case of premises falling within the specified criteria, but as previously
indicated they would have available to them national guidance indicating the
factors that might be considered in determining whether the premises constituted
a low risk. Although such guidance would also be the subject of consultation
with the fire service, for illustrative purposes an outlineof the factors that
might be included is contained in Annex C.

1.19 All non-certificated factories, offices, shops and railway premises would
be subject to a statutory duty to provide and maintain adequate means of escape
and fire fighting equipment. In the case of premises which would have been
certificated under the existing system, the exercise of the.power to exempt them
from certification should result in a significant reduction in the burden on
these premises. On means of escape there would be no significant change for
office, shop and railway premises which are already subject to section 9A of the
FPA which requires them to have an adequate means of escape. Although factories
are not subject to this section, the Government is satisfied that in the light
of the concern expressed about "sweat shops" there is no justification for
leaving such premises outside the controls being applied to offices, shops and
railway premises. The requirements would not be burdensome: the standards
required for smaller premises in the supporting codes of guidance for factory,
office, shop and railway premises would aim at an effective but not unduly
onerous level of protection concerned with maintaining adequate means of escape
and fire fighting equipment. Adoption of these arrangements would make it
possible to repeal section 9A of the FPA and to revoke the non-certificated
regulations*.
1.20 In the case of hotels and boarding houses, certain premises would continue
to be outside the scope of the designation order, provided that:

       (a)   they have sleeping accommodation for less than 7 staff or
             guests, and

       (b)   sleeping accommodation is not provided above the first floor
             or below the ground floor.

It is not proposed to introduce new statutory requirements over means of escape
and fire fighting equipment in such premises, although those parts which are
used as places of work (for example, some offices and catering facilities) would
be subject to the statutory duty. Hotel and boarding houses currently requiring
certification are by definition normal or high risk premises because they
provide sleeping accommodation for significant numbers of people or provide such
accommodation in parts of the premises from which escape in the event of fire
would be difficult without special provision. It is not therefore proposed to
empower fire authorities to exempt any certificatable hotels and boarding houses
from the requirement to have a certificate.

1.21 A limited survey carried out in four fire authority areas indicates that
over 60% of factory, over 5 0 % of office, and over 2 5 % of shop premises currently
subject to certification would, under the proposals made in this document, fall
into the category where the fire authority would be empowered to exempt the
premises from the requirement to have a certificate. It is difficult to predict
how many of these premises might be regarded as low risk, but estimates made by
experienced fire prevention officers suggest that up to one third of the
premises in each of these categories could in practice be exempted from the
certification requirement. The owners/occupiers of these low risk premises
would be released from some of the requirements which would otherwise be imposed
on them under certification, but the Government is satisfied that adequate fire
safety standards would be achieved. While it is recognised that the premises
falling into these categories are not those which at present generate the
greatest amount of certification work, there would nevertheless be a significant
saving for fire authorities who are currently issuing new or revised
certificates each year in respect of some 4,000 factory premises, and some 7,000
offices and shops. Apart from the administrative savings, there would be a
reduction in the workload of inspecting officers who would no longer be required
 to carry out detailed initial inspections, draw up notices of steps to be taken,
 and follow these up prior to the issue of a certificate.



 *   The Fire Precautions (Non-Certificated Factory, Office, Shop and Railway
     Premises) Regulations 1976 : SI No 2010

                                          7
1.22 The reduction in the number of new premises needing certification should
enable fire authorities to carry out initial inspections of premises requiring
certification more quickly after the application has been received, thereby
speeding up the process of certification and ensuring that the premises are
brought up to the appropriate standard as soon as possible. However, in the
same way that section 9A of the FPA currently requires all office, shop and
railway premises to have an adequate means of escape, it is proposed to impose
certain basic fire safety requirements on premises put to a designated use which
are subject to certification, whether or not they may eventually be exempted
from the requirement to have a certificate. The requirements would relate to
the existing fire precautions and provide for exits to be available for use in
an emergency when the premises are occupied, means of escape to be kept free
from obstruction and employees to be aware of the routine to be followed in the
case of fire. These requirements would apply until the premises were either
certificated or, where appropriate, granted an exemption from the certification
requirement, in which case the statutory duty (see paragraph 1.1 3 ) would become
effective.

1.23 It is intended that resources released by the reduction in certification
work will make it possible for fire authorities to discharge a new statutory
duty to carry out inspections and reinspections of premises put to a designated
use. The precise frequency of inspections of particular premises would be for
fire authorities to determine having regard to local circumstances, but it is
proposed to prescribe in regulations the maximum interval for different
categories of premises. These would be drawn up in consultation with local
authority associations and other fire service representative organisations,
taking account of the impact of the new certification arrangements. In
addition, supporting guidance would be issued which might also cover premises
not designated under the FPA but subject to fire safety controls under other
legislation. In this way, a redeployment of resources could be brought about,
concentrating attention on high risks while reducing the amount of time which is
currently devoted to low risk premises. When this redeployment has been
achieved, further consideration will be given to the extent to which
designations of any new occupancies could be contemplated within existing
resources. Priority would be given to classes of use where the fire safety
record gave cause for concern and where the premises were not adequately
controlled under existing legislation. Consideration would need to be given to
the likely costs and benefits of designation and to the appropriate level of
control which might be applied to any newly designated occupancies, ie full
certification or a more limited statutory duty.

1.24 The effect of the proposed new system on occupancies already designated is
shown in the flow chart at Annex D.

Consideration of other proposals in the consultative document

1.25 The previous consultative document made a number of other proposals for
changes in fire precautions legislation. Some of these proposals are no longer
applicable in the light of the modified proposals to retain certification as the
main instrument of control in normal and high risk premises. Conclusions on the
remaining proposals are set out below:

      (a)   Registration. The effect of the modified proposals in relation to
            premises put to uses already designated under the FPA makes it
            unnecessary to introducea requirement for such premises to register
            with the fire authority. The larger premises will continue to be the
            subject of applications for certificates, even though in some cases
            the fire authority would be empowered to exempt them from
            certification. Smaller factory, office, shop and railway premises
            would be subject to the statutory duty and will continue to come to

                                        8
      the attention of fire authorities without changing the existing
      notification arrangements.

(b)   Prohibition notices. Although there was some support for the
      retention of the emergency procedure under section 10 of the FPA, in
      the light of the other comments received and Recommendation 7 of the
      Popplewell Inquiry, section 10 will be replaced with a power for fire
      authorities to issue prohibition or restriction notices in respect of
      any premises which could be designated under the Act, whether or not
      they have been designated. As with improvement notices (see
      paragraph 1.14 above) appeals against prohibition or restriction
      notices will lie to the magistrates' court (or the sheriff) rather
      than to an industrial tribunal.

(c)   Places of worship. The exemption under the FPA which prevents fire
      certificates being required for any premises appropriated to, and
      used solely or mainly for public religious worship, will be removed.
      There are no plans at present to require such premises to be
      certificated, but the removal of this exemption will enable this to
      be contemplated, if appropriate, in the future, for example for
      premises not specifically built for the purpose.

(d)   Sprinklers. Because the scope of the statutory duty under the
      modified proposals will be limited to means of escape and fire
      fighting equipment for use by persons in the premises, the earlier
      proposal that, at some time in the future, sprinklers might be taken
      into account in achieving the required standard of fire safety, no
      longer arises in the way it did in the previous consultative
      document. However, consideration will be given in any amending
      legislation to providing that fire authorities should be able, where
      appropriate, to require sprinklers or other automatic extinguishing
      systems as a condition of issuing a fire certificate, but this power
      will not be brought into effect unless and until such systems, eg
      rapid response sprinklers, which are currently being developed, have
      reached the stage where they are generally acceptable in a life
      safety context, and could be regarded as an alternative to
      traditional structural fire precautions. In the meantime, further
      consideration will be given to the regulatory arrangements which
      might be made in certain limited circumstances such as town centre
      developments, for the provision of conventional sprinkler systems,
      complying with BS 5306 Part 2, where these are deemed by the fire
      authority to be necessary to support the means of escape provisions.

(e)   Multi-use buildings. There was support, particularly from fire
      service interests, for the proposal in the earlier consultative
      document that provision should be made to extend the power to issue
      an improvement notice, not only to premises put to a designated use
      but also to other buildings of which only part was put to such a use.
      It was suggested that such improvements could be limited to those
      necessary for giving warning in case of fire, or could be capable of
      embracing other fire protection measures. However, in the light of
      the modified proposals set out in this document, it is likely that a
      significant proportion of the multi-occupied    buildingswhich are put
      to a designated use on the lower floors, but    have sleeping
      accommodation on upper floors, will be thosewhere the designated
      part would only be subject to the proposed statutory duty to have
      adequate means of escape and fire fighting equipment. Against this
      background, and taking account of the potential compliance costs and
      the likely enforcement difficulties, the Government does not intend
      to proceed with the earlier proposal at the present time.

                                  9
      (f)    Definition of premises. It is intended to revise the definition of
             premises for fire precautions purposes so as to include open spaces
             adjacent to buildings put to a designated use, which could affect the
             means of escape. Further consideration will be given to the
             provision of a power to enable adequate standards of fire safety to
             be secured, as appropriate, in certain open spaces which constitute
             places of work.

      (g) Disclosure of information. Because of the view taken by some fire
           authorities that they are precluded by section 21 of the FPA from
           disclosing information to health and safety at work enforcing
           authorities it is proposed for the avoidance of any doubt, to give
           fire authorities the right, where appropriate, to disclose
           information to such authorities. However, in the light of comments
           on the consultative document, it is not proposed to provide that fire
           inspectors should be required to pass certain information to
           employees or safety representatives.

      (h) Recovery of costs. The Government has reflected further on the
           question of cost recovery in the light of responses to the previous
           consultative document and the implications of the modified proposals
          outlined in this document. It has concluded that provision should be
          made for fire authorities to charge for the issue and amendment of
           fire certificates. Further consideration will be given to the
           detailed arrangements for determining the level of charges. The
           possibility of charging for other advisory, inspectorial and
          enforcement work carried out under fire precautions legislation is
           still under consideration in the context of the review of local
          authority fees and charges which was announced in the Green Paper on
           local government finance published in January 1 9 8 6 *.

Conclusion

1.26 The Government is satisfied that the proposals in this document for a
modified system of fire precautions controls fully meet the objectives set out
in the previous consultative document, namely:

      (a)    to be more flexible in its approach than the present system;

      (b)    to show a more favourable ratio between enforcement and compliance
             costs;

      (c)    to be less demanding in the administrative burden it imposes on the
             resources of fire authorities and fire brigades; and

      (d)    to be capable of identifying premises which pose the greatest risk to
             the safety of occupants in the event of fire and of raising the
             standard of unsatisfactory premises without having to devote
             equivalent attention to premises where standards are acceptable.

The Government is also satisfied that the modified proposals will enable
essential fire safety standards to be maintained and, where necessary, improved,
while at the same time safeguarding the legitimate interests of
owners/occupiers, by lightening ths burden on premises presenting low risk and
facilitating a more flexible approach to the achievement of appropriate
standards.



* Paying for Local Government : Cmnd 9714
CHAPTER TWO

FINAL REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS
GROUNDS - RECOMMENDATIONS ON SAFETY

2.1   A number of measures have already been taken under existing powers to
secure greater safety at sports venues. All remaining Association football
grounds in the third and fourth divisions of the Football League with a
spectator capacity of more than 10,000 were designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA) in August 1985 as were the qualifying grounds of
the first and second divisions of the Rugby League. In addition, fire
authorities and local safety teams have inspected a wide range of sports venues
and, where necessary, have taken appropriate action to secure spectator safety.
The Interim Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
Grounds (Cmnd 9585) and the Final Report (Cmnd 9710) were drawn to the attention
of local authorities, police and fire services and sports clubs and sporting
authorities. Specifically, fire authorities were requested to provide further
information on sports stadia and grounds with at least one unit of covered
accommodation for more than 500 spectators and also on indoor sports premises
with total spectator accommodation for more than 500. Local authorities are
fully aware of the powers available to them under existing legislation to deal
with unreasonable risks to spectators at sports grounds. The attention of
certificating authorities, chief fire officers/firemasters and chief officers of
police was drawn to the need for the training and instruction of stewards and
for evacuation procedures.

2.2   The Final Report made ten recommendations on safety at sports venues (see
Annex E). Of these recommendations 3> 5, 6 and 7 relate specifically to the
Fire Precautions Act 1971 (FPA) while recommendations 1, 2, 4, 8 and 9 relate to
specific provisions of the SSGA or possible amendments to it. Recommendation 10
is a matter for Building Regulations which are outside the scope of either Act.

2.3   The following paragraphs deal with each of the Inquiry's safety
recommendations in turn to outline a package of proposed changes which interlock
to provide an integrated system of safety controls at sports grounds which will
be consistent with the changes to the FPA proposed in Chapter One of this
consultative document. So far as is compatible with the Government commitment
to improve safety at sports venues due account is taken of the need to keep the
costs upon sports clubs, ground owners and local authorities to reasonable
proportions.

Recommendation 1
"The distinction between sports grounds and sports stadia should be abolished".

2.4   Section 17 of the SSGA defines a sports ground as "any place where sports
or other competitive activities take place in the open air and where
accommodation has been provided for spectators consisting of artificial
structures or of natural structures artificially modified for the purpose".  The
same section defines a sports stadium as "a sports groundwhere the
accommodation provided for spectators wholly or substantially surrounds the area
used   for activities taking placeon the ground".

2.5     The principal mechanism of control under the SSGA is thesystem of safety
certification. A safety certificate is issued by the appropriate local
authority in respect of a sports stadium which has been designated by the
Secretary of State under section 1(1) of the Act.

2.6Section 1(1) of the SSGA restricts     the power todesignate(and thereby  the
main control mechanism) in two ways: first, it applies only to a stadium (as
defined in the Act) and secondly it applies only to a stadium which in the       *
opinion of the Secretary of State has accommodation for more than 10,000
spectators.

2.7   The SSGA also empowers the Secretary of State, under section 15 to
designate as requiring a safety certificate classes of sports ground which are
not also stadia. Only classes of sports ground may be subject to such an order;
individual sports grounds can be designated only after the provisions of the
SSGA are applied by order to the class of ground to which they belong. The
limit of 10,000 spectators does not apply to this power but stadia under that
size may not receive the protection afforded by designation under the Act.

2.8   The Government accepts the Inquiry's conclusion that it is no longer
appropriate to draw such distinctions between stadia and sports grounds.
Although the original scheme of the SSGA had been influenced by the crowd
disaster at Ibrox Park in 1971 the Bradford fire demonstrated that hazards to
life existed in principle for spectator numbers much less than 10,000. Indeed,
the Inquiry considered the minimum spectator numbers for special provision
should be as low as 500 in stands. To implement the Inquiry’s recommendation,
therefore, it is proposed to amend the SSGA so that the power to require a
safety certificate can apply to all outdoor sports venues with accommodation for
more than 10,000 spectators. It is however proposed to include a provision to
enable the Secretary of State to vary the figure of 10,000 should circumstances
warrant it. Provision would also be made to enable the statutory requirements
resulting from designation to be modified or adapted as might be considered
necessary.

2.9      Outdoor sports venues with overall spectator accommodation for 10,000 or
less but which have a stand capable of holding over 500 spectators would be
subject to a modified certification procedure applicable only to a stand (or
stands) capable of holding over 500. For this purpose a stand would be defined
as a unit of accommodation for spectators, either sitting or standing or a
combination of both, which is covered in whole or in part by a roof. This
modified procedure (which is explained in more detail in paragraphs 2.17 and
2 . 1 9 below) would also apply to any sports venue with overall spectator
accommodation for more than 10,000 which is not already subject to a safety
certificate for the whole ground if it included a stand capable of holding over
500 spectators. Provision could also be made to enable the Secretary of State
to vary the figure of 500 spectators in a stand should the circumstances warrant
it.

R e c o n m e n d a tio n 2
There should be "Further designation under the SSGA 1975 of sports grounds and
sports stadia with accommodation for over 10,000 spectators where Association
Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and cricket is played in England and Wales
and Scotland".

2.10 The Home Secretary announced on 16 January 1986 that designation of these
grounds and stadia would be brought about in England and Wales and that the
Secretary of State for Scotland would bring in similar designations for Scotland
in respect of Association Football grounds of clubs in the Scottish Football
League 1stand 2nd Divisions. Consultations have taken place with the
interested   parties with the aim ofobtaining designation orders by the end of
the summer   1986. (It is necessaryto obtain an order under section 15 of the
SSGA before any individual grounds which are not also stadia can be designated,
see paragraph 2.7 above.) The number of venues currently identified as being
affected by the Government's response to Recommendation 2 are as follows:



                                       12
England and Wales

Association Football                          28
Rugby Union Football                          17
Rugby League Football                          3
Cricket                                       _7
                          Total               55

Scotland

Association Football                           I1*

Recommendation 3
"All sports grounds and sports stadia not already designated under the SSGA and
having a capacity in a stand of over 500 spectators should be designated under
the FPA as requiring a fire certificate".

2.11 Recommendation 2 of the Final Report envisaged that all sports grounds and
stadia in England, Wales and Scotland where association football, rugby union,
rugby league or cricket is played and where there is accommodation for more than
10,000 spectators would be required to have safety certificates under the Act.
Recommendation 3 is therefore concerned with spectator safety at those
undesignated stadia and grounds where sporTaT other than association football,
rugby union, rugby league and cricket take place and where there is spectator
accommodation of more than 10,000 and also at undesignated stadia/grounds for
any sports where there is spectator accommodation for less than 10»000 but with
covered accommodation in a stand for more than 500. It is based on the
assumption that at these types of sporting venues the main risk to spectators is
from fire in covered accommodation rather than structural failure as a result of
crowd pressure or movement. Consequently the Inquiry recommended that stands
with covered accommodation for more than 500 spectators at these venues should
be designated under the FPA as requiring a fire certificate. Even so the
Inquiry was concerned with the need to ensure structural safety.

2.12 The provisions of the FPA apply only to "premises", which are currently
defined as "buildings or parts of buildings". They could therefore be applied
to stands. Designation under the FPA would, however, permit fire authorities to
certificate the stands only in matters relating to fire safety; they would not
be able to seek improvements to the structural safety of the stand. Only a
limited degree of safety would thus be provided and there are no reasons to
assume that, in future, risks in stands will not arise from structural failure
or deficiency as well as from fire.

2.13 The Inquiry's Final Report (paragraphs 3.40 and 3.43 to 3.45) acknowledged
that, if it were possible under the SSGA to introduce some form of certification
for undesignated grounds and stadia, it would be logical to bring them under
that Act. It pointed out that section 15 of the SSGA would permit this for
grounds but not for stadia.

2.14 The returns from local authorities and chief fire officers in response to
the Home Office request in January 1986 have indicated that in England and Wales
about 267 venues would be affected by Recommendation 3. Of these, some 72
stadia and 100 grounds (approximately 64$) were assessed as being generally
satisfactory. Although these figures may not be exhaustive, they are thought to
provide a reasonable assessment of the overall position. The total figure
includes 16 stadia and 23 grounds (almost 15$) which were identified as having
spectator accommodation for over 10,000. For Scotland the figures are 104
venues of which 31 stadia and 10 grounds (approximately 40$) were assessed as
being satisfactory. The figures include 18 stadia and 6 grounds identified as
having spectator accommodation for over 10,000 and used for either rugby union
or association football but which would not be designated as a result of the
Government's response set out in paragraph 2.10 above.

2.15 As indicated in paragraph 2.8 above it is proposed to amend the SSGA in
such a way as to make it possible to extend the scope of designation so that,
should the need arise, it would be possible for a more diverse range of premises
to be made subject to full safety certification. But this is an exacting system
designed to secure reasonable safety by reducing or eliminating risks associated
with potentially large numbers of spectators with restricted mobility in a
confined area such as a stadium. It may not therefore always be appropriate to
apply a detailed system of this kind in all cases irrespective of the size and
configuration of a particular venue and the nature of the sports pursued there.
This was acknowledged by the Inquiry (paragraph 3.21 of the Final Report). It
is therefore right to consider the possibilities of establishing a different
safety control regime for sports venues which appear to pose a lesser degree of
risk just as the modified proposals on fire precautions have sought to
distinguish between low, normal and high fire risks in premises.

Option 1

2.16 One approach would be to utilize the new powers of designation contained
in section 1 of the SSGA by extending designation as requiring a safety
certificate to all those venues with which Recommendation 3 is concerned. This
would secure reasonable safety against the risks of fire and non-fire hazards in
the same way as other designated venues which are already the subject of safety
certificates. Such an approach, however, goes well beyond what was specifically
recommended in the Final Report of the Inquiry, even though it might ensure
equal treatment of all outdoor venues where safety controls are considered
necessary. On the other hand although safety certification may be an exacting
system it is also a flexible one geared to meeting the individual needs ofeach
ground. Safety certificates are self-adjusting in that their terms and
conditions should reflect in each case the circumstances of the particular
ground in question. Where, for example, a large venue such as a motor racing
circuit or horse racing track (which might attract large crowds) consists
primarily of open ground except for the stand(s) and other accommodation around
the winning post, certification would concentrate on these stands and other
accommodation. Open, natural spaces would probably require minimal attention.
The terms and conditions of safety certificates should also reflect work
required in relation to spectator ceilings, and a certificate should take
account of the number of spectators who will attend events at a venue. The
complexity and associated cost of preparation of the certificate and of
compliance with it should accordingly decrease for smaller, sparsely    attended
venues - more so since over 60$ of venues in England and Wales (40$
for Scotland) were assessed by local authorities as generally satisfactory.

Option 2

2.17 An approach closer to Recommendation 3 of the Final Report, however, and
the one which in the Government's provisional view is better, would be to
provide in respect of those venues with which Recommendation 3 is concerned that
a safety certificate should be required only with respect to the stand or other
building with covered accommodation for over 500 spectators. That is to say
that at such "enues only the stand or stands or other building or buildings
which individually provide covered accommodation (either fully or in part) for
over 500 spectators would requiresafety certification. Other parts of the
sports venue would not be subjectto the certification process except in so far
as it was necessary to do so in order to secure reasonable safety within the
covered accommodation. This approach would concentrate attention on that part
of sports venues (ie covered accommodation for over 500 spectators) identified
by the Inquiry as being most vulnerable. At the same time certification and
compliance costs would be kept to a minimum.

                                       14
2.18 Unlike the full designation system whereby individual venues are
designated by name, there would be an automatic requirement on owners/occupiers
of sports venues with an individual unit of covered accommodation for more than
500 spectators to apply to the certificating authority for a safety certificate
for stands able to accommodate over 500 spectators. Those stand(s) would
thereafter be inspected and a safety certificate containing terms and conditions
in respect of them would be issued.

2.19 It is recognised that in operating such a system care would be needed
where exit routes from a stand are part of a larger exit system from a venue.
Despite this difficulty Option 2 would, if adopted, fulfil the Inquiry's
objectives of achieving by means of a certification system not only fire safety
but also structural safety within units of covered or partly covered
accommodation capable of holding over 500 spectators. In addition, as a
consequence of the requirement for owners/occupiers of venues with which
Recommendation 3 is concerned to apply for a safety certificate, authorities
would build upon their existing knowledge of and about outdoor sports venues
within their areas in line with Recommendation 17 of the Interim Report
(Registration of Sports Venues).

2.20 Consideration has been given to the idea that the local authority could
exempt from safety certification those stands falling within certain criteria;
for example, where the stand capacity was below a certain level and the
building, on inspection, was considered structurally safe and not of timber
construction built in accordance with or to the standard of national building
regulations. Owners of premises containing a stand which was then exempted
could be made subject to a minimum statutory duty along similar lines to that
proposed in paragraph 1.13 for the FPA. But, unlike the premises affected by
the FPA, the total number of sports venues with which Recommendation 3 is
concerned is relatively small (see paragraph 2.14 above), exemptions would be
still fewer and any consequential resource savings, given the likely input
necessary in all cases, seem unlikely to be substantial or significant.

2.21 For convenience the effects of proposals outlined in paragraphs 2.4 to
2.19 are summarised in the following table:

1.    All sports venues with                 To be designatable as
accommodation for more than 10,000           requiring a full safety
spectators.                                  certificate.

2.    Sports venues with spectator           England and Wales: already
accommodation for more than 10,000           designated or to be designated
spectators where association                 as requiring full safety
football, rugby union, rugby league          certificates.
or cricket are played.                       Scotland: Scottish Football
                                             League and International Rugby
                                             Union grounds already designated
                                             or to be designated as requiring
                                             full safety certificates.

3.    Undesignated sports venues with        Safety certification
accommodation for over 10,000 spectators     of the unit of covered
and all sports venues with spectator         accommodation capable of holding
accommodation for less than 10,000 and       over 500 spectators.
containing a unit of covered                 [If Option 2 were adopted]
accommodation capable of holding over
500 spectators.




                                       15
4.    Sports venues as at (3) above         Not subject to certification.
but with a unit of covered                  Management to be assisted by
accommodation capable of holding            guidance contained in the Guide
500 spectators or less.                     to Safety at Sports Grounds
                                            (the Green Guide).

The Green Guide

2.22 The Final Report included in its Appendix E a report of a working group
which under the chairmanship of the Inquiry's Fire Assessor had reviewed the
current Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds ("the Green Guide"). A
new edition of the Green Guide is being prepared in accordance with the
principles recommended by the working group. It will be drawn up in
consultation with Government Departments, local authorities, sporting
authorities and other interested organisations. In line with the Inquiry's view
that the Guide should not form a statutory code, it is not intended to change
the present status of the Guide.

Temporary Stands and Marquees

2.23 The Final Report (paragraphs 3.94 to 3.96) referred to the fact that the
Home Office is preparing a Guide to Fire Precautions in Places of Public
Entertainment which will include a chapter on fire precautions in temporary
structures including tents and marquees. The draft guidance will shortly be the
subject of consultation with Government Departments and other interested bodies
including the British Standards Institution prior to publication.

Recommendation 4
"One authority should be given responsibility for securing structural safety at
sports grounds and stadia not designated under the 1975 Act".

2.24 This recommendation follows from the Inquiry's recommended course of
action on Recommendation 3 in that the Inquiry recognised that designation under
the FPA would be limited in its scope to fire matters only. Either of the
options put forward in paragraphs 2.16 to 2.21 above would deal with both fire
and non-fire risks. The appropriate "enforcing" authority for sports grounds
safety under each would be the local authority which is also responsible for the
issue of safety certificates. There should be no conflict with enforcement of
the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 (HSWA). It is recognised that proper
liaison between enforcing authorities under the HSWA and local authorities or
fire authorities is essential (Recommendation 9 of the Inquiry's Interim Report)
because officers acting under the HSWA might have cause to visit a sports
ground. HSE completed an internal review of the liaison arrangements towards
the end of 1985 and have discussed with the Home Office issuing revised internal
guidance on liaison with both fire and local authorities. Liaison on fire
safety matters has been finalised; the other issues are still to be the subject
of further consultation.

Recommendation 5
"In England and Wales indoor sports facilities with accommodation for over 500
spectators should require a fire certificate under the FPA".

2.25 The Government have accepted the principle that safety controls should be
extended to indoor sports facilities providing accommodation for spectators. As
the Inquiry noted, the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982
already provides for the licensing by district councils of public entertainment
in indoor premises, including any public contest, exhibition or display of
boxing, wrestling, judo, karate or any similar sport. Similar provisions apply
in London under the London Government Act 1963, although these do not extend to
judo, karate and similar sports. The 1982 Act requires the licensing authority

                                       16
in considering applications for licences to have regard to any observations
submitted to them by the chief officer of police and by the fire authority.
Under both Acts the licensing authority can impose conditions for a number of
purposes, including safety.

2.26 The Inquiry noted that in England and Wales over 80$ of indoor sports
premises with spectator capacity of more than 1,000 are licensed under the 1982
Act or the equivalent London legislation, because one or more of the activities
which take place in them requires licensing. The Inquiry also noted that of the
remaining premises with capacity of over 1,000 more than half were subject to
liquor licensing or other legislation which required fire safety to be taken
into account in considering whether to issue a licence. However, the Inquiry's
concern was that these and other premises in which sports activities outside the
scope of licensing legislation were held, are not subject to any controls over
fire safety while these events are taking place. The Inquiry pointed out that
in 1983 there were around 200 fires in indoor sports premises with or without
any spectator capacity , and concluded that such premises presented a fire risk
and should be controlled for fire safety purposes at all times when spectator
sports activities are being held. However, the Inquiry found no evidence of
problems relating to crowd control or structural safety at such premises. They
noted that if the entertainment licensing legislation were to be amended this
would enable the necessary control to be exercised over fire safety, but
recommended that unless and until that happened, the premises should be required
to be certificated under the FPA.

2.27 The Government has carefully considered whether the deficiency highlighted
by the Inquiry can best be dealt with under fire precautions legislation (taking
account of the proposals in Chapter One of this document) or in some other way.
It is not at present persuaded that certification under the FPA, as recommended
by the Inquiry, would be the best way forward. The extensive work involved in
preparing a fire certificate for each indoor sports venue used for spectator
sporting events, describing in detail the means of escape and other fire safety
requirements, would not seem to be justified bearing in mind that many of the
premises are only used on an occasional basis for such events. The modified
fire precautions proposals set out in Chapter One envisage fire authorities
being given power to exempt certain low risk premises from the requirement to
have a certificate, but this does not seem to be an appropriate arrangement for
controlling fire safety at spectator sporting events which could not generally
be regarded as low risk, and where it would be necessary to be able to exercise
some degree of control over fire safety matters other than just means of escape
and fire fighting equipment. Moreover, by using fire precautions legislation it
would not be possible to regulate any other safety matters.

2.28 As indicated by the Inquiry, the other possibility is to extend the Local
Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 and the London Government Act
1963 so that the entertainments licensing provisions of those Acts apply to all
indoor public contests, exhibitions or displays of sporting activities where
accommodation for more than 500 spectators is provided. Recent enquiries have
identified 422 such premises in England and Wales, of which 360 (85$) are
already licensed under the 1963 or 1982 Acts for one or more activities.
Although these figures may not be exhaustive, particularly in the Greater London
area, they are thought to represent a reasonably comprehensive picture. 329 of
the premises are owned by local authorities; and in 148 of them the only
spectator sporting events are those already licensed, such as boxing and
wrestling which would not be affected by any changes. Extending the legislation
to other sporting activities would mean that 62 premises would become subject to
a licensing requirement for the first time, and the licences of another 212
premises would need to be extended to cover other sporting events taking place
there. In the latter case the owner or manager of the premises would be able to
make a single application under the licensing legislation covering all such

                                       17
events, so the change in the law would not involve him in any new procedural
requirements (unlike the effect of the proposal to certificate under the FPA).
Nevertheless, extending the legislation to other sporting events would be bound
to add to the functions of the licensing authorities and, in certain cases, to
the costs of indoor sporting premises.

2.29 The main argument against extending the Local Government (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1982 and the corresponding London legislation to indoor sports
premises is that the Acts are aimed at regulating more than just fire safety.
Thus, notice of an application has to be given to the local police as well as
the fire authority and the licensing authority. The licensing authority is also
free to impose any condition it thinks fit when granting an application. So
although it would be procedurally simpler to extend the scope of the licensing
legislation owners of sport premises could find that, as a result, they became
subject to a wider range of conditions than the Popplewell Inquiry specifically
recommended or than the Government thinks is needed. For instance, conditions
could be imposed relating to the times when events can be held, and the control
of spectators, noise limits and heating arrangements. Premises which stage
sporting events which need to be licensed under the existing provisions are
already subject to these wider requirements, but there is no evidence that other
sports events need similar controls. There may nevertheless be some merit in
bringing all public sports events under the same regulatory regime. In this
context it is for consideration whether any new licensing requirement should
depend on a minimum number of spectators since there is no such threshold for
activities currently licensed. The Government's provisional view however, is
that in practice this will not be a critical factor because there are unlikely
to be many additional premises where accommodation is provided for 500
spectators or less for a public contest, exhibition or display. In addition the
best way of avoiding anomalies between, on the one hand, those events already
controlled and brought into the new scheme and, on the other hand, those already
controlled but left outside, would be to continue to observe the present
legislation's silence on spectator numbers.

2.30 The Government's provisional conclusion is that despite the drawbacks the
best course is probably to extend the licensing legislation. It does not have
any proposals for extending the 1963 or 1982 Acts to recreational activities
which are not public sporting events. It should be noted that theseproposals
envisage that a licence would be mandatory: in view of the Inquiry's
recommendation it is not considered that it would be satisfactory to give local
authorities discretion as to whether or not to require a licence. The
Government would particularly welcome comments from local authorities and owners
of sports premises on the practical implications of these proposals.

Recomendation 6
"An urgent review of the existing legislation on indoor sports facilities in
Scotland should be undertaken and if they are not currently covered by fire
regulations such facilties should be designated under the FPA"

2.31 It is clear that there is no comprehensive cover of indoor sports
facilities in Scotland by legislation designed to ensure fire safety. Such
facilities have not hitherto been designated under the FPA. Moreover, while it
is true that Building Regulations and licensing of public entertainment under
the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 either separately or together provide
some protection of spectators, that cover is patchy. This is because the
Building Regulations bear on newer and altered premises only, and the licensing
arrangements bite only where the local authority has resolved to require the
obtaining of a licence.



                                       18
2.32 The Government takes the view that, to be consistent with its other
provisional proposals to meet the recommendations of the Inquiry, it would
appear to be appropriate to deal with safety in general, rather than with fire
safety alone. This could be done by bringing forward legislation which would
secure comprehensive safety cover for spectators through the introduction of
licensing arrangements in respect of public exhibitions of sporting activities
in indoor facilities. Such arrangements would be able to cover fire and
structural safety as well as crowd control and other matters. Licensing of this
nature would produce a degree of flexibility which would allow local authorities
to deal with applications in a way that best met local needs.

2.33 These new arrangements could be achieved by amending the Civic Government
(Scotland) Act 1982 so as to create a system of mandatory licensing to cover the
use of indoor premises for public exhibitions of sporting activities. Anyone
promoting such public exhibitions would be required to apply for a licence to
the islands or district council. The licensing authority would deal with that
application in much the same way as do those authorities who currently exercise
licensing functions under section 41 of the 1982 Act. That is to say the
provisions set out in Schedule 1 of the 1982 Act would be attracted, including
those involving consultations with the chief constable and fire authority.
Steps would, of course, be taken to eliminate any potential overlap between
section 41 and the new legislation (for example, licensing this activity would
no longer be optional for the authorities). The powers given to licensing
authorities would include powers to restrict use, to limit the number of
spectators and to fix times.

2.34 These new licensing arrangements could apply to the use of all such
premises or, in order not to penalise smaller operators, could be restricted to
premises with spectator accommodation above a certain limit. The figure of 500
was mentioned by the Inquiry in connection with Recommendation 5. Another
possible figure is that of 60 occupants, one of the criteria in the Building
Regulations for requiring additional means of egress. The Secretary of State
could be given a power to vary the number, so that if circumstances altered or
if the operation of the legislation demonstrated that a different threshold was
appropriate, this could be achieved without recourse to primary legislation.
Any use of premises for public entertainment not covered by the proposed
legislation but involving spectators would, of course, continue to be licensable
at the will of the local authority in terms of section 41.

2.35 The Government would welcome views on these provisional proposals. In
particular it would be glad to have comments from local authorities and other
interested parties as to whether there should be a threshold for application of
mandatory licensing, and if so what that figure should be.

Recommendation 7
"Provision should be made in the FPA 1971 for authorised officers ofa fire
authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice".

R e c o m m e n d a tio n 8
"Provision should be made for authorised officers of the local authority to have
power to issue a prohibition notice under the SSGA 1975".

2.36 The two recommendations run together. The Home Departments accept the
desirability of removing any barriers which impede the swift introduction of
urgent safety measures needed to combat acute risks to spectators. It is
therefore proposed to change the procedure under the current section 10of the
SSGA along similar lines to the proposals for the current section 10 of the FPA
(see paragraph 1.25(b)).



                                       19
2.37 For grounds designated under the SSGA the general safety certificate can
be amended to take account of changed circumstances; terms and conditions can be
framed so as to cover more than one activity and special conditions can be
incorporated to deal with especially large crowds. A special safety certificate
is issued for "one off" events not covered by theterms of a general safety
certificate. Thus, the safety certificate is seen as the main mechanism to
govern safety at designated grounds.

2.38 Even so, where a serious risk to spectators is identified there should be
additional machinery to reduce it. A prohibition notice would achieve this as
necessary eg by requiring certain works or by closing down part of a ground with
effect from a date stipulated by the local authority. The nature of the risk
and the work needed to reduce it to an acceptable level in order to allow the
affected area to be used to accommodate a specified number of spectators would
be stated in the notice.

2.39 There would need to be a right of appeal against such a notice either to
the courts (in line with the parallel procedures proposed for the FPA) or
alternatively to the Secretary of State as is the case at present under the SSGA
in respect of appeals against terms or conditions contained within a safety
certificate. There seems in fact no reason why appeals should be along
different avenues in respect of virtually identical procedures. It would
therefore seem sensible to align appeals according to a single model. On the
basis that in principle any disputes related to fact and expert opinion are best
adjudicated by the courts, the Government considers that the FPA model should be
preferred. Appeals under the present SSGA procedures have been few and the fact
that there has now accumulated a good deal of experience in operating the SSGA
suggests the special administrative procedure devised for what was originally a
wholly novel system of control is no longer appropriate. It will be essential
to ensure that grounds for appeal either against prohibition notices or against
terms or conditions within a safety certificate are justiciable by the courts.

Reconmendation 9
"There should be (1) annual renewal of safety certificates under the SSGA 1975;
(2) a duty on the local authority to inspect the premises prior to reissuing the
certificate and (3) power for the local authority to revoke the certificate".

,2.40 Under the present certification system the local authority can be flexible
 in that it can permit remedial work to be carried out in stages or within set
 time limits by regulating the number of spectators permitted into the stadium,
 or parts of it, to match the conditions which exist within the stadium.
 Certificates also provide for periodic checks, tests or inspections to be
 carried out by suitably qualified personnel and for records of these to be kept.
 The frequency of these inspections is at the discretion of the local authority
 who can call on the reports of those inspections to consider whether or not a
 safety certificate requires amendment as a result of a deterioration of the
 venue or any part of it. Annual renewal of certificates is not therefore
 necessary to ensure that standards of safety are maintained. Annual renewal of
 certificates as recommended would, however, force local authorities into issuing
 certificates quickly, because on expiry of a certificate the conditions it
 imposed would expire with it. Amended legislation would therefore be necessary
 to implament the recommendation to provide either:

       (a)   that it became an offence to admit spectators to designated venues
             not possessing a current certificate, or

       (b)   that previous certificate conditions continue to apply after expiry
             and until a replacement certificate is issued.


                                         20
In the latter case, (b), no improvement would be achieved over the present
safety system under which a local authority has power to amend a safety
certificate at any time by imposing new conditions or vary existing ones should
changed circumstances in a stadium warrant it. In the former case, (a),
legislation would also need to specify a period of time in which local
authorities would have to reissue certificates. This would, again, add to the
pressure on local authorities to issue a certificate quickly since the effect of
closing down a stadium completely could impose intolerable and unjustifiable
financial burdens on its management.

2.M1 Annually issued certificates could also give rise to repeated appeals
against terms or conditions which stadium management found difficult to accept,
thereby reducing the effectiveness of the certificate (pending appeal the
condition which is appealed against is not operative) as well as leading to
substantial additional resource implications on both local and central
government. A yearly certificate might lead to stadium management becoming less
cooperative in that they might perceive the prime responsibility to secure
reasonable safety as having passed from them to the local authority.

2.M2 A full inspection of a stadium for the purpose of drawing up a safety
certificate involves local authority, fire authority and police resources. Such
detailed multi-discplinary inspections and surveys may not warrant repetition
each year. "In use” inspections, though probably less detailed, are likely to
represent a more efficient use of resources commensurate with the nature of the
risks involved, and are in most cases probably equally effective. Fire
certificates issued under the FPA are not renewed annually and the system
appears to have worked well. There are no proposals to make fire certification
an annual process.

2.M3 In the circumstances described above it would seem that powers to revoke
certificates would be superfluous; if the situation in a certificated stadium
were to deteriorate to the extent that there was a risk to safety, the local
authority would amend the conditions in the certificate to meet the risk, which
could include prohibitions or restrictions on use. Alternatively, if the risks
were sufficiently acute, the local authority would be able to use the power
proposed above to issue a prohibition notice in respect of those part(s) of the
ground which were deemed to be unsafe for spectators. Powers to revoke the
certificate would be less than helpful since, in the absence of provisions to
prevent it, a stadium whose certificate was revoked would simply apply for
another certificate and, in the intervening period until the stadium had been
inspected and new conditions imposed, would be entitled to continue business
without regard even to safety conditions imposed by the original certificate.

2.MM While, therefore, for the reasons stated in paragraphs 2.MO to 2.M3 above
the implementation of Recommendation 9 as it stands would have some serious and
unwelcome consequences, the basic objective of having sports stadia regularly
inspected and conditions in certificates kept up to date is fully accepted. It
is clearly right that local authorities should regularly inspect designated
grounds following the issue of the certificate. Any variations or amendments to
certificates required as a result of inspections should be communicated to
management without delay and the certificate amended accordingly. This would
achieve the desired objectives without excessive resource costs and avoid
placing unreasonable financial burdens on management by unnecessary over­
elaboration.

2.M5 It is therefore proposed to amend the SSGA to impose a duty on local
authorities to draw up and carry out inspections and reinspections of grounds
and stadia. As in paragraph 1.23 in relation to inspections by fire
authorities, the frequency and nature of inspections of particular venues under
the SSGA would be for local authorities to determine having regard to the local

                                       21
circumstances, but provision would be made for the minimum frequency for
different types of inspection. This provision would be drawn up in consultation
with the local authority associations. Supplementary guidance would also, if
necessary, be issued on inspections of venues which would not be subject to
safety certification under the SSGA.

Recommendation 10

"The Department of the Environment should urgently amend the building
regulations guideline codes in relation to structural fire precautions in new
stands"

2.M6 The new building regulations which came into force on 11 November 1985
require buidings (which include covered sports stands) to be built so that the
structure adequately resists the spread of fire and maintains its stability in
fire for a reasonable period. The purpose behind the requirements is that, if
there is a fire, the building should remain safe for long enough for anyone in
it to be able to escape, and that escape routes should be adequately protected
from fire. The Building Regulations 1985 therefore, in paragraphs B2 and B3 of
Schedule 1 to the regulations, provide adequate powers to control the
construction of new stands.

2.M7 The new regulations are supported by approved documents which give
guidance on how to meet the requirements. If the recommendations for structural
fire precautions are followed, they will ensure that the great majority of new
stands will be built to high standards of safety. The Final Report, however,
points to one area where the guidance is lacking. Most new stands will be two
storey buildings, because the area under the rake of the seats is normally used
for offices, changing rooms etc. In these cases the guidance for buildings of
more than one storey recommends measures which would protect the seating area
from the danger of fire spread below the floor. For single storey buildings the
standards are less demanding because the risk of fire spreading from beneath the
floor is normally remote. The Bradford stand however was a single storey
building because it was built over a sloping bank. The Government agree that
the guidance on the interpretation of the regulations should be extended to
cover this kind of building.

2.M8 The technical requirement of the regulations as a whole including those
for fire safety are being reviewed as part of the Government's comprehensive
overhaul of the building regulations. The issues raised by the Bradford Fire
will be included in this review.

2.M9 Action cannot wait on the review however. In the intervening period, so
as to ensure that adequate structural fire precautions are taken in the event of
a new single storey stand being constructed, the Department of the Environment
will issue interim guidance on the need for concealed space in the floor of
stands to be sealed and sub-divided where this is necessary to inhibit the
spread of fire within the stand.




                                       22
SUMMARY OF MAIN CONCLUSIONS

Fire precautions

1.   Certification should be retained for normal and high risk premises.

2.    Provision should be made for designation orders to confer a power on fire
authorities to exempt premises in specified categories from the requirement to
have a fire certificate.

3.    National guidance will be drawn up, in consultation with fire service
interests, on the factors which might be taken into account in determining
whether particular premises constituted a low risk and could be exempted from
certification.

M.    Provision should be made for fire authorities to be notified of material
changes in premises which they have exempted from certification, and for the
exemption to be cancelled when this was appropriate.

5.    Provision should be made for owners/occupiers of premises exempted from
certification, either by the designation order or by the fire authority, to be
required to provide and maintain reasonable means of escape and fire fighting
equipment.

6.   Failure to comply with this statutory duty would be an offence.

7.    A code of practice should be drawn up in consultation with relevant
interests setting out how the statutory duty could be met in particular
circumstances. Compliance with the code, in appropriate circumstances, would be
deemed to satisfy the duty but it would be open to owners/occupiers to meet the
duty in other ways provided the standard achieved was at least equivalent.

8.    The primary formal means of remedying deficiencies in meeting the
statutory duty would be the serving of improvement notices, which would be
subject to appeal to the magistrates' court (or the sheriff in Scotland).

9.     Premises liable to certification should be required to provide for
existing exits to be kept unlocked, existing means of escape to be available for
use and staff to be aware of the routine to be followed in the case of fire,
until the premises are either certificated or granted an exemption.

10. A statutory duty should be placed on fire authorities to carry out
inspections and reinspections of premises put to a designated use.

11. When a redeployment of resources has been achieved as a result of the
modified proposals, further considerationshould be given to the extent to which
designations of any new occupanciescould be contemplated within existing
resources.

12.   Section 10 of the FPA should be replaced by a system of prohibition and
restriction notices issued by the fire authority and subject to appeal to the
magistrates' court or the sheriff.

13*   The exemption preventing firecertificates being required for pliaces of
worship should be removed, although there are no plans to designate such
premises at present.




                                       23
1M.   Provision should be made for fire authorities to be able, where
appropriate, to require sprinklers or other automatic extinguishing systems as a
condition of issuing a fire certificate, but this power would not be brought
into effect unless and until such systems have reached the stage where they are
acceptable in a life safety context, and could be regarded as an alternative to
traditional structural fire precautions.

15.   No change should be made in the arrangements for regulating fire safety in
multi-use buildings.

16.   The definition of premises should be revised to include open spaces
adjacent to buildings which could affect the means of escape. Further
consideration will be given to the provision of a power to enable adequate
standards of fire safety to be secured, as appropriate, in open spaces which
constitute places of work.

17.   Fire authorities should be given the specific right, where appropriate, to
disclose information to other health and safety at work enforcing authorities,
but fire inspectors will not be required to pass information to employees or
safety representatives.

18.   Provision should be made for fire authorities to charge for the issue and
amendment of fire certificates.

Safety at Sports Venues

19.   The Secretary of State should have power to designate all outdoor venues
which have spectator accommodation for over 10,000. There should be power to
vary this figure.

20.   The Secretary of State should have power to vary the statutory
requirements of certification following designation.

21.   All sports stadia and sports grounds in England and Wales with spectator
accommodation for over 10,000 used for association football, rugby league
football, rugby union football and cricket are to be designated as requiring a
safety certificate under the existing provisions of the SSGA. All such grounds
of association football clubs in the Scottish Football League are also to be
designated.

22.   Provision should be made to require all outdoor sports venues not
designated as requiring a safety certificate to have a safety certificate for
any unit of covered accommodation which is capable of holding over 500
spectators and the Secretary of State should have power to vary the figure of
500.

23.   The appropriate legislation on licensing of indoor premises should be
amended so as to require indoor premises used for public displays of sporting
events to obtain a licence for those events.

2M.   Section 10 of the SSGA should be replaced by a system of prohibition and
restriction notices issued by the local authority and for appeals against such
notices to lie with the courtr,

25.   Appeals against terms and conditions contained within safety certificates
should lie with the courts.

26.   A statutory duty should be placed on local authorities to draw up and
carry out inspections of sports venues subject to certification.
27.   A revised 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' which will remain a
voluntary guide should be published as soon as possible.

28.   Guidance on fire safety in temporary stands and marquees should be
published as soon as possible.

29.   Interim guidance is to be issued on structural fire precautions for new
single storey stands.
                                                                         ANNEX A

List of organisations and individuals who consented on the consultative document
on the review of the Fire Precautions Act 1971

Access Committee for England
Aged Pilgrims' Friend Society
Allied Breweries
Architectural Heritage Society of Scotland
Association of British Insurers
Association of Charity Officers
Association of Chief Architects of Scottish Local Authorities
Association of Consulting Engineers
Association of County Councils
Association of District Councils
Association of Independent Businesses
Association of Metropolitan Authorities
Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical & Computer Staff
Association of Residential Communities for the Retarded
Bedfordshire County Council
Borders Regional Council
Borough of Epsom and Ewell
Bridges R R Esq
British Approvals for Fire Equipment
British Automatic Sprinkler Association
British Fire Protection Systems Association
British Fire Services Association
British Hotels Restaurants & Caterers Association
British Insurance Brokers' Association
British Property Federation
British Railways Board
British Retailers Association
British Standards Institution
British Steel Corporation
British Telecom
Building Regulations Advisory Committee
Cambridgeshire Fire & Rescue Service
Central Electricity Generating Board
Central Regional Council
Central Region Fire Brigade
Centre for Policy on Ageing
Centre on Environment for the Handicapped
Chief & Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
Chief & Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association, No M District
Chubb Fire Security Limited
Churches Main Committee
Clark D W Esq
Cleveland County Council
Collins G W H Esq
Committee of Vice Chancellors & Principals of the Universities of the
 United Kingdom
Confederation of British Industry
Confederation of British Industry, Scotland
Construction Surveyors' Institute
Consumers' Association
Convention of Scottish Local Authorities
Cornwall Fire Brigade

                                       27
Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas
Council of British Fire Protection Equipment Manufacturers
Courtaulds pic
Crafer Associates
Cumbernauld Development Corporation
Department of the Environment
Department of Health & Social Security
Department of Trade & Industry
Department of Transport
Derbyshire Fire Service
Devon Fire Brigade
District Surveyors' Association
Dorset Fire Brigade
Dumfries & Galloway Fire Brigade
Dumfries & Galloway Regional Council
Durham County Council
Dyfed Fire Brigade
Electric Cable Makers Confederation
Electricity Council
Engineering Employers' Federation
EverReady Limited (Dawley Factory)
EverReady Limited (Four Ashes Factory)
Exeter Access Committee
FBC Limited
Fibre Cement Manufacturers' Association
Fife Fire & Rescue Service
Fife Regional Council
Fire Brigades Union
Fire Protection Association
Fire Research Station
Fire Service College
Food Manufacturers' Federation Inc
Gloucestershire Fire Brigade
Golden Sunset Homes Trust
Grampian Fire Brigade
Greater London Association for Disabled People
Greater London Council
Greater Manchester Council
Guild of Surveyors
Ham S J Esq
Health & Safety Executive
Hertfordshire County Council and Fire Brigade
Highlands & Islands Fire Board
H M Coroner, Inner West London
IMI pic
Imperial Brewing & Leisure Limited
Imperial Tobacco Limited
Incorporated Association of Architects & Surveyors
Independent Schools Bursars' Association
Institute of Clerks of Works of Great Britain Incorporated
Institute of Personnel Management
Institution of Building Control Officers
Institution of Building Control Officers (Scottish District)
Institution of Environmental Health Officers
Institution of Fire Engineers
Institution of Occupational Safety and Health
Isle of Wight Fire & Rescue Service
Isles of Scilly Fire Brigade
John Lewis Partnership
Joint Committee on Mobility for the Disabled
Justices' Clerks' Society

                                        28
Kent Fire Brigade
King's College, Cambridge
Lancashire County Fire Brigade
Law Society of Scotland
Leicestershire County Council
Lincolnshire Fire Brigade
London Borough of Barnet
London Fire Brigade
London Regional Transport
Lothian and Borders Fire Board
Marie Curie Memorial Foundation
Marie Curie Memorial Foundation (Scottish Office)
Magistrates Association
Merseyside Fire Brigade
Methodist Church Property Division
Mid Glamorgan Fire Service
Ministry of Defence Chief Fire Officers Standing Committee
NALGO (South Wales District Council)
National Association of Fire Officers
National Association of Fire Officers (Scottish District)
National Confederation of Registered Rest Homes Associations
National Federation of Meat Traders
National Union of Tailors & Garment Workers
National Westminster Bank pic
Nissan Motors Manufacturing (UK) Ltd
Norfolk Fire Service
Norfolk Residential Care Homes Association
North Yorkshire County Council
Nottinghamshire Fire Brigade
Platt S Esq
Post Office
Powys Fire Service
Property Services Agency
Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland
Royal Institute of British Architects
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Scottish Branch)
Royal National Institute for the Deaf
Rudman R J Esq
Scottish Committee of Council on Tribunals
Scottish Council for Single Homeless
Scottish Development Agency
Scottish Development Department
Scottish Federation of Housing Associations
Shropshire County Council
Society of Chief Building Regulation Officers
South Glamorgan Fire Service
South of Scotland Electricity Board
South Yorkshire Fire Service
Spastics Society
Special Needs Housing Advisory Service
Spinal Injuries Association
Staffordshire Fire Brigade
Stockport Health Authority
Strathclyde Fire Brigade
Suffolk Fire Service




                                       29
Tayside Fire Brigade
Trades Union Congress
Union of Independent Companies
United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, Safety and Reliability Directorate
United Response
Universities Safety Association
University of Edinburgh, Unit of Fire Safety Engineering
Warwickshire Fire Brigade
Welsh Counties Committee
Welsh Office
West Birmingham Health Authority
West Glamorgan County Fire Service
Westminster City Council
West Sussex County Council
West Yorkshire Fire Brigade
Wiltshire County Council and Fire Brigade




                                                                             #




                                      30
                                                                         ANNEX B

Summary of comments on the consultative document


Recommendation (i) The present system of fire certification should be replaced
by one under which all designated premises must be registered and a statutory
responsibility be placed on responsible persons to achieve and maintain a
reasonable standard of fire safety.

1.    The majority of responses from fire authorities and other fire service
representative bodies accepted the need for a review of the present system and
welcomed a more flexible approach. Most felt however that the emphasis on the
administrative burden caused by certification was misplaced and that while
certification may have been a burden in 1978 most of the backlog of designated
premises awaiting certification had been cleared. Experience, together with
modern technology, had reduced the processing of certificates to manageable
proportions. Most of these respondents took the view that the proposed new
system would, if anything, increase the workload on fire authorities. A
frequent comment was that a great deal of fire authorities' time was taken up
with non-designated premises and that one way to improve the use of resources
would be to bring fire precautions matters in all premises under the umbrella of
the fire precautions legislation.

2.    Responses from other representative bodies and individuals varied
considerably not only in their approval or otherwise but in their understanding
of what was meant by the proposed new procedures particularly in the area of
self-compliance, and revealed a number of misconceptions. The majority of these
responses appeared to accept that the proposed changes were inevitable and
confined their comments to points of specific interest to themselves. Of those
who voiced an opinion just under half felt that the changes were unnecessary and
that a more effective and efficient system could be evolved within the present
legislation. Others, while welcoming a more flexible approach and opportunity
for self-compliance, expressed doubts about the practicability of the proposals.
A few respondents, mainly those with an interest in building control, felt that
while change was welcome, the opportunity should be taken to integrate fire
precautions responsibilities more closely with the building regulations or the
Health and Safety at Work etc Act. Two 0 " three suggested that if this were
done there would be no need for separate fire precautions legislation. Most of
those who commented on certification also thought that it was not the burden
suggested by the consultative document, but argued that many of the problems
were caused by inflexibility on the part of fire prevention officers and
variations in the requirements between fire authorities and individual fire
officers. The main concern was that while larger businesses and organisations
could cope with the work generated by a transfer of responsibility, many smaller
businesses would find difficulty in achieving or even having sufficient
understanding to reach the required standards.

3.    Respondents in favour of retaining certification commented that the system
had been streamlined by the introduction of modern technology and was not
inflexible nor extravagant; the system had worked effectively and fire
authorities had been able to identify high/low risk premises and plan their work
accordingly; there was scope in the present Act to extend the system to other
premises and procedural restraints at present making the system inflexible and
cumbersome could be reduced without the need for further legislation. Business
organisations did not feel that it was a burden, though some suggested that the
system could possibly be simplified and many valued the possession of the
certificate as evidence of having attained the required standards. Some
respondents suggested that the present system of certification should be


                                      31
retained and that the scope of section 9A of the 1971 Act should be widened or
replaced by a general requirement for all premises to achieve and maintain a
reasonable standard.

4.    Most respondents welcomed the idea of greater flexibility and the
opportunity to identify high/low risk premises but many qualified their comments
by expressing doubts that the new system would work in the way intended. Many
felt that the form that registration would take, particularly the sort of detail
and plans to be required, would be of paramount importance. Some business
organisations suggested that if a fairly detailed form was required initially,
it could also be used not only for reinspection purposes but also for meeting
requirements under other legislation, and might also be used as a checklist to
assist the responsible person to meet the required standards.

5.   While recognising that there would be no effective gain from the proposals
unless the amount of record keeping was reduced, it was felt that it would be
essential to keep some form of documentation in the absence of a fire
certificate, particularly in view of proposals to introduce statutory re­
inspections, in order to provide consistency and continuity. It was also felt
that premises would require some form of documentation to indicate that their
fire precautions were satisfactory. Suggestions on the form that the records
might take varied from detailed information (as in the fire certificate) to a
simple line drawing of the premises. It was suggested that such plans could be
provided by the fire authority for a fee or provided in duplicate at the time of
registration by the responsible person, the copies subsequently annotated and
one being returned to the responsible person, after inspection. It was also
suggested that it would be particularly important to have some record of
inspection since strict compliance with the code would no longer be required.
The fire authority would also need to have a record of the means of escape.

6.    A large number of respondents felt that the proposed system of
registration was unlikely to lead to any savings in resources, that it was only
another name for the present procedures. Some respondents suggested that
whatever form an application for registration took it would only be as good as
the responsible person chose to make it. Owners of premises presenting the
greatest risks were the most likely to fail to register, thus requiring
increased enforcement measures. Some business organisations and individuals
felt that the proposed system would only be an additional burden placed on them
by yet another piece of legislation requiring them to register with an
authority.

7.    Respondents who welcomed the proposal to place a statutory duty on the
responsible person to achieve and maintain a reasonable standard of fire safety
agreed that it was right in principle for owners/occupiers to be made aware of
their responsibilities and that reasonable standards should be required from the
day of registration. Business organisations welcomed the more flexible approach
and opportunity to achieve safety standards by alternative means. A number of
respondents qualified their approval of the proposal by recognising that there
would always be a conflict between the moral duty and financial constraints, and
that the responsible person would need to be persuaded and educated as to his
responsibilities.

8.    Respondents who were not in favour feared that the proposal could lead to
a lowering of fire safety standards. Some of the fire service representative
organisations and business organisations felt that experience with, for example,
section 9A of the FPA showed that self-compliance did not work, and that people
tended to ignore their responsibilities particularly where there were no
financial inducements, and that profitablity would be the primary consideration.
The premises having the greatest risks would be those where the owner/occupier
was least likely to worry about achieving a reasonable standard. Business



                                      32
organisations and others felt that the transfer of responsibility to the
responsible person would be simply transferring the burden from the fire
authority to the business. This would be a great hardship for smaller
businesses and would be contrary to the deregulation initiative. The aim of
achieving a reasonable standard from the outset was unlikely to be met because
responsible persons would not be willing to start work on alterations or
improvements until they had received advice from the fire authority. A number
of respondents felt that there would be difficulty in identifying the
responsible person in multi-tenanted complexes and representatives of property
owners in particular, expressed concern that landlords of such properties would
be put in an invidious position if the statutory duty for achieving a reasonable
standard was placed on them. It would be more difficult for them to persuade
tenants that expenditure was necessary when it was known that the means of
achieving fire safety standards was up to them, than when they could present a
legal notice of improvements required from the fire authority. Respondents
representing the disabled generally expressed fears that in placing the
statutory duty on the responsible person to attain a reasonable standard there
was a danger that the needs of the disabled would be overlooked or deliberately
ignored.

Recommendation (ii): Codes of practice in respect of all designated uses of
premises should be available as guidance to assist responsible persons to
achieve and maintain reasonable standards.

9.    Respondents generally welcomed the provision of codes of practice but had
reservations about the feasibility of producing guidance that would be simple
enough for the layman without training to understand and technical enough for
the professional to put into effect. Business organisations suggested that the
provision of new codes would only add to the burden of documentation on
industry. There were several suggestions that the guidance should form part of
the British Standards Institution codes of practice; that the guidance should
complement other BSI advice; and that care should be taken to ensure that advice
in the various guides did not conflict. Other suggestions were that there
should be separate guides for specific premises; that they should not be
mandatory, thus making it possible to use alternative means of compliance; that
they should not be capable of being too loosely interpreted resulting in a
lowering of standards; and that fire prevention officers would need to be
trained to be more flexible in their interpretation of the guides. Most
respondents felt that it was unlikely that owners/occupiers would be prepared to
work solely from the guide and that most would want to seek fire authority
advice and approval before entering into work which could be costly. The work
of the fire authority would not be reduced and since few of the smaller
businesses would have staff able to interpret the requirements they would need
to seek professional advice which would mean additional expense. One business
organisation suggested that the code should include information about the
responsible person's duties and suggest where staff might get training on fire
precautions. Bodies responding on behalf of the disabled suggested that any
guidance must reflect the needs of that group. A number of respondents
commented on the illustrative guide and offered their services in the drawing up
of the final version to ensure that their particular interests were met.

Recommendation (iii): Fire authorities should have a statutory duty to prepare
and carry out an effective programme of inspection and reinspection.

10.   Over 90$ of those who expressed an opinion on this recommendation were in
favour of fire authorities having a statutory duty to carry out a programme of
inspections and reinspections. The majority of these also agreed that there
should be some form of guidance as to the frequency of reinspections. Responses
included suggestions that reinspection intervals should be related to potential
fire risks; that reinspection frequencies should be left to the discretion of


                                       33
the fire authority; and that maximum periods between inspections should be
included in the statutory   duty or designation order since, while in view of the
implications for manpower   resources it might not be practical to prescribe
reinspection intervals, for this same reason there was a danger that the absence
of prescribed periods might mean that reinspections were not carried out as
frequently as they should be. A statutory maximum period between inspections
would preclude authorities from failing to carry out inspections for reasons of
financial expediency. A number of respondents felt that there was a need for
some record of inspection to assist with reinspections and a few fire
authorities pointed out that it had been the practice to use operational
personnel for reinspections since they were able to refer to the detailed
certificate. The absenceof detailed documentation would make this impractical
and necessitate an increase in manpower. One fire authority argued that the
imposition of statutory reinspection intervals was impractical and ran counter
to the objective of reducing statutory controls on local authorities. Other
responses included the view that the proposal would mean extra work and that
fire authorities had insufficient resources; section 19 powers were adequate;
and that the inspection functions should be separated from operational functions
and be organised nationally by the Home Departments.

Recommendation (iv): Fire authorities should be empowered to enforce compliance
with the law ultimately by prosecution but more usually by the issue of an
improvement notice or in the case of an abnormally serious risk by the issue of
a prohibition or restriction notice.

11.   The majority of respondents agreed that fire authorities should be
empowered to enforce compliance with the law and that the proposals should lead
to a more effective role being played by fire prevention officers. They
welcomed the proposal for immediate enforcement of fire safety requirements by
notices without recourse to the courts and supported the proposal to model these
powers on those available to health and safety inspectors, since employers were
already familiar with the powers. Some fire authorities and their associations
commented that the improvement notice was basically the same as the present
notice of steps to be taken and that the responsible person would, as now, be
likely to wait for the service of the notice before embarking on alterations and
improvements. They felt that the phased time limits were likely to cause more
work because fire officers would need to check each stage of the work, and there
was a danger that they might be easily persuaded to give further extensions on
request. Some respondents suggested that guidance would be needed on the time
limits to be set; some welcomed the idea of a brief improvement notice as they
felt this would place the responsibility of compliance with the responsible
person while others considered that the improvement notice would need to be more
detailed and specific, possibly taking the form of a schedule of work to avoid
unnecessary work being done. Some business organisations felt that the
differences in interpretation of the requirements between fire authorities and
individual fire officers could cause problems and that training of officers to
achieve a uniform standard would be necessary. Most respondents agreed that
there should be a right of appeal against a prohibition notice but there was
some concern that if an appeal was lodged a potentially dangerous situation
could pertain by allowing the premises to continue to operate pending the
appeal. One suggestion was that provision, as in section 24(3) of the Health
and Safety at Work Act, should be made to keep the prohibition notice in force
pending the appeal hearing. Some respondents suggested that the authority to
issue prohibition notices should be limited to senior officers or that there
should be access to a more senior officer and a secondary inspection before the
prohibition notice was issued.

12.   There was some difference of opinion, particularly amongst fire
authorities and representative organisations over whether the prohibition notice
proposal was an improvement over section 10 of the FPA. A number suggested that



                                       34
the legislation was already adequate and that if section 10 were amended to
provide for ex-parte hearings by the court as a matter of course there would be
no need for the power to issue prohibition notices. It was argued that people
would be more likely to respond to a court order. Other responses included the
suggestion that there should be a statutory provision to prevent fire
authorities being liable to civil proceedings in cases of successful appeal
against prohibition orders; that restriction notices were unnecessary as
prohibition notices would be sufficient; and that a lack of adequate
documentation (as a result of abandoning certification) could cause enforcement
problems between responsible persons and fire authorities.

Recommendation (v): Appeals from improvement and prohibition notices should be
heard by industrial tribunals which might have recourse to advice from impartial
fire safety experts. It is for consideration whether the appeal bodies should
be empowered to take account of wider considerations.

13«   Responses to this proposal varied, but the majority of respondents
stressed that if industrial tribunals were used it would be necessary to ensure
that one of the panel members had fire safety expertise. Other suggestions for
inclusion on the tribunal were representatives of other safety interests,
persons experienced in industrial and commercial fire safety management, and
persons with some understanding of the needs of the disabled. The proposal that
tribunals should be given powers to take into account wider considerations was
generally unacceptable to fire authorities and their representative
organisations and to some other respondents. It was felt that the appeal should
be judged on the content of the notice and that the sole criterion should be the
adequacy of fire precautions. It would be too easy for the responsible person
to suggest ways in which the resources could be put to a better use. There was
concern that such a discretion could result in differing standards in similar
types of premises and that the safety of persons could be put at risk. Other
respondents felt that it would be beneficial to be able to consider the
implications of requiring costly work to be done in relation to the available
resources. A balance needed to be struck between adequate levels of fire
protection and other competing demands on financial resources. It was suggested
that written guidelines on fire safety principles, and other priorities that
might be regarded as having equal validity, should be provided for the
tribunals.

Recommendation (vi): Consideration should be given to making it an offence to
fail to notify the fire authority when automatic detection and/or extinguishing
systems on which a reasonable standard of fire safety depends, fail or are
liable to be out of action.

14.   Opinions were divided on the value of introducing such an offence and some
respondents questioned what action the fire authorities would be expected to
take on receipt of the information. Some respondents felt that it was
unrealistic for notification to be given in every case and that such an offence
was inappropriate in an industrial context where systems were regularly taken
out of service for checking or maintenance and faults were speedily remedied.
If there was to be a requirement to inform the fire authority it was suggested
that this should only be when the appliance was to be out of action for more
than 24 or 48 hours. It was pointed out that most of the sprinkler
installations were at present for the protection of property rather than life
and that any legal action should only be taken where such a system had been
provided expressly for life safety, in particular when it had been provided
instead of structural fire precautions. It was suggested that the proposal
could have manpower implications, since fire authorities would be expected to
give advice on alternative or remedial measures and some respondents suggested
that the codes of practice should contain advice on alternative means which
would enable the occupier to continue to provide a reasonable standard of fire


                                       35
safety without shifting the responsibility on to the fire authority. Other
comments were that clear guidance would be needed as to when the offence
actually occurred; that breakdowns in smoke ventilation and emergency lighting
should also be included; and that it might be more practical for each occupier
to keep a record of maintenance checks and details of breakdowns which could be
inspected by the fire authority.

Recommendation (vii): Consideration should be given to whether applications for
registration should be required in respect of premises which have been
certificated.

15.   About half of those who responded to this proposal considered that all
certificated premises should have to register, though some suggested that those
already certificated under the 1971 Act might be given a longer period in which
to register and that the form of registration might be simplified. Other
respondents were fairly equally divided into those who could see no reason for
requiring any certificated premises to register and those who felt that premises
certificated prior to the 1971 Act should do so.

Recommendations (viii) and (ix): Premises having a fire certificate issued
under the 1971 Act should be deemed, while the first code of practice in respect
of that use remains in force, and unless there has been a material change of
circumstances, to comply with the duty to achieve a reasonable standard of fire
safety and will not therefore be liable to be made subject to an improvement
notice. Premises having certificates issued under legislation prior to the 1971
Act should be liable to be made subject to an improvement notice.

16.   The majority of respondents agreed that premises certificated under the
1971 Act should be regarded as satisfactory. There were however some who felt
that constant reappraisal and updating of precautions was needed and suggested
that a time limit should be imposed after which all premises, certificated or
not, should be included in the reinspection programmes. One area of concern was
that certificates under the 1971 Act were issued in a number of cases to replace
certificates issued under the 1963 or 1961 Acts without any improvement in
standards being required, and it was suggested that these should be treated in
the same way as those issued in 1961 and 1963. It was generally agreed that
certificates issued prior to the 1971 Act should be subject to an improvement
notice.

Recommendation (x): Consideration should be given to the inclusion of places of
public worship not specifically built for that purpose within fire precautions
control.

17.   Only one respondent disagreed with the proposal to bring places of worship
not specifically built for the purpose within fire precautions controls, mainly
on the grounds that the amount of work involved would be prohibitive. About two
thirds of the respondents considered that while recognition should be given to
the minimal risk in conventional places of worship used solely for that purpose,
provision should be made for all places of worship to be included in view of the
many other uses which they were put. This would also overcome problems likely
to be caused if the provision was limited to buildings not specifically
constructed for the purpose since this might be seen as discriminatory against
ethnic and minority religious groups.

Recommendation (xi): Consideration should be given to types of occupancy which
might be subject to future designation orders.




                                       36
18.   Many respondents felt that all classes of occupancy other than Crown
property and private houses should be designated under the Act. Fire
authorities and representative bodies in particular felt that this would
rationalise control of premises now dealt with under other legislation and that
it was right that sole responsibility for the enforcement of fire safety
provisions should rest with fire authorities. It was argued that more
designations could have been made under the present Act had it not been for lack
of resources. Although there was some feeling that the increased demand for
advice and the carrying out of more inspections would put resources under
pressure, it was generally felt that if priority was given to areas already
covered by fire authorities under other legislation there should not be too
great an increase in the workload. Some respondents said that new designation
orders should be made as soon as possible but only after consultation with the
relevant organisations; careful consideration would need to be given to costs
and benefits of new designations but the risk factor should be of more
importance than costs. It was also considered that lower standards for
businesses were not welcome and that financial help should be offered rather
than lower standards. Respondents generally felt that houses in multiple
occupation (HMOs) and hostels should be designated as soon as possible since at
present it was often difficult to make a clear definition between hostels and
other HMOs, and hotels and boarding houses. It would also close a loophole
whereby some owners managed to evade control by changing the name of the
property. One organisation considered that it would be unnecessary to extend
designation orders to areas covered by legislation since any problems over fire
precaution provisions had been resolved by other means such as the issue of
guides. Other suggestions for designation were that small factories,warehouses,
schools and Government training schemes should be included as well as temporary
structures.

Recommendation (xii): Fire precaution measures to comply with the obligation to
achieve and maintain a reasonable standard should be broadly similar to those at
present required but in view of the possible development of sprinkler systems in
the life safety context provision should be made for them to be acceptable.

19.   All the respondents agreed with the proposal that the aspects which would
need to be considered in the context of achieving and maintaining a reasonable
standard of fire safety should be broadly similar to those set out in section
5(3) of the 1971 Act, though one respondent was not convinced that the code of
practice could or should give guidance on what constituted a reasonable
standard.

20.   Respondents generally agreed that provision should be made for the
inclusion of sprinklers, though there were doubts about their proven value, as
yet, in a life saving application. Several respondents stressed the need to
ensure that they did not become an alternative to structurally efficient means
of escape. Some respondents suggested that the recommendation could be achieved
by omitting the words in brackets in section 5(3)(b) of the FPA. Other
respondents felt that the proposal should be included as a recommendation and
not a requirement, along with other fire fighting systems for the protection of
life. While it was felt that the use of sprinklers could be of value in areas
such as large public buildings, open plan buildings and shopping centres, one or
two felt that sprinklers could cause more damage than their usefulness
justified, particularly to valuable contents and that they could be dangerous if
used in areas where there were chemicals.

Recommendation (xiii): In addition to imposing a duty to achieve reasonable
standards the proposed new system should impose a duty to maintain those
standards.
21.   The majority of respondents agreed that the maintenance of a reasonable
standard of fire safety was important particularly in a scheme of self­
compliance since there would be no point in achieving a reasonable standard if
it was not maintained. It was suggested that there should be a legal duty on a
responsible person to carry out maintenance in accordance with instruction or
advice. However there were doubts about the practicability of ensuring that
appropriate fire safety standards were maintained since experience had shown
that some owners/occupiers give low priority to fire precautions measures in
comparison to the day to day management of their business. Some respondents
suggested that the maintenance and testing of various items of fire detection or
extinguishing equipment should be clearly specified and that there should be a
requirement to keep a record of all tests, maintenance and fire drills.

Recommendation (xiv): There should be powers to issue an improvement,
restriction or prohibition notice for buildings which are wholly or partly put
to a designated use.

22.   Respondents were generally in agreement with the recommendation and many
felt that the ideal would be for fire precautions to cover the whole building
with both structural means of escape and fire warning systems but they also
foresaw difficulties in determining who would have overall responsibility. Some
respondents felt that if part of a building was designatable then the whole
building should be designated. Others suggested that all occupiers should be
required to register, or that the registration form should identify the
responsible person or persons. It was suggested that a distinction could be
drawn between multi-use buildings and multi-occupied buildings and that the fire
risk to persons in the building should be carefully assessed when considering
fire precaution needs. A number of respondents felt that automatic fire
detection systems would not be sufficient and that the Act and codes of practice
should be so phrased as to allow the use of alternative equally effective
precautions, while others felt that the codes of practice would be unlikely
adequately to cover all the possible circumstances which might arise from the
types of risk outlined. On the problem of responsibility for a multi-use
building the comments were that where only part of the building was designated,
the occupier of the designated part should exercise his statutory duty within
that part but should not be made liable for the other occupants over whom he
might have no legal authority or control. It was arguable whether for example a
ground floor occupier could be held responsible for automatic fire detection
systems and means of escape for tenants of separately owned premises above him,
and there could be difficulties in serving improvement notices on the
responsible person. It was suggested that multi-occupied buildings should be
treated as a whole for fire safety precautions and that a specific duty of care
towards other occupiers should be placed on responsible persons. It would not
be practical for each tenant to be responsible for safety measures as the
overall safety of the building must be centrally co-ordinated but at the same
time, the terms of leases could cause difficulties in identifying the
responsible person. Managing agents for owners of multi-occupied buildings
might be unwilling to take on the responsibility.

Recommendation (xv): The definition of "premises" for fire precautions purposes
should include open spaces adjacent to buildings which could affect means of
escape, and might be extended to open spaces where people work.

23.   Most of the responses agreed that the definition of premises should be
extended in both the ways proposed. It was however suggested that caution would
need to be exercised where agricultural premises were concerned, since these
were already covered comprehensively by health and safety at work requirements.
Other comments were that the legislation should be drafted to ensure that future
developments of the site or extension to the building were not obstructed; that
BS 5839 Part 1 should be extended to cover raising of the alarm of fire from


                                        38
these areas and the audibility of fire alarm sounders in these areas; that the
definition of premises could reasonably draw on section 175 of the Factories Act
1961 and that open space problems outlined did not cause problems in Scotland
where it was axiomatic that escape routes from a building lead to a "place of
safety".

Recommendation (xvi): The "statutory bar" should be retained in new
legislation.

24.    The majority of respondents agreed that the statutory bar should be
retained in new legislation. A number also felt that, as provided for in
section 14 2(b) of the FPA there should be power to override the statutory bar
in certain circumstances where because of the high risk hazard a higher standard
of means of escape is required than that imposed by the building regulations.
Some respondents were not satisfied with the way the statutory bar had worked
under the present system, because the building control authority was not
required to implement the measures that the fire authority considered necessary
for fire safety. The statutory bar had prevented the fire authority from
requiring changes to be made and they had been obliged to certificate premises
which they considered inadequate. It was suggested that there should be some
provision for the statutory bar not to apply where a building control authority
failed to take notice of a fire authority's recommendations. Other respondents
suggested that the need for good liaison between building control authorities,
environmental health authorities and fire prevention officers should be
emphasised. It was also suggested that the problems arising from differences
which occurred between the plans passed and the final building could be reduced
if identical standards were set down in the approved documents and codes of
practice. It was felt that some form of appeal or arbitration would also be
welcome, particularly where the building control authority intended to relax the
mandatory rules on means of escape against the fire authority's advice.

Recommendation (xvii); Fire authorities should be given the right where
appropriate to disclose relevant information to other enforcing authorities.

25.   Only two respondents objected to the proposal that fire authorities should
be able to disclose information to other enforcing authorities, but opinions on
whether fire inspectors should be required to pass certain information to
employees or their representatives were divided. A few respondents were in
favour and some, particularly fire authorities, had no objection to such
disclosure provided that it was discretionary and not obligatory. Some
respondents felt that it was the responsibility of the employer or management to
inform their employees and that the fire authority's involvement would create
difficulties. One or two felt that information on the safety of premises should
be freely available to all those affected as well as to interested organisations
and the public. It was argued that if information were to be given to
employees, the employers should also be informed in writing. Other comments
suggested that a clear definition was needed of "certain information" and
possibly some form of national guidance.

Recommendation (xviii): Consideration should be given to enabling fire
authorities to impose charges to defray the costs of certain services they
provide under the new fire precautions system.

26.   Most respondents were generally in favour of provision for recovering some
or all of the costs of enforcing fire precautions legislation. The most popular
method suggested was for a one-off registration fee. Although there was not
much support for charging for inspections or re-inspections, some thought that a
charge could be levied when an inspection revealed an unsatisfactory situation
or where a previous inspection had found an infringement and the owner/occupier
had been instructed to carry out works and a follow-up inspection had to be made
to ensure that the work had been completed.   Some felt that in addition to
registration fees, charges could be made for issuing improvement, restriction or
prohibition notices, although others felt that enforcement notices were the only
ones that should be charged for under a new system. The majority of respondents
felt that the fire precautions advice should remain a free service. However
there were several comments that members ofother professions such as architects
or insurers should be charged for advice if   they were to charge a client.
Others felt that improvement or other notices should not be charged for as this
would be seen as punitive. Where in the past verbal instructions might have
been given, a written notice would be issued if the cost could be recovered.
Among those who supported the principle of charging fees, the majority felt that
these should be set at national level. Church interests felt that they should
be exempt from any system of fees. Commercial bodies and industrial concerns
were generally opposed to any form of charging as they considered that the
services of the fire authority should be provided to them free of charge. As
rate-payers they felt that charging would be tantamount to making them pay for
the service twice. Other objectors felt that charges would act as a
disincentive and discourage people from seeking advice or making themselves
known to the fire authority and a potentially dangerous situation could go
unchecked.

Responses were also received on certain other matters not covered by the main
conclusions and recommendations, and these are summarised below.

Paragraph 36: The major offences would relate to (a) putting premises to a
designated use at a time when the premises are not registered with the fire
authority (b) failing to comply with an improvement, restriction or prohibition
notice and (c) failing to comply with the statutory obligations to achieve and
maintain a reasonable standard of fire safety in designated premises.

27.   In addition to the offences proposed in the consultative document
respondents suggested that falsification of documents, false statements and
false impersonation of fire inspectors as in section 22 of the FPA, refusal to
allow entry to an officer of the fire authority as in section 19(6), failure to
attain a standard within a designated time scale and deliberate interference
with reasonable precautions should be included. It was also suggested that
persons other than the responsible person should be liable to prosecution and
that guidance should be given to Courts on sentencing levels since at present
the fines imposed were totally inadequate given the life safety risk involved.

Paragraphs 47 and 48: Arrangements for securing satisfactory fire precautions in
small factories.

28. The proposal to include small factories within the scope of the new
controls was generally welcomed. Respondents agreed that they should be subject
to a basic requirement to be provided with a reasonable standard of general fire
precautions. They said that since fire authorities were aware of the need to
exercise flexibility when recommending action to improve safety, particularly
with premises representing minimal fire risk, and to take account of comparative
costs in considering alternative recommendations, this should not be a
significant additional burden on small businesses. Some respondents commented
on the trend for large redundant buildings to be subdivided into smaller units,
often w^th inadequate means of escape. They felt that the ability to require
structural means of escape in non-certificated premises was long overdue and
that there should be no cut-off points or lowering of standards for small
premises. Other respondents felt that it would be sensible to require less
stringent standards in smaller premises and suggested that codes of practice
should reflect this. Respondents generally agreed that the fire authority
should be made aware of the existence of small factories, though this could
possibly be achieved by closer liaison between fire authorities and health and


                                      40
safety inspectors, who already had lists of small factories, rather than
requiring them to register yet again. Other responses included the suggestion
that the anomaly which prevented the use of section 9A of the FPA could be
removed under present legislation by using section 12 to impose new regulations
and that small factories were adequately covered by the general provisions of
the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 (section 2(2)(d)).

Paragraph 50: Definition of the "responsible person".

29.   The proposals were generally seen as an improvement in an area which had
caused many problems in the practical enforcement of the legislation and one
means whereby owners and occupiers had most easily delayed the due process of
law. However there were still some serious practical difficulties in
establishing the responsible person particularly in multi-occupancy and
leasehold buildings. Respondents suggested that the responsible person should
be clearly identified in the registration document and that it should be the
responsible person's responsibility to notify the fire authority when their
interest in the property was relinquished. Suggestions as to who should be the
responsible person included the person having day to day occupation and control
of the premises; the owner; the last rateable occupier; the person receiving the
market rent; the agent of the owner; and in the case of industrial and
commercial premises the corporate body, though within the organisation an
employee would have to accept a commitment to achieve and maintain standards.

It was also suggested that the responsible person need not be someone physically
located on the premises and that all people with an interest in the building
such as freeholders, leaseholders and occupiers should all be liable for
maintenance of the relevant parts of the building. However a number felt that
unless a clear definition of the responsible person could be made there were
likely to be a number of legal disputes.

Paragraph 54: The need for consultation before issuing an improvement notice
requiring alterations to the building.

30.   Some respondents said that the need for consultation for certain works
such as internal alterations was not always apparent and would need to be
stressed further. Others felt that the delay of 14 days in the issuing of the
notice to allow for consultation was undesirable and pointless and that the
requirement to consult should be removed. Other respondents in favour of
consultation suggested that it should be made clear to the other authorities
that it was for them to advise the fire authority if the notice contravened any
of their responsibilities and that, if as a result of the fire authority's
requirements being carried out, there was a need for them to impose other
requirements then they should impose them directly and not via the fire
authority. It was also suggested that the proposed brevity of the improvement
notice would not be very helpful when consulting other authorities.




                                       41
                                                                          ANNEX C

Factors which might be taken into account when considering exemption from the
requirement to hold a fire certificate

1.   Introduction

     Chief Fire Officers/Fire Masters may wish to take account of the following
     factors when considering whether to grant exemptions. Not all the factors
     carry the same weight, although all are important. Being satisfied with
     one of the factors does not imply thatexemptionshould be granted.
     Conversely failure to achieve asatisfactorystandardin relation    to any
     one factor does not necessarily mean that exemption cannot be granted.
     For example the risk presented by the processes carried out in a factory
     is an important factor but must be weighed against the availability of
     exits and the ease of escape from the premises.

2.   Factories

      i.   The processes carried out - Some processes will present a higher fire
                                       risk than others.
      ii. Visibility of exits        - Can exits be seen clearly by employees?
      iii. Arrangement of working    - Is the layout such that ready access is
            areas                      available to exits?
      iv. Storage arrangements       - Adequate separation between storage racks
                                       or stacks and orderly arrangements in
                                       storage areas offer more opportunity for
                                       rapid evacuation.

      v.   Occupancy densities and   - Are there any parts of the factory
            total number of employees where problems could arise because of the
                                       high concentration of employees?
                                       Although the number of employees itself
                                       is not a factor which will determine
                                       whether a fire certificate is needed,
                                       there will, no doubt, be circumstances
                                       where high numbers will influence the
                                       decision. For example it may be
                                       desirable to have the additional
                                       discipline exercised by the requirements
                                       of a fire certificate to control
                                       evacuation procedures.
      vi. Storage of highly          - Have satisfactory arrangements been
          flammable or explosive       made?
          materials in relation to     See Home Office guidance ..............
          the building                 (being revised).


3.    Offices

      i.    Location of staff          Are there any employees working   in
                                       isolated places?
      ii.   Complexity of escape       Exits may be adequate in number   and
             routes                    size but are the routes to them
                                       straightforward?
     iii. Machinery rooms              Some rooms may present a higher   fire risk
                                       than others. Their position in    relation
                                       to the escape routes should be
                                       considered.




                                       42
     iv.   Storage areas and type       Loose materials may present more
            of storage                  opportunity for fire to start. If these
                                        are stored near escape routes
                                        consideration should be given to the
                                        effect on evacuation procedures.
     v.    Occupancy densities and      The same factors apply as stated in
            total number of employees   2.v.

4.   Shops

     i.      Visibility of exits        Persons unfamiliar with the premises need
                                        to be able to see the exits.
     ii.     Staff/customer ratio       Are there sufficient numbers of staff
                                        available to assist the public in an
                                        emergency?
     iii. Arrangement of goods          Are the goods in racks or on sales
           on display                   counters arranged so that clear-cut
                                        routes are available to exits?
     iv.     Type of goods stocked      Some goods will have an inherently low
                                        fire risk. But even where this is not
                                        the case the packaging, eg in cans or
                                        robust containers, may reduce the risk to
                                        an acceptable level.
     v.    Storage in non-public        Sometimes the storage conditions in
            areas                       the non-public areas present problems and
                                        the factors in iii. and iv. above should
                                        be taken into consideration.

     vi.   Total number of persons      Although the application for a fire
           resorting to the premises    certificate will have been submitted
                                        based on numbers of employees, in shop
                                        and possibly other premises it will be
                                        necessary to consider the impact made on
                                        available means of escape by the total
                                        number of persons using the premises.




                                        43
                                                           REVIEW OF FIRE PRECAUTIONS ACT 1971
                                             EFFECT OF MODIFIED PROPOSALS ON OCCUPANCIES ALREADY DESIGNATED
Hotels & Boarding Houses              Factories, Offices, Shops & Railway Premises
                                          Existing                                                                Premises
Certificated                                                                                                      brought into
hotels &                                  premises
                                                                                                                  use
boarding
houses


                                                                                            More than 20                          Smaller
No change              N on                              Certificated
                                                                                            employed to                           premise)
premises remain        certificated
                                                                                            work or more
certificated but                                                                            than 10 else*
subject to a re-                                                                            where than on
inspection                                                                                  the ground floor
duty on                                                                                                                                                      I
fire authority                                                                                                                    Explosives or       Low
                                                         S ubje ct to           Material
                                                                                                                                  highly              Risk
                                                         a re-inspection        change
                                                                                                                                  flammables in
                                                         d u ty o n fire
                                                                                                                                  factories
                                                         a u th o rity



                                                                                Notify      Apply for
                                                                                Fire        Fire
                                                                                Authority   Certificate
                                                                                    ]— c      “L
                                                                                            Factories, offices                    Low rise
                                                         Low rise                                                                 premises
                                                         premises                           & railway prem­
                                                                                            ises on 3 or more
                                                                                            storeys or of 2
                                                                                            storeys & base*
                                                                                            m ent (not F.R.
                                                                                            separated) shops
                                                                                            on 2 or more                        Fire Authority
                                                         Fire Authority                                                         decides whether
                                                         decides whether                    storeys above
                                                                                            ground or single                . p to exercise
                                      r                  to exercise
                                                         power to grant
                                                         exemption
                                                                                            storey & basement
                                                                                             (not F.R.
                                                                                            separated)
                                                                                                                                power to grant
                                                                                                                                exemption


                                                                                                             H -—J
                                                 Jl                                                                   Normal or                   Low risk
                                           Low risk                 Normal or
                                                                    high risk                                         high risk


                                                                                                                 I_                                   Subsequent
                                          Subsequent                                                                                                  change
                                          change

                                                                                            S ubje ct to                                              Notify fire
                                           Notify fire                                                                                                authority
                                                                                            c e rtific a tio n
                                           authority


                                                                                             Re*inspection
                                                                                             duty on
                                                                                             fire authority
                                                                                                                  u
                                                                                                                                                       Subject to
                                                                                                                                                       statutory duty
                                                                                                                                                       on adequate
                                                                                                                                                       means of escape
                                                                                                                                                       & fire fighting
                                                                                                                                                       equipment with
                                                                                                                                                       inspection & re­
                                                                                                                                                       inspection duty
                                                                                                                                                       on fire authority
                                                                         ANNEX E

Safety Recommendations in the Pinal Report of the Popplewell Inquiry

1.    The distinction made between sports grounds and sports stadia should be
abolished.

2.    Further designation under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 of sports
grounds and sports stadia with accommodation for over 10,000 spectators where
Association Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and Cricket is played in
England, Wales and Scotland.

3.    All sports grounds and sports stadia not already designated under the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act1975 and having a capacity in a stand of over 500
spectators should be designated under the Fire Precautions Act 1971 as premises
requiring a fire certificate.

4.    One authority should be given the responsibility for securing structural
safety at sports grounds and stadia not designated under the 1975 Act.

5.    In England and Wales indoor sports facilities with accommodation for over
500 spectators should require a fire certificate under the Fire Precautions Act
1971.

6.    An urgent review of the existing legislation on indoor sports facilities
in Scotland should be undertaken and if they are not currently covered by fire
regulations such facilties should be designated under the Fire Precautions Act
1971.

7.   Provision should be made in the FPA 1971 for authorised officers of the
fire authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice.

8.    Provision should be made for authorised officers of the local authority to
have power to issue a prohibition notice under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975.

9.    There should be (1) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975; (2) a duty on the local authority annually to
inspect the premises prior to reissuing the certificate; and (3) power for the
local authority to revoke the certificate.

10.   The Department of the Environment should urgently amend the Building
Regulations Guidance Codes in relation to structural fire precautions in new
stands.




                                       45
                           STATUTORY                         I N S T RUM ENT S




                                                1987 No. 1941

       SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
           The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987
                         Made -                                         16th November 1987
                         Laid before Parliament                         25th November 1987
                         Coming into force              -                    1st January 1988



In exercise o f the powers conferred upon me by sections 6(1) and (4) and 10A(1) and (2) of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975(a), and after such consultation as is mentioned in
section 18(4) o f that Act, I hereby make the following Regulations:

Citation, commencement and extent
  1.—(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Safety o f Sports Grounds Regulations
1987 and shall come into force on 1st January 1988.
   (2) These Regulations do not extend to the Isles of Stilly.

Revocation
   2. The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976(b), the Safety of Sports Grounds
(Scotland) Regulations 1976(c) and the Safety o f Sports Grounds (Amendment)
Regulations 1986(d) are hereby revoked, except for the purposes o f any appeal to which
paragraph 6 o f Schedule 5 to the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of Sport Act 1987
(transitional provisions as respects appeals about safety certificatesXe) applies.

Interpretation
  3. For the purposes of these Regulations “ the 1975 Act ” means the Safety o f Sports
Grounds Act 1975.

Applications
  4.—(1) An application for a safety certificate shall be in the form contained in the
Schedule to these Regulations or a form to the like effect.
   (2)    An application for the amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate
shall be made in writing and any such application shall set out the names and addresses of
any persons who to the applicant’s knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring
compliance with the terms and conditions o f the safety certificate as amended, replaced or
transferred.

Notices by local authority
 5.—(1) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided—
    (a) to issue a safety certificate (including an issue by way of replacement of a safety
        certificate); or
    (b) to amend a safety certificate; or
    (c) to refuse to amend or replace a safety certificate,
(a) 1975 c.52; section 6(1) (c) was substituted by section 22(7) o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987
    (c.27) and, section 10A was inserted by section 24 o f that Act.
(b) S.I. 1976/1263.      (c) S.I. 1976/1300.     (d) S.I. 1986/1045.       (e) 1987 c.27.

                                                             1
they shall serve on every interested party notice in writing of their decision setting out the
information referred to in paragraph (4) below, together, in the case of a refusal, with their
reasons for it.

  (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
determined to refuse that application on grounds other than the one referred to in section
5(1) of the 1975 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal serve on the
applicant notice in writing of their decision, together with their reasons for it.

  (3) Where on an application for the transfer of a safety certificate a local authority—
     (a) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is not
         a qualified person, they shall, in addition to the notice referred to in section 5(1)
         of the 1975 Act, serve on the holder of the certificate a copy of that notice;
     (b) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is a
         qualified person but decide not to transfer the certificate, they shall serve on that
         person and the holder of the certificate notice in writing of their decision together
         with their reasons for it.

  (4) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of any application in respect of which the local authority’s decision
was taken is available for inspection at a place and at the times specified in the notice.

  (5) A soon as may be after the decision referred to in paragraph (1) above, the local
authority shall cause to be published in a newspaper circulating in the locality of the sports
ground to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision and the
information referred to in paragraph (4) above.

   (6) In this regulation “ interested party ” means—
      (a) the holder of a safety certificate whose application to have it amended or replaced
          has been refused;
      (b) any other person known to the local authority to be or likely to be concerned in
          ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate;
      (c) the chief officer of police; and
      (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
          authority or, in any other case, the building authority.



Appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act
  6.—(1) An appeal under section 5 of the 1975 Act(a) shall be brought (in accordance
with subsection (3A) or, as the case may be, subsection (3B) of section 5 of that Act(b)) in
the case of an appeal in respect of—
     (a) a general safety certificate, not later than twenty-eight days, and
     (b) a special safety certificate, not later than seven days,
after the relevant date.

    (2) In paragraph (1) above “ relevant date ” means—
       (a) in the case of a person to whom a safety certificate is issued, the date of the receipt
           by him of that certificate;
       (b) in the case of a person on whom a notice is served under section 4(1) (a) or 5(1) of
           the 1975 Act or regulation 5(1), (2) or (3) above, the date of the receipt by him of
           that notice; and
       (c) in the case of any other person, the date of the publication of the notice required
           by regulation 5(5) above.
 (a) Section 5 was amended by paragraph 7(1) o f Schedule 8 to the Local Government Act 1985 (c.51) and by section
     22 o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987.
 (b)*Subsections (3A) and (3B) o f section 5 were inserted by section 22(3) o f the Fire Safety and Safety of Places o f Sport
     Act 1987.

                                                              2
Appeals under section 10A of the 1975 Act
^    m An aooeal by an aggrieved person against a prohibition notice under section
       of the 1975 Act(a) shall be brought (in accordance with subsection (3) or, as the

the day on which the notice was served on him under section 10(1) of the 1975 ActlD).
  (2) An appeal by an aggrieved person against an amendment to <




 FT     A local authority may determine the fee to be charged in respect of an application
 for the issue amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate but such a fee shall
 not S a n ^ S o ^ t co—            rate with the work actually and reasonably done by or on
 behalf of the local authority in respect of the application.


                                                                                                     Douglas Hurd
 JfcN o v em b er 1987                                           One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                                                SCHEDU LE                                               Regulation 4(1)

                               SAFETY O F SPORTS G R O U N D S ACT 1975
                             A PPLICA TIO N FO R A SAFETY C ER TIFICA TE
  When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive of.
        (a) the county council where the sports ground is situated in a non-metropolitan county in England
             or Wales; or
        (b) the borough council where the sports ground is situated in Greater London; or
        (c) the district council where the sports ground is situated in a metropolitan county in England; or
         (d) the regionallislands council where the sports ground is situated in Scotland.

   To be completed in all cases                                                                                                 , --.i
   I hereby apply for a ‘ [general] [special] safety certificate in respect of the sports ground described
   below to be issued to ......................................................................................................


   I make the application *[on behalf of] [as]
    o f t ...........................................................



    Date       ............................................................             ..................................................

    Address ........................................................
                         .................................................        Tel.No........................................................

    * Delete as appropriate                                                                                ,
    t I f applying on behalf o f a sports club, company or some other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).

        Under the provisions of section 3(1) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, a local authority
     receiving an Application for a safety certificate have to determine whether the persor, to whom the
     .-rtificate mav be issued is likely to be in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and
     conditicms^f thecertificate. The applicant should therefore furnish below the



     <b) Section                                                                                                   Sport Act 1987.

                                                                              3
       1.       (a) Name and address of sports ground



            (b) Name of the occupier............
                 Name and address of the owner


            (c) Names and addresses of any persons other than the proposed holder of the certificate who
               to his knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with the terms and
               conditions of the safety certificate for which this application is being made.




    Complete Part I onlyfor an applicationfor a general safety certificate (to cover activities held over an
    indefinite period).
    Complete Part II onlyfor an applicationfor a special safety certificate ( to cover one occasion or a series
    o f occasions).



    PARTI: GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
       2.       List activities to be covered by general safety certificate




      3.     Give the approximate date of the construction of the spectator accommodation on the sports
    ground and details of any subsequent extension, major alteration or re-construction of the spectator
    accommodation on the sports ground, together with relevant dates.




      4. Give particulars of current fire certificates covering any premises on any part of the sports
    ground:
        (a) name of issuing fire authority...........................................................................................
            (b) name of holder of fire certificate.......................................................................................
            (c) date of issue of fire certificate...........................................................................................
            (d) description of premises covered by the fire certificate                                   ............................................
V
      5. Give particulars of any current statutory licences granted in respect of the sports ground or
    parts of it:
         (a) name of issuing licensing authority..................................................................................
            (b) name of licensee...............................................................................................................
            (c) type of licence (liquor, gaming etc.)                   ...............................................................................
            (d) date of expiry...................................................................................................................
            (e) description of the part or parts of the sports ground covered by the licence                                          ................


                                                                          4
   M        l) State maximum capacity for which spectator accommodation at the sports ground is
intended-.
     (a) seated spectators.........................................................................................

       (b) standing spectators...................................................................

    (2) State any restrictions on that capacity:
       (a) seated spectators...................................................................

        (b) standing spectators.............................................................................................

                          * i f        the ioet three vears the total number of seated spectators and
   7. Set out separately or               f       v, activity other than reserve team matches, practice
 the to tal nu m b er of sending sp^teto                 nd Each activity (other than those excluded)
 S r b e 'S C                  t h " ^          the nunvto of Scasions on which each activity took place dunng
  each of those years.

            Set out separately for each activity the                                                                           aetoity'took


  the activity taking place.

^ A R T I I : SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
       9.     Name event for which special safety certificate is required



       10. Give date(s) of event

      11.    Give the number of occasions on which this special event has taken place at the sports
    ground during the last three years ........................................................................................



    of the event and the date on which it was held.




                                                    EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                            (This note is not part o f the Regulations)
            These R e la tio n s , which            a p p ly   throughout O n * .B ritain (ex c^ t the Isles of IMUy),



       1976 (“ the 1976 Scottish Regulations ).




        1975 Act ).                                 ,       . 9g7 ^ t      come into force, those appeals will be made to




        f f i S               S       S       L         d      )   comes into force on . s. January .988, the same date
as the coining into force of these Regulations. Accordingly, these Regulations no longer
include provision corresponding to regulations 8 to 13 of the 1976 Regulations and
regulations 9 and 10 of the 1976 Scottish Regulations (the enabling power for which is, in
any event, replaced by section 22(7) of the 1987 Act) but provide instead (in regulation 6)
for the time within which an appeal must be brought before a magistrates’ court in England
and Wales or by summary application in Scotland.
  These Regulations also differ from the 1976 Regulations and the 1976 Scottish
Regulations in that they no longer prescribe a minimum time before the event for which
the application is made for the submission of an application for a special safety certificate.
They also do not require the local authority to have made decisions in respect of such
applications by specified periods.
  Regulation 5 of these Regulations requires certain notices to be given to interested
parties (as defined) and a newspaper notice to be published. Regulation 8 of these
Regulations differs from regulation 14 of the 1976 Regulations and regulation 11 of the
1976 Scottish Regulations in that it allows local authorities to charge fees in respect of
applications for the replacement and transfer of safety certificates as well as for
applications for their issue and amendment.
  These Regulations also differ from the 1976 Regulations (as amended) and the 1976
Scottish Regulations in that they refer only to sports grounds and not to sports stadia in
consequence of the amendments made to the 1975 Act by section 19 of, and Schedule 2 to,
the 1987 Act (which provisions also come into force on 1st January 1988 by virtue of the
Commencement Order referred to above).
  Regulation 7 of these Regulations is a new provision which prescribes the period within
which appeals in respect of prohibition notices (and amendments to those notices) issued
under section 10 of the 1975 Act (as substituted by section 23 (1) o f the 1987 Act) must be
brought under section 10A (1) and (2) of the 1975 Act (as inserted by section 24 of the 1987
Act).




                                              £1 *30 net
                                  ISBN 0 11 071941                    X

                      Printed in the United Kingdom by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                                   79Q/WO1734 C I3       11/87   3I7487I
                                              HOME OFFICE
                                     Queen Anne’s Gate L o n d o n SW1H 9AT
                                              Direct line: 01*213
                                           Switchboard: 01*213 3000

Our reference:    FEP/87 6/233/14
Your reference:                                             25 November 1987

       Chief Executives - County Councils +
                          Metropolitan District Councils
                          London Boroughs
                          Common Council of the City of London


       Dear Sir,
       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987

       FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:-
       IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)

        Introduction
        1.    As foreshadowed by HOC No 42/1987 the Secretary of State has
        now made a commencement order under section 50(2) of the Fire
        Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act)
        bringing in Part II of the 1987 Act with effect from 1 January
        1988.
        2.   This circular, together with Annex A, introduces the
        provisions of Part II of the 1987 Act and gives advice on the
        effects and operation of them. Advice on those provisions of
        Part I of the 1987 Act (fire safety) which are to be brought into
        force by the first commencement order is the subject of Fire
        Precautions Act Circular, 14/1987.

        Implementation of Part II (Safety of Sports Grounds)

        3.   Part II of the 1987 Act, consisting of sections 19 - 25,
        amends the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) in
        line with the Government's proposals contained in the
        Consultative Document published in June 1986 in response to the
        safety recommendations of the Popplewell Inquiry set up following
        the fire tragedy at Valley Parade on 11 May 1985. The main
        changes effected by Part II are as follows:-

        Section 19:- removes the distinction between sports "ground" and
        •ports "stadium" with consequential modifications to section 2(2)
        of the 1975 Act dealing with the contents of safety certificates.


        Section 20:- empowers the Secretary of State to vary the
        designation threshold of 10,000 under section 1 of the 1975 Act.
Section 21:- precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for the Chief Officer of Police.


Section 22:-   directs appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act to
the courts.

Sections 23 and 24:- replaces the existing emergency procedure
under section 10 by introducing prohibition notices in the case
of serious risks to spectators; and provision to appeal against
them.

Section 25:- places a duty on local authorities to enforce the
1975 Act and to arrange for annual inspections of designated
sports grounds in accordance with guidance from the Secretary of
State.

4.   Annexes A and B to Home Office circular Mo 7/1986 which
gives advice on the 1975 Act should be noted as necessary and
cross referenced to this circular. Particular attention is d r a ^ P
to the latest guidance on the new procedure for the issue of
prohibition notices to deal with serious risks to spectators.
Local authorities are asked to copy all such notices to the Home
Office for information until further notice. To assist local
authorities to draw up a prohibition notice a suggested format is
reproduced at Annex B to this circular.

Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987

5.   A copy of the revised regulations is also enclosed with this
circular. The regulations reflect the changes brought about by
sections 22 and 24 of the 1987 Act and lay down time limits for
appeals. Provisions on procedures for applications for safety
certificates, their issue, amendment, transfer and replacement
are incorporated in the regulations which also authorise the
determination of fees to be charged in respect of applications
for the issue, amendment, transfer and replacement of safety
certificates.

Transitional

6.   Under the provisions of Schedule 5 of the 1987 Act any
existing court order made under section 10 of the 1975 Act
remains in force. Similarly any appeal lodged prior to 1 January
1988 and still extant on that date will remain subject to the
appeal procedures of the Safety of Sportr. Grounds Regulations
1976 (SI 1976/1263).


Resource and manpower implications

7.   The contents of this circular do not result in any cost or
manpower implications other than those arising from the
inspections to be carried out on designated sports grounds under
section 10B(1) as introduced by section 25 of the 1987 Act.
Circulation of Statutory Guidance under section 10B(2) of the
1975 Act on these inspections together with any supplementary
advice is being done separately and will cover, as necessary, any
resource implications arising therefrom.


Supplementary

8.   The information and advice in this circular aiiid in Annex A
on the 1987 Act are given in good faith but it should be
understood that ultimately only the courts can rule
authoritatively on points of lav.

9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to Mr D Macnamara 01-213 7338.

                                          Yours faithfully



                                           AV
                                           P CANOVAN




 enclosures     1) Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations
                2) Commencement No 1 Order

copies for information to:-
ACC
AHA
LBA
ADC
ACPO
♦Clerks to Police Authorities
+Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
Chief Officers of Police
Magistrates Association
Justices Clerks Society
Sports Council


*vithout enclosures
+vithout enclosure (2)
                                                         ANNEX A

ANNEX A TO HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

Advice note by the Home Office on Part II of The Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (The 1987 Act) amending The
Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (The 1975 Act)

Introduction

1.   The general background to the 1975 Act together with a
summary of local authority powers and functions under that Act,
and procedures for the issue of safety certificates is set out in
Annexes A - D of Home Office Circular 7/1986 issued 7 February
1986 (taken from earlier Home Office circulars 150/1975, 130/1976
and 187/1976). This guidance should therefore be read in
conjunction with Annexes A - D of Home Office Circular 7/1986
which will need to be cross-referenced.

2.   The Popplewell Inquiry set up after the fire tragedy at
Valley Parade concluded that the 1975 Act had worked
satisfactorily at designated grounds but recommended changes to
improve its operation. The Government's response was contained
in a consultative document published in June 1986. Parts II and
III of the 1987 Act implement these proposals and introduction of
Part II as from 1 January 1988 is the first phase of this
implementation.
3.   The main mechanism for securing safety at sports grounds
remains the safety certificate. Guidance on safety standards is
contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green
Guide) revised in October 1986. Local authorities are reminded
of the advice contained in paragraph 5 of Annex B to Home Office
Circular 7/1986 highlighting the need to maintain flexibility in
order to take account of the different circumstances at
individual grounds.
SUBSTANCE OF THE AMENDMENTS EFFECTED BY PART II OF THE 1987 ACT
Section 19: Application of the 1975 Act to all sports grounds

4.   Section 19, together with the textual amendments of Schedule
2 to the 1987 Act removes the distinction in the 1975 Act between
a sports "ground" and a sports •’stadium". As amended the
provisions of the 1975 Act apply to all sports grounds as defined
in section 17(1) of that Act. The Secretary of State m?y thus
designate any category of sports groond without first h?ving to
make an order extending the provisions of the Act to that
particular class of ground.

5.   In consequence of this wider power, section 2 of the 1975
Act (originally formulated with "stadia" in mind, particularly
football stadia) has also had to be amended, by section 19 (2) of
the 1987 Act, so that safety certificates are no longer required
to contain certain obligatory terms and conditions. The
Secretary of State is however empowered to stipulate by order the
contents of a safety certificate for any class of sports ground.
In this way those grounds of a particular type, or grounds used
for a particular sport need not be subject to requirements which
would be inappropriate to them.

6.   As there are no present plans to extend designation to other
classes of sports ground it is not envisaged that an order under
this new power will be necessary. The discretion given to local
authorities under section 2(1) of the 1975 Act means that with
the possible exception of clauses in safety certificates relating
to police presence (see paragraph 9 below) the contents of safety
certificates will not automatically require amendment as a result
of the removal of the obligatory terms of section 2 of the 1975
Act. Safety certificates should continue to specify maximum
spectators;  include terms and conditions as to size, situation
of entrances/exits to and from the ground and parts of it
(including means of escape in the case of fire or other
emergency) plus means of access to any such entrances and exits;
tenos and conditions should continue to require those entrances,
exits and means of access to be properly maintained and kept free
from obstruction; and terms and conditions should continue to flf
deal with the number, strength and situation of any crush
barriers.

7.   Section 19(2) also widens the regulation powers given to
the Secretary of State by insertion of a new subsection (1A) to
section 18 of the 1975 Act thereby enabling regulations to make
different provision for different classes of sports grounds.

Section 20:   Designation of grounds - variation in qualifying
              spectator capacity

8.   Section 20 inserts subsections (1A) and (IB) in section 1 of
the 1975 Act to give the Secretary of State power to vary by
order the numerical threshold above which grounds may be
designated as requiring a safety certificate. The threshold is
at present set at 10,000 by the Act.


Section 21:   Safety certificates - police presence

9.   Section 21 adds subsection (2A) to section 2 of the 1975
Act. Where the local authority includes in a safety certificate
a provision which requires the presence of the police, the
subsection requires that determination of their number is to be
left to the Chief Officer of Police. This is already the usual
if not invariable practice and this provision does no more than
give statutory force to existing arrangements.  Safety
certificate conditions which do noc comply with this provision
vill however be void and local authorities are advised to ensure
that any such conditions comply with the new provisions.

Section 22:   Safety certificates - appeals

10. Section 22 of the 1987 Act directs appeals under section 5
of the 1975 Act to the courts instead of to the Secretary of
State as hitherto. Such an appeal is to the Magistrates Court by
way of making a complaint (new subsection (3A) of section 5).
There is also provision for an appeal to the Crown Court against
an order made by a Magistrates Court on determining a complaint.
Such an appeal may be made by the local authority or by any
"interested party" as defined in section 5 of the 1975 Act.

11. Subsections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 5 are repealed
in consequence of the removal of the Secretary of State's
functions in respect of appeals. However the Secretary of State
is given the power to prescribe by regulation the time within
which appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act ar* to be brought.
These regulations will also come into effect as from 1 January
1988. There is however transitional provision contained in
paragraph 6 of Schedule 5 to the 1987 Act to preserve the
existing appeal procedures/powers in respect of appeals made to
the Secretary of State before 1 January 1988 and which are still
extant on that date.
12. Section 22(8) of the 1987 Act makes a number of
consequential amendments to section 7 of the 1975 Act
(determinations and appeals/supplementary). Subsection (8)(a)
amends section 7(1) of the 1975 Act so that it provides for an
application to be deemed to be withdrawn if the local authority
serve a notice under section 5(1) that an applicant is not
qualified for the issue of a certificate, once the time limit for
an appeal has expired.  It also removes from the 1975 Act section
7(1)(b) which misleadingly implies that the local authority can
determine without an application having been made that an
existing holder of a safety certificate no longer qualifies to
hold it.   Subsection (8)(b) amends section 7(2) to make
provision to suspend the effect of the local authority decision
that an applicant is not a qualified person if an appeal is made
in the prescribed time limits. This suspension has effect until
the appeal is either withdrawn or determined by the court in
favour of the authority. Subsection 8(c) amends section 7(3) of
the 1975 Act and subsection (8)(d) repeals the provision in
section 7 of the 1975 Act by which a court could, on the
application of the local authority, give immediate effect to a
term or condition of a safety certificate which had been
suspended as a result of an appeal.

Section 23: Special procedure in case of serious risk -
prohibition notices: and
Section 24: Prohibition Notices: appeals
13. Section 23 of the 1987 Act replaces the existing section 10
of the 1975 Act with provision for a system of prohibition
notices. Section 24 of the 1987 Act provides for appeals against
a prohibition notice.
14. A prohibition notice may be served in respect of any sports
ground as defined in section 17(1) of the 1975 Act or part of
such a sports ground. The criteria for issuing a prohibition
notice are set out in the new section 10(1) and local authorities
should not feel inhibited from using the new powers when
necessary.  These powers are nonetheless potentially far reaching
(see also paragraph 20 below) and local authorities are therefore
asked to ensure that they are used with due discretion.   In
practice, the considerations leading to -the issuing of a
prohibition notice are likely to be comparable to those which no
apply to seeking a court order, and prohibition notices should in*
general be used as a last rather than a first resort, after      V
consultations with the ground operator have failed to secure
reasonable safety improvements and amendment of a safety
certificate (where issued) is not considered to be an effective
way of dealing with the risk(s). It is, of course, nonetheless
important for local authorities to ensure that they have an
effective machinery for the issue of such a notice ;urgently
should the need arise. Authorities may therefore wish to
consider delegating to a limited number of senior officers the
authority to act on behalf of the council and issue such a notice
containing directions.

15. Prohibition notices must contain the information specified
in new section 10(2). Local authorities are also encouraged to
include in the notice directions under new section 10(4)
detailing the required remedial measures. A notice can apply
generally or to a specific occasion (new section 10(3)). A
notice may not however include directions compliance with which
would require the provision of police unless the Chief Officer
Police has consented to their inclusion (new section 10(5)). T ™
extent of the provision is also reserved for his determination.

16. A prohibition notice and any amendment to it should be
served on the persons specified in new section 10(6). Where it
applies to an occasion for which a special safety certificate is
in force, notice should be served on both the holder of the
special safety certificate and the holder of the general safety
certificate.  Failure to do so does not however affect the
validity of the notice.

17. New section 10(7) provides that a prohibition notice can
take effect immediately if the risk to spectators is imminent or,
in other cases, at the end of the period specified in the notice.
Where the notice is to take immediate effect, the notice must
state that the local authority are of the opinion that the risk
to spectators is or, as the case may be, will be imminent.

18. A copy of the prohibition notice and any amendment to it
must be sent to the officer and authorities named in new section
10(8). In most cases these authorities are likely to be
represented in any safety team and are likely to have been
consulted in advance.

19. Under section 10(9) a prohibition notice may be amended and
any amendment must specify the date on which it is to come into
operation (section 10(10)). Under section 10(11) a prohibition
notice may be withdrawn. Section 23(2) of the 1987 Act amends
section 12 of the 1975 Act (offences) to take account of the
changes to section 10. Section 23(3) adds to the definitions of
section 17(1) of the 1975 Act.

Appeals

20. Section 24 of the 1987 Act introduces new section 10A to the
1975 Act which provides for a system of appeals against
prohibition notices issued under new section 10 as inserted by
section 23 of the 1987 Act. The bringing of an appeal does not
suspend the operation of the notice or of any amendment to it
(section 10A(6)) so, particularly if the notice is to apply to a
"one-off" fixture, it is important that it is served, wherever
possible, well in advance so as to enable the recipient to
exercise effectively his right of appeal. The appeal procedure
is by way of complaint to a Magistrates Court. O n ,appeal the
court may cancel the notice or affirm the notice, either in its
original form or as amended, or with such modifications as the
court thinks fit. There is provision for a further right of
appeal to the Crown Court against the decision of the Magistrates
Court. Persons entitled to make such an appeal are listed in new
section 10A(7). "An aggrieved person" referred to in sub-section
 (7)(a) is defined in sub-section (9).

Section 25:   Enforcement : Inspections and offence of obstruction

21. Section 25(1) of the 1987 Act adds a new section 10B to the
1975 Act which provides for local authorities to enforce the
Act's provisions and, for that purpose, to arrange for the
inspection of designated grounds at least once every twelve
months in accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of
State.

22. Section 25(2) updates section 12(6)(d) of the 1975 Act by
amending the term "wilfully" to "intentionally".




G2 Division
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
                                              HOC 71/1987   ANNEX B



[Name and address of local authority]


Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

PROHIBITION NOTICE


Name (a)

Address (b)

     being - *the holder of a general safety certificate for (c)

              - *the holder of a special safety certificate for    (c)

              - *the person who appears to the (e) council to be
                responsible for the management of (c)

              - *a person who appears to the (e) council to be
                responsible for organising an activity at (c)


     on    (d)


Notice is hereby given that (e) Council are of the opinion that
the admission of spectators to *[the (c) sports ground]*[parts of
the (c) sports ground which are] specified in the Schedule to
this notice *[involves]*[will involve] a risk to them so serious
that until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable
level the admission of spectators to *[the ground] *[that part of
the ground] ought to be * [prohibited] * [restricted].

The matters which in the council's opinion *[give] *[will give]
rise to that risk are as follows . . . .




The (e) Council hereby direct that *[no spectators]*[no more than
the number of spectators specified in the schedule which forms
part of this notice] shall be admitted to *[that sports ground]
*[the parts of that sports ground specified in the schedule]
until those matters detailed above have been remedied.

*The (e) Council is of the opinion that the risk to spectators
*[is]*[will be] imminent, and the * [prohibition] * [restriction]
is to take effect immediately.
,
The * [prohibition] * [restriction] is to tike effect after   /19
  and relates to the admission of spectators * [generally] *[on
the occasion(s) specified in the schedule].

•The (e) Council further direct that the steps specified in the
schedule which forms part of this notice will have ito be taken to
reduce the risk to a reasonable level.




Signature                                          Date

(Block Capitals)

Position held in Council ..............

[Being a person authorised by (e) Council under section 101 of
the Local Government Act 1972 to issue such a notice]

(a)   Name of person on whom the notice is being served
(b)   Address at which it is intended to serve the notice
(c)   Name of sports ground
(d)   Date of event covered by a special safety certificate to
      which the notice applies
(e)   Name of the local authority




•delete as appropriate.
schedule
1.* No sore than the following numbers of spectators may be
admitted to the ground/the parts of the ground specified below*:


2.* The following steps must be taken to reduce the risk to
spectators to a reasonable level:


3.* The prohibition/restriction* applies to the admission of
spectators on the following occasions:



•delete as appropriate
          THESE NOTES SHOULD BE PRINTED ON THE BACK OF THE
                         PROHIBITION NOTICE

NOTES

Offences

1.    Contravention of any prohibition notice or restriction
imposed by a prohibition notice is an offence provided by section
12(1)(e) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act)
as amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 (the 1987 Act) and renders the offender liable, on summary
conviction, to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum
(currently £2,000) or, on conviction on indictment, to an
unlimited fine, or imprisonment for not more than two years, or
both.
2.   Where any person is charged with an offence under section
12(1)(e) of the 1975 Act it shall be a defence to prove

(a)     that the admission of spectators in contravention of the
        notice was without his consent; and

(b)     that he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all
        due diligence to avoid the commission of such an offence by
        himself or any other person under his control.

3.   Section 12(7) of the 1975 Act provides that where an offence
under that Act which has been committed by a body corporate is
proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of,
or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of, a director,
manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body
corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in any such
capacity, he, as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of
that offence and be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
4.   Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, section 12(7) of the 1975 Act shall apply in relation to
the acts, and defaults of a member in connection with his
functions of management as if he were a director of the body
corporate.
5.   The validity of a prohibition notice served on any person
shall not be affected by a failure to serve another person
required to be served with such a notice.


Appeals
6.   Your attention is drawn to the provision for appeal to a
magistrates' court against this notice in section 10A of the 1975
Act as inserted by the 1987 Act.
Regulations made under section 10A(1) of the 1975 Act stipulate
that a person on whom a prohibition notice is served may appeal
to the court within 21 days after the day on which the notice is
served on him.
Where an appeal is brought under this section against a
prohibition notice or an amendment of it, the bringing of the
appeal does not have the effect of suspending the operation of
the notice.
                             STATUTORY                    INSTRUMENTS




                                     1987 No. 1762 (C. 54)

                   FIRE PRECAUTIONS
          SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

      The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
               (Commencement No. 1) Order 1987

                             M ade   -                                    6th October 1987




•
    In exercise of the powers conferred on me by section 50(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety
    of Places of Sport Act 1987(a), I hereby make the following Order:

      1.  This Order may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (Commencement No. 1) Order 1987.

      2.    The provisions of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified
    in the Schedule to this Order shall come into force on 1st January 1988.



    Home Office                                                                      Douglas Hurd
    6th October 1987                             One of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                                 SCHEDULE                                             Article 2

    PROVISIONS O F TH E FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY O F PLACES O F SPORT
           ACT 1987 COM ING IN TO FORCE ON 1st JANUARY 1988

    Provisions o f the Act               Subject m atter o f provisions

    In Part I:
      Section 3                          Charges for fire certification work
      Section 4                          Means o f escape: scope o f regulation
      Section 8                          Duties as regards safety pending determination o f applications for
                                           fire certificates
      Section   9                        Special procedure in case o f serious risk: prohibition notices
      Section   11                       Disclosure o f information obtained in premises
      Section   12                       Civil and other liability
      Section   13                       Removal o f exemption for premises used for public religious
                                           worship


    (a)   1987 c.27.
Provisions o f the Act               Subject matter o f provisions

  Section 14                         Breaches o f fire certificate requirements: restriction o f defence
  In section 16, subsection          Special provision for certain premises
     (1), subsection (2) to the
     extent necessary to give
     effect to the provisions of
     Schedule 1 specified in
     this Schedule, and
     subsection (3)
  Section 17                         Extension o f power to apply the Fire Precautions Act 1971(a)
  In section 18, so much of          Application to the Crown
     subsections (1), (2) and
     (3) as amends section 40
     o f the Fire Precautions
     Act 1971 by providing-
     (a) that in subsection
     (l)(a) o f that section after
     “4” there shall be
     inserted “5(2A)”; and
     (b) that in subsection
     (l)(b) o f that section after
     “8” there shall be
     inserted “8B” and after
     “ 10” there shall be
     inserted “ 1OB”
Part II                              Safety o f sports grounds
In Part V:
  Section 46                         Entertainment licences: fees for variation
  Section 49, to the extent          Repeals and transitional and saving provisions
     necessary to give effect to
     such o f the repeals in
     Schedule 4 and provisions
     o f Schedule 5 as are
     specified in this Schedule
     and the Appendix to this
     Schedule
  In section 50, subsections         Short title, commencement and extent
     (1), (2) and (3) and so
     much of subsections (4)
     to (7) as has effect in
     relation to Part II o f the
     Act
In Schedule 1, Part I of             Fire precautions: special provision for certain premises
   Schedule 2 to the Fire
  Precautions Act 1971 and,
  in Part II of Schedule 2 to
  that Act, in paragraph 3,
  sub-paragraphs (1) and (2)
  and so much o f sub-
   paragraph (3) as has effect
  in relation to the references
  to the occupier in sections
   5(2A), 7(3A), 7(4) and 8B(1)
   of that Act
Schedule 2                           Extension o f application o f Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975(b)
                                       to sports grounds
In Schedule 4, so much o f the       Repeals
  entries as is specified in the
  Appendix to this Schedule
In Schedule 5, paragraphs 1,         Transitional and saving provisions
  3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9

(a) 1971 c.40.                       (b)   1975 c.52.


                                                        2
                     APPENDIX TO THE SCHEDULE
             REPEALS TAKING EFFECT ON 1st JANUARY 1988

Chapter        Short title            Extent o f repeal
1971 c.40      Fire Precautions Act   In section 2, the words from “o f any o f the following” to
                  1971                  “any premises” where last occurring
                                      In section 12(1), the words “other than paragraph (d)”
                                      In section 43(1), in the definition o f “the court”, the
                                        words “and the Schedule thereto”
                                      Section 43(2)
1975 c.52      Safety o f Sports      Section 5(4), (6), (7) and (8)
                 Grounds Act 1975     In section 7, in subsection (3), the words     subject to
                                        subsection (4) below,” and subsections (4) and (5)
                                      In section 12(2), the words “stadium or other”
                                      Section 15
                                      In section 17(1), the definition o f “sports stadium”




                                EXPLANATORY NOTE
                           (This note is not part o f the Order)

  This Order brings into force on 1st January 1988 the provisions of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 specified in the Schedule to the Order.




                                             3
             STATUTORY                       INSTRUMENTS



                       1987 No. 1762 (C. 54)

          FIRE PRECAUTIONS
 SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
         (Commencement No. 1) Order 1987




                                          85p net
                               ISBN 0 11 077762 X

             Printed in the U nited Kingdom for H er Majesty’s Stationery Office


       790   W 01551     C29      10/87     452/3     4235     PS 7944007      872617P
                                                             Annex C


THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS   (DESIGNATION) ORDERS


Statutory Instrument     Football                Ruabv Union
1976 No 1264             Arsenal                 Twickenham
 31 July 1976            Aston Villa             National Stadium,
                                                     Cardiff Arms Park
                         Birmingham City
                         Bristol City
                         Cardiff City
                         Coventry City
                         Derby City
                         Everton
                         Ipswich Town
                         Leeds United
                         Leicester City
                         Liverpool
                         Manchester City
                         Manchester United
                         Middlesborough
                         Newcastle United
                         Norwich City
                         Q u e e n 1s Park Rangers
                         Stoke City
                         Sunderland
                         Tottenham Hotspur
                         West Bromwich Albion
                         West Ham United
                         Wrexham
                         Wembley Stadium


1977 No 1323             Chelsea
 29 July 1977            Nottingham Forest
                         Wolverhampton Wanderers


1978 No 1091             Bolton Wanderers
 28 July 1978            Sheffield Wednesday
                         Southampton
1979 No 1022    Brighton and*Hove Albion
7 August 1979   Bristol Rovers
                Burnley
                Cambridge United
                Charlton Athletic
                Crystal Palace
                Fulham
                Luton Town
                Notts County
                Oldham Athletic
                Orient
                Preston North End
                Shrewsbury Town
                Swansea City
                Watford


1980 No 1021    Blackburn Rovers
 18 July 1980   Grimsby Town


1981 No 949     Rotherham United
 2 July 1981    Barnsley


1982 No 1052    Carlisle United
 27 July 1983


1984 No 962     Huddersfield Town
 4 July 1983    Portsmouth


1984 No 942     Oxford United
 3 July 1984    Sheffield United
                Wimbledon
AFC Bournemouth
Aldershot
Blackpool
Bradford City
Brentford
Bury
Chester
Chesterfield
Colchester
Crewe Alexandra
Darlington
Doncaster Rovers
Exeter City
Gillingham
Halifax Town
Hatlepool
Hereford United
Hull City
Lincoln City
Mansfield Town
Millwall
Newport County
Northampton Town
Peterborough United
Plymouth Argyle
Port Vale
Reading
Rochdale
Scunthorpe*
Southend
Stockport County
Swindon Town
Tranmere Rovers
Walsall
Wigan Athletic
York City
                 Ruabv League      *
1985 No 1064     Barrow
 11 July 1985    Batley
                 Bradford Northern
                 Castleford
                 Dewsbury
                 Featherstone Rovers
                 Halifax
                 Huddersfield
                 Hull
                 Hull Kingston Rovers
                 Keighley
                 Leeds
                 Leigh
                 Oldham
                 St Helens
                 Salford
                 Swinton
                 Wakefield Trinity
                 Warrington
                 Widnes
                 Wigan
                 Workington Town


1986 No 1296      Other association
                  football, ruabv and cricket grounds
  24 July 1986    Barnet
                  Bath
                  Bewick-upon-Tweed
                  Billingham
                  Birmingham (Edgbaston)
                  Blackpool
                  Boston
                  Bridgend
                  Bristol    (Rugby)
                  Camborne
                  Cardiff    (Arms Park)
                  Chelmsford
                  Chorley
Cwmbran
Dartford
Ebbw Vale
Exeter
Gateshead    (Int Stadium)
Gloucester
High Wycombe
Kettering
Leeds
Leicester
Llanelli
London Champion Hill
          The Oval
          Lords
Manchester    (County Ground)
Mitcham
Morecambe
Neath
Newport
Northwich
Nottingham        (Trent Bridge)
Nuneaton
Pontypridd
Poole
Port Talbot
Scarborough
Sheffield (Owlerton)
Southall
Southport
Sutton
Swansea
Telford
Worcester
Workington        (Borough Park)
Workington        (Ellis Ground)
Yeovil    (Athletics Ground)
York
Redruth
1987 No 1689             Scarborough
24 September 1987


1988 No 1975             Scunthorpe*
11 November 1988         Macclesfield




*   Previous ground designated by SI 1985 No.1063.   New ground
designated by SI 1988 No.1975.
                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                        Queen Anne’s Gate L o n d o n SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-213
                                              Switchboard: 01*213 3000

Our reference:     FEP/87 6/233/14
Your reference:

                                                             25 November 1987
        The Chief Executives
                               County Councils
                               Metropolitan District Councils
                               London Borough Councils
                               Common Council of the City of London

        Dear sir

       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 72/1987

       FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 ;
       IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)              SECTION 25


       INSPECTIONS UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
       1975




       Introduction

       Further to HOC/71/87 giving advice about the effects of changes
       brought about by implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and
       Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) this circular
       introduces statutory Guidance given by the Secretary of state on
       inspections of designated sports grounds under section 10B of the
       Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as inserted by
       section 25 of the 1987 Act.
       General

       The Statutory Guidance, drawn up following consultation with the
       local authority associations, has effect in respect of any
       inspection carried out under section 10B of the 1975 Act after 1
       January 1988 when, by virtue of the Commencement Number 1 Order,
       Part II of the 1987 Act comes into effect.

       Local authorities should bear in mind the mandatory nature of the
       Statutory Guidance on inspections carried out under section 10B
       of the 1975 Act whereas the supplementary, explanatory memorandum
       enclosed with the Statutory Guidance is not binding.
Resource Inplications

Whilst it is not intended to restrict the time local authorities
may feel should be devoted to this task, inspections under
section 10B (when taken with existing commitments to inspect
designated sports grounds) should not result in significant
resource implications. The scope of inspections under paragraphs
3 and 4 of the statutory Guidance, together with associated
report work, are not intended to be as detailed or extensive as
that often required of the holder of a safety certificate, or
that which may sometimes be necessary prior to the issue of a
safety certificate. In general, inspections are not expected to
take more than about 2 man days per ground on average.
To assist local authorities prepare a report and record of
inspections a suggested basic format which can be adapted
according to preference is enclosed at Annex A.
Supplementary

Any enquiries about this circular or the statutory Guidance
should be directed to Hr Hacnamara 01-213 7338.

                                        Yours faithfully




                                        P CANOVAN
Copies for information sent to:-
ACC, AMA, LBA, ADC, ACPO
Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
Chief Officers of Police
Clerks to Police Authorities
Sports Council
HOC 72/1987


STATUTORY GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON INSPECTIONS TO BE
CARRIED OUT UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
1975



The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Ground Act
1975 (as inserted by section 25(1) of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987).


General

1.   The local authority should be satisfied that inspections
under this guidance are carried out by a person or persons
qualified for that purpose.
Scope of inspection

2.    Inspection of the ground should, where practicable, include
inspection of the following certificates of testing and records
as required under the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate to be kept by the holder and/or submitted to the
local authority.

(a)   any certificate covering testing of

(i) strength/loading tests carried out on crush barriers, guard
rails, hand rails, balustrading, walls or fences;

(ii) strength, stability of buildings or other structures;

(iii) inspections and condition of electrical installations.

(b)   records of the following:-

(i)   spectator attendances;

(ii) accidents involving spectators;

(iii) maintenance and other inspections of buildings, components
     and installations, together with identified deficiencies and
     recorded remedial measures taken;

(iv) tests and checks on emergency lighting, public address
     system, fire fighting equipment, fire warning system (if
     installed);

(v)   emergency evacuation procedures and steward training
      sessions.
3.   The inspection of the ground should normally include
inspection of the following items:-

(a) any part of the ground where an accident or incident
resulting in serious injury to spectators has occurred since the
last inspection;

(b) any recorded defect or deficiency which has arisen since the
last inspection and which, in the opinion of the inspecting
officer would be likely to lead to an accident which could result
in serious injury to spectators;

(c) major remedial work carried out since the date of the last
inspection to ascertain that it has been satisfactorily carried
out;

(d) all public stairways for their general condition, slip
resistance, condition of hand-rails (see also (j) below), trip
hazards especially at the head of stairways, adequacy of lighting
and structural fire separation;

(e) all egress routes used by the public, including emergency
exit routes, for obstructions, operation of exit gates, adequacy
of sign-posting and lighting, presence of any uncleared litter;

(f) fire fighting equipment and fire warning system (if
installed);

(g)   for the presence of any accumulation of litter,

(h) the emergency lighting system including any generator or
batteries

(i)   first-aid facilities and equipment;

(j) 10% of any crush barriers, balustrading and hand-rails for
overt signs of weakness which might signal the need for further
testing, remedial action or (additional) restriction on the
number of spectators allowed to occupy that part of the ground;

(k) 10% of the terraces or viewing slopes for general surface
condition, even-ness and slip resistance;

(1)   anchorage and fastening of 10% of any fixed seating.
(m)   any provision for the disabled.

Where the inspection of a sample as in paragraphs (j), (k) and
(1) reveals matters giving rise to serious concern for the safety
of spectators, the authority should go on to inspect all the
crush barriers etc, terracing or seating in that part of the
ground where the sample indicated that there were deficiencies.
Testing of equipment

4.   Tests should if possible be carried out to confirm that the
following is in working order:-
(a)   lighting, particularly on stairways and exit routes;
(b)   emergency lighting;

(c) public address system, including the proper functioning of
zoning where this facility is part of the requirements of the
safety certificate;

(d)   fire warning system (if installed);

(e) 10% of any metering system for recording the admission of
spectators to parts of the ground.




Home Office

25 November 1987
Supplementary advice and explanatory notes to the Statutory
Guidance to local authorities given by the Secretary of state
under section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

Introduction

1.   The following advice does not form part of the Statutory
Guidance given under section 10B of the 1975 Act. The following
advice is given in good faith but it should be remembered that
only the courts can rule authoritatively on interpretation of
points of law.

Objective of Inspections

2.   The object of the inspections is to monitor the suitability
of the terms and conditions of the safety certificate (where
issued) in the light of any change in the condition of the ground
and secondly, to assist local authorities in enforcing compliance
with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate or other
notice served on the ground occupier.

3.   Local authorities may wish to note that the inspection is
not intended to shift responsibility for spectator safety away
from the holder of any safety certificate or ground occupier, but
rather to help see that he succeeds in achieving (and
maintaining) the safety standards intended to be set by any
certificate for the number of spectators authorised to enter the
ground for a specified activity.
General

4.   As the size, age, configuration, condition and usage of
designated sports grounds as well as the attitude of management
can give rise to different inspection needs, the discretion of
local authorities to carry out more frequent or more extensive
inspections than is laid down by section 10B of the 1975 Act is
not restricted. The requirements of the Statutory Guidance have
been set at what is seen as the desired minimum likely to achieve
the objective described above leaving authorities free to add to
the content of the inspections or increase their frequency
according to locally determined needs. In this context local
authorities may wish to bear in mind that inspections carried out
under section 10B of the 1975 Act are in addition to, not a
substitute for those required to be carried out under the terms
and conditions of the safety certificate by or on behalf of the
holder.
Inspection frequency

5.   As section 10B(3) of the 1975 Act stipulates that an
inspection should take place of a "designated" ground at least
once every twelve months, this frequency must be observed even if
the issue of a safety certificate is delayed. Where a safety
certificate has not been issued, the inspections carried out
prior to its preparation and issue should be such as to fulfil
the requirements of the Statutory Guidance. Once a safety
certificate has been issued at least one further inspection of
the ground should be carried out either
within a year of its issue, or

within a year of the last inspection, whichever is the earlier.

Thereafter, inspections should take place at least annually from
the date of the last inspection.

Where an inspection of a sports ground takes place at the
discretion of the local authority for some other reason, for
example as a result of proposed alterations or an application for
amendment to the safety certificate, that inspection can be
regarded as an inspection carried out under section 10B of the
1975 Act provided the criteria of the Statutory Guidance are met.
Inspection Team

6.   The Statutory Guidance allows the local authority to
determine how best to arrange and effect inspections under
section 10B of the 1975 Act and does not stipulate that they
should be carried out by a particular professional discipline.
As it is nonetheless important that inspecting officers are
qualified for that purpose, the guidance places an onus on the
local authority to be satisfied on this account.  (The Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (paragraph 36) envisages that
inspections arranged by ground management will be carried out by
someone who is professionally qualified. Local authorities may
wish to consider whether inspecting officers should also be
professionally qualified.)

7.   Local authorities are also asked to bear in mind the
potential advantages of a team approach to inspections under the
Statutory Guidance and the role of the fire authority, building
authority and the police. Local authorities in London and
metropolitan counties may therefore wish to arrange at least one
inspection per year to be carried out with a representative of
the fire authority in attendance. Elsewhere, local authorities
will no doubt wish to consider inclusion of a member of the fire
service as well as a representative of the building authority.
Local authorities may also wish to consult the Chief Officer of
Police so that the opportunity can be given for a police officer
to attend at least one inspection each year.  (It is not intended
that these considerations should interfere with any internal or
locally agreed arrangements between the local authority, fire
authority, building authority, police and any other agency with
an interest in safety at the ground.)
Scope of Inspections

8.   Where possible all the items listed in paragraphs 3 and 4
of the Statutory Guidance should be inspected and tested. It is
recognised however that there may be occasions when one or more
of these elements cannot, for some reason, be inspected. For
this reason there is a degree of discretion within paragraphs 2 -
 4 of the Statutory Guidance. In this way it is hoped to avoid
the situation where the local authority has to pay repeated
visits to a ground in order to comply with the Statutory
Guidance.

9.   The Statutory Guidance does not require that an inspection
should take place at any particular time so the local authority's
discretion to carry out an inspection whilst the ground is in use
is not restricted. An "in-use" or "during performance"
inspection could therefore constitute part of the inspection
required by section 10B of the Act even though it might not be
sufficient (having regard to the requirements of the Statutory
Guidance) to be an inspection itself.
Records

10. Local authorities will doubtless need to keep a record of
all inspections carried out under the Statutory Guidance and may
wish to consider whether a copy of any report/record should be
sent to the holder of the safety certificate. Local authorities
are also asked to consider affording a reasonable opportunity for
any such report to be made available for inspection, if so
requested, by members of the public.




Home Office

25 November 1987
                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                            Queen Anne’s Gate L o n d o n SW1H 9AT
                                                     Direct line: 01-213
                                                  Switchboard: 01-213 3000

    Our reference:    FEP/87 6/233/14
    Your reference:
                                                                 25 November 1987
            The Chief Executives
                                   County Councils
                                   Metropolitan District Councils
                                   London Borough Councils
                                   Common Council of the City of London

            Dear Sir

            HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 72/1987

            FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 S
            IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)             SECTION 25


            INSPECTIONS UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
            1975




            Introduction
                                                                                     >

            Further to HOC/71/87 giving advice about the effects of changes
            brought about by implementation of Part II of the Fire Safety and
            Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) this circular
            introduces statutory Guidance given by the Secretary of State on
            inspections of designated sports grounds under section 10B of the
            Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as inserted by
            section 25 of the 1987 Act.

            General
            The Statutory Guidance, drawn up following consultation with the
            local authority associations, has effect in respect of any
            inspection carried out under section 10B of the 1975 Act after 1
            January 1988 when, by virtue of the Commencement Number l Order,
            Part II of the 1987 Act comes into effect.
            Local authorities should bear in mind the mandatory nature of the
            Statutory Guidance on inspections carried out under section 10B
            of the 1975 Act whereas the supplementary, explanatory memorandum
            enclosed with the statutory Guidance is not binding.




0
Resource Implications

Whilst it is not intended to restrict the time local authorities
may feel should be devoted to this task, inspections under
section 10B (when taken with existing commitments to inspect
designated sports grounds) should not result in significant
resource implications. The scope of inspections under paragraphs
3 and 4 of the Statutory Guidance, together with associated
report work, are not intended to be as detailed or extensive as
that often required of the holder of a safety certificate, or
that which may sometimes be necessary prior to the issue of a
safety certificate. In general, inspections are not expected to
take more than about 2 man days per ground on average.
To assist local authorities prepare a report and record of
inspections a suggested basic format which can be adapted
according to preference is enclosed at Annex A.
Supplementary

Any enquiries about this circular or the Statutory Guidance
should be directed to Mr Macnamara 01-213 7338.

                                        Yours faithfully




                                        P CANOVAN

Copies for information sent tos-

ACC, AMA, LBA, ADC, ACPO
Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
Chief Officers of Police
Clerks to Police Authorities
Sports Council
HOC 72/1987

STATUTORY GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON INSPECTIONS TO BE
CARRIED OUT UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
1975



The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Ground Act
1975 (as inserted by section 25(1) of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987).


General

1.   The local authority should be satisfied that inspections
under this guidance are carried out by a person or persons
qualified for that purpose.
Scope of inspection

2.    Inspection of the ground should, where practicable, include
inspection of the following certificates of testing and records
as required under the terns and conditions of the safety
certificate to be kept by the holder and/or submitted to the
local authority.

(a)   any certificate covering testing of

(i) strength/loading tests carried out on crush barriers, guard
rails, hand rails, balustrading, walls or fences;

(ii) strength, stability of buildings or other structures;
(iii) inspections and condition of electrical installations.


(b)   records of the followings-

(i)   spectator attendances;

(ii) accidents involving spectators;

(iii) maintenance and other inspections of buildings, components
     and installations, together with identified deficiencies and
     recorded remedial measures taken;

(iv) tests and checks on emergency lighting, public address
     system, fire fighting equipment, fire warning system (if
     installed);

(v)   emergency evacuation procedures and steward training
      sessions.
3.   The inspection of the ground should normally include
inspection of the following items:-
(a) any part of the ground where an accident or incident
resulting in serious injury to spectators has occurred since the
last inspection;

(b) any recorded defect or deficiency which has arisen since the
last inspection and which, in the opinion of the inspecting
officer would be likely to lead to an accident which could result
in serious injury to spectators;

(c) major remedial work carried out since the date of the last
inspection to ascertain that it has been satisfactorily carried
out;

(d) all public stairways for their general condition, slip
resistance, condition of hand-rails (see also (j) below), trip
hazards especially at the head of stairways, adequacy of lighting
and structural fire separation;

(e) all egress routes used by the public, including emergency
exit routes, for obstructions, operation of exit gates, adequacy
of sign-posting and lighting, presence of any uncleared litter;

(f) fire fighting equipment and fire warning system (if
installed);

(g)   for the presence of any accumulation of litter,

(h) the emergency lighting system including any generator or
batteries
(i)   first-aid facilities and equipment;
(j) 10% of any crush barriers, balustrading and hand-rails for
overt signs of weakness which might signal the need for further
testing, remedial action or (additional) restriction on the
number of spectators allowed to occupy that part of the ground;

(k) 10% of the terraces or viewing slopes for general surface
condition, even-ness and slip resistance;

(1)   anchorage and fastening of 10% of any fixed seating.

(m)   any provision for the disabled.
Where the inspection of a sample as in paragraphs (j), (k) and
(1) reveals matters giving rise to serious concern for the safety
of spectators, the authority should go on to inspect all the
crush barriers etc, terracing or seating in that part of the
ground where the sample indicated that there were deficiencies.

Testing of equipment
4.   Tests should if possible be carried out to confirm that the
following is in working order:-
(a)   lighting, particularly on stairways and exit routes;
(b)   emergency lighting;

(c) public address system, including the proper functioning of
zoning where this facility is part of the requirements of the
safety certificate;

(d)   fire warning system (if installed);

(e) 10% of any metering system for recording the admission of
spectators to parts of the ground.




Home Office

25 November 1987
Supplementary advice and explanatory notes to the Statutory
Guidance to local authorities given by the Secretary of State
under section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

Introduction

1.   The following advice does not form part of the Statutory
Guidance given under section 10B of the 1975 Act. The following
advice is given in good faith but it should be remembered that
only the courts can rule authoritatively on interpretation of
points of law.

Objective of Inspections

2.   The object of the inspections is to monitor the suitability
of the terms and conditions of the safety certificate (where
issued) in the light of any change in the condition of the ground
and secondly, to assist local authorities in enforcing compliance
with the terms and conditions of the safety certificate or other
notice served on the ground occupier.

3.   Local authorities may wish to note that the inspection is
not intended to shift responsibility for spectator safety away
from the holder of any safety certificate or ground occupier, but
rather to help see that he succeeds in achieving (and
maintaining) the safety standards intended to be set by any
certificate for the number of spectators authorised to enter the
ground for a specified activity.

General
4.   As the size, age, configuration, condition and usage of
designated sports grounds as well as the attitude of management
can give rise to different inspection needs, the discretion of
local authorities to carry out more frequent or more extensive
inspections than is laid down by section 10B of the 1975 Act is
not restricted. The requirements of the Statutory Guidance have
been set at what is seen as the desired minimum likely to achieve
the objective described above leaving authorities free to add to
the content of the inspections or increase their frequency
according to locally determined needs. In this context local
authorities may wish to bear in mind that inspections carried out
under section 10B of the 1975 Act are in addition to, not a
substitute for those required to be carried out under the terms
and conditions of the safety certificate by or on behalf of the
holder.
Inspection frequency
5.   As section 10B(3) of the 1975 Act stipulates that an
inspection should take place of a "designated" ground at least
once every twelve months, this frequency must be observed even if
the issue of a safety certificate is delayed. Where a safety
certificate has not been issued, the inspections carried out
prior to its preparation and issue should be such as to fulfil
the requirements of the Statutory Guidance. Once a safety
certificate has been issued at least one further inspection of
the ground should be carried out either:-
within a year of its issue   ,
                             or

within a year of the last inspection, whichever is the earlier.

Thereafter, inspections should take place at least annually from
the date of the last inspection.

Where an inspection of a sports ground takes place at the
discretion of the local authority for some other reason, for
example as a result of proposed alterations or an application for
amendment to the safety certificate, that inspection can be
regarded as an inspection carried out under section 10B of the
1975 Act provided the criteria of the Statutory Guidance are met.
Inspection Team

6.   The Statutory Guidance allows the local authority to
determine how best to arrange and effect inspections under
section 10B of the 1975 Act and does not stipulate that they
should be carried out by a particular professional discipline.
As it is nonetheless important that inspecting officers are
qualified for that purpose, the guidance places an onus on the
local authority to be satisfied on this account.  (The Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (paragraph 36) envisages that
inspections arranged by ground management will be carried out by
someone who is professionally qualified. Local authorities may
wish to consider whether inspecting officers should also be
professionally qualified.)

7.   Local authorities are also asked to bear in mind the
potential advantages of a team approach to inspections under the
Statutory Guidance and the role of the fire authority, building
authority and the police. Local authorities in London and
metropolitan counties may therefore wish to arrange at least one
inspection per year to be carried out with a representative of
the fire authority in attendance. Elsewhere, local authorities
will no doubt wish to consider inclusion of a member of the fire
service as well as a representative of the building authority.
Local authorities may also wish to consult the Chief Officer of
Police so that the opportunity can be given for a police officer
to attend at least one inspection each year.  (It is not intended
that these considerations should interfere with any internal or
locally agreed arrangements between the local authority, fire
authority, building authority, police and any other agency with
an interest in safety at the ground.)

Scope of Inspections
8.   Where possible all the items listed in paragraphs 3 and 4
of the Statutory Guidance should be inspected and tested. It is
recognised however that there may be occasions when one or more
of these elements cannot, for some reason, be inspected. For
this reason there is a degree of discretion within paragraphs 2 -
 4 of the Statutory Guidance. In this way it is hoped to avoid
the situation where the local authority has to pay repeated
visits to a ground in order to comply with the Statutory
Guidance.
9.   The Statutory Guidance does not require that an inspection
should take place at any particular tine so the local authority's
discretion to carry out an inspection whilst the ground is in use
is not restricted. An "in-use" or "during performance"
inspection could therefore constitute part of the inspection
required by section 10B of the Act even though it might not be
sufficient (having regard to the requirements of the Statutory
Guidance) to be an inspection itself.

Records
10. Local authorities will doubtless need to keep a record of
all inspections carried out under the Statutory Guidance and may
wish to consider whether a copy of any report/record should be
sent to the holder of the safety certificate. Local authorities
are also asked to consider affording a reasonable opportunity for
any such report to be made available for inspection, if so
requested, by members of the public.




Home Office

25 November 1987
                                           fa n         £




FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY
     OF PLACES OF
    SPORT ACT 1987

Part III o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of
Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) and the Safety o f
Places o f Sport Regulations 1988 com e into
effect on 1 January 1989. They provide for a
system o f safety certification by local auth­
orities* for certain covered stands known as
regulated stands at sports grounds and for
subsequent inspections.

This leaflet gives basic guidance to sports
ground m anagers on the operation o f Part III
o f the 1987 Act. It has no legal authority as an
interpretation of the legislation or regulations
m ade u n d er it.
       Part III o f the 1987 A ct does not apply to a                  T h ere are two sorts o f safety certificate: a
sports g ro u n d w hich is designated u n d e r the           “ g en eral” safety certificate and a “ special” safety               This d ep en ds on the viewing accom m odation
Safety o f Sports G ro und s Act 1975 as re q u irin g a       certificate.                                                 u n d e r cover for spectators. In m o st cases it
safety certificate for the w hole g ro u n d . It applies            T he general safety certificate is for the use of      sho uld be clear w h eth er o r n o t a stand can
to all o th e r o u td o o r sports g ro u n d s, w hatever    the stand for those activities at the sports g ro u n d      accom m odate u n d e r cover a t least 500 spectators.
th eir use, w here th ere are covered stands for               specified in the certificate for an indefinite period.       T here is statutory guidance for local authorities
spectators.                                                                                                                 issued u n d e r section 28(8) o f the 1987 Act. In
                                                                      T he special safety certificate is for an event,
                                                               o r series o f events, specified in th a t certificate and   general th e capacity is calculated for the p u rp o se
                                                               n o t specified in the general safety certificate. A         o f d e te rm in in g w h ether a stand is a regulated
                                                               special safety certificate is issued only if a general       stand by a d d in g the n u m b e r o f any fixed seats
                                                               safety certificate is in force.                              (and/or m arked bench places) and any standing
        Basically, it stipulates th a t a stand at a sports                                                                 a cco m m o d atio n calculated a t 27 persons p e r 10
g ro u n d w hich is n o t a designated g ro u n d ( s ^ a k            A lthough there is no statutory tim e lim it in


                                                               a
                                                                                                                            squ are m etres.                                        ^jjp
above) an d which can acco m m o d ate at lea.st.w y                    to apply for a special safety certificate, the
spectators under cover to view the activities at the                   luthority will n eed tim e to consider any
g ro u n d m u st have a safety certificate if it is to be             application. A pplication sho uld therefore be
used fo r that p u rp ose. Such a stand is called a            m ad e as early as possible, preferably a t least 3
“ regulated sta n d ” .                                        m o n th s before the event.

                                                                                                                                   If you disagree w ith the preliminary
                                                                                                                            determ in atio n contact the local authority straight
        Broadly speaking, the local autho rity                                                                              away saying why you disagree. You should also
respo nsible for the issue o f a safety certificate                    A general safety certificate is issued to the        tell the local authority if you th in k som eone else
d e te rm in e if a stand is a regulated stand. They           p e rso n responsible for the m an a g e m e n t o f the     qualifies to h o ld the safety certificate. T he local
will th e n notify the perso n w ho appears to them            sports gro und .                                             authority can th e n try to resolve any differences
to be responsible for the m a n a g em en t o f the                                                                         with you before the prelim inary determ inatio n
                                                                      A special safety certificate is issued to the         becom es final, i f you th en still disagree a b o u t
sports g rou n d . This is know n as a preliminary
                                                               p erso n organising the p articular event at the             w hether the stand can a cco m m o d ate a t least 500
determ ination which becom es a final determ ination
                                                               sports g ro u n d (who m ay also be the h o ld e r o f the   spectators u n d e r cover you can appeal to a
after two m onths. A n application for a general
                                                               general safety certificate).                                 m agistrates co u rt (in Scotland, a Sheriff Court)
safety certificate th e n has to be m a d e if the stand
is to be used by spectators to view activities a t the                                                                      w ithin 28 days o f the date o f the final
gro u n d .                                                                                                                 determ ination.
       A lternatively, if the perso n responsible for                This is d efined in section 26(11) o f the 1987
m an aging the sports g ro u n d is aware th a t o ne or       Act. T em porary stands are excluded. O therw ise
m o re o f the stands w ould be a regulated stand he           any artificial structure providing covered
can obtain the form s from the local authority and             acco m m o d atio n for spectators is regarded as a
                                                               stand for the p urpo ses o f Part III o f the 1987 Act.            A pplication form s are ob tainable from the
apply for a general safety certificate w ithout waiting
                                                               T he a cco m m o d atio n m ay be seated o r standing        local au th ority (who m ay well issue th e m with
for the p relim inary determ in ation . T he local
                                                               a ccom m o dation o r both. (Covered terracing               their p relim inary determ ination). A separate
au th ority will then m ake a final determ in atio n and
                                                               w ould, for exam ple, be a stand u n d e r Part III of       application form sho uld be co m p leted for each
deal with the application.
                                                               the Act.)                                                    regulated stand.
       It will contain term s an d conditions which                       As w ith any enterp rise o r undertaking,
the local authority, after they have consulted the                responsibility fo r th e safety o f spectators rests with
police a n d either the fire au thority o r building              the m a n a g e m e n t a n d organisers w ho have to
authority, co nsider necessary o r ex p ed ien t to               m e e t the cost o f any safety m easures.
secure reasonable safety for the n u m b e r o f
spectators to be a c c o m m o d ate d in the whole stand
(including any parts w hich are n o t u n d e r cover)
w hen it is in use for viewing such activity or
activities at the g ro u n d as are specified in the                      Local authorities are a u th o rised by
certificate. Term s a n d conditions are likely to deal           regulations to charge fees fo r w ork reasonably
w ith such things as exits, exit routes, stairways,               d o n e by th em , o r on th eir behalf, as a result of an
gangways, b a rrier p rotection, fire precautions,                application fo r the issue, am e n d m e n t,
stew arding etc.                                                  replacem ent, transfer o r cancellation o f a safety
                                                                  certificate.




       This will d e p e n d o n the individual
circum stances. In g eneral the local authority will
balance th e a m o u n t o f ad ditio nal safety p ro d u c e d            T h e G uide to Safety at Sports G roun ds
by a particular m easu re against its cost a n d the              (ISBN 0-11-340840-4) p u b lish ed o n b e h a lf o f the
extent o f the risk. If th e h o ld e r o f a safety              H o m e Office a n d Scottish Office by H M SO price
certificate thinks the re q u ire m e n ts are                    £2.50 contains g uidance o n safety re q u ire m e n ts at
u n rea so n a b le h e has a right to ap p eal to a              sports gro u n d s. B ut do take care n o t to waste
m agistrates c o u rt (in Scotland, a Sheriff Court)              resources on m easures w hich do n o t satisfy the
w ithin 28 days o f receipt o f the general safety                local authority. Seek professional o r skilled advice,
certificate (7 days in th e case o f a special safety             o r ask th e local au th ority, if you are in d o u b t
certificate).                                                     a b o u t w h at is req u ired .

    '




       T h e re is provision u n d e r Part III o f the Act
for a local authority to a m e n d , transfer, replace or
cancel a safety certificate — either o n application
in writing, o r w ith o u t application if th e local
au th o rity con sid er it righ t to do so.
                                                                  * “ Local authority” m eans for the purpose o f the 1987 Act:-
                                                                  in London, the L ondon borough council or C om m on Council
                                                                  of the City o f London; in m etropolitan counties, the
                                                                  m etropolitan district council; elsewhere in England and Wales,
                                                                  the county council; in Scotland, the regional or islands council.
                                           / W a /£~x   Z''




                                              HOME OFnCE
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                               Direct line: 01-273
                                             Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference: FEP/88 6/233/8               15 November 1988
Your reference:




    The Chief Executive
    County Councils
    Metropolitan District Councils
    London Borough Councils
    Common Council of the City of London



    Dear Sir
    HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 96/1988
    FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT : PART III - SPORTS
    GROUNDS - CERTIFICATION OF STANDS AND THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF
    SPORT REGULATIONS 1988

    Introduction

    1.   This circular, together with annexes A - D, introduces the
    provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
    Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) and the Safety of Places of Sport
    Regulations 1988, which come into force on 1 January 1989.  A
    copy of the Commencement No 4 Order, under which Part III comes
    into force, is enclosed.

    Implementation

    2.   Part III is the final phase of implementation of those parts
    of the 1987 Act dealing with spectator safety at places of sport
    in line with the Government's proposals contained in the
    Consultative Document published in 1986.   It brings into effect a
    system of safety certification and (subsequent inspection of
    stands able to accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators
    ("regulated stands") at sports grounds not designated as
    requiring a safety certificate under section 1 of the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Detailed advice on Part III,
    section by section, is contained in Annex A.   A suggested format
    for a notice of determination that a stand is a regulated stand
    is at Annex D.

    3.   Action taken by local authorities in response to HOC 5/1986
    to identify stands able to accommodate at least 500 spectators
    should mean that most, if not all, such stands have already been
identified.  However, in determining regulated stand status under
Part III of the 1987 Act local authorities are required to act in
accordance with guidance issued by the Secretary of State under
section 26(8).  This guidance is being issued, together with
guidance on inspections under section 34 of the 1987 Act, under
separate cover.

Regulations
4.   A copy of the 1988 regulations is enclosed with this
circular.  The regulations lay down the procedure for
applications for safety certificates, their issue, transfer,
amendment, replacement and cancellation.  The regulations further
authorise local authorities to determine charges in respect of
applications for the issue etc of safety certificates.  Time
limits for all appeals to the courts are also prescribed.  More
detailed guidance to the regulations is contained in Annex B.

Safety Certification

5.   Supplementary advice on the application of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) and on the certification
of stands is offered in Annex C.                                    J

Resource and Manpower Implications

6.    The potential variation in regulated stands is such that an
accurate estimate of the average number of man-days for
certification is not possible, but reasonable costs can be
recovered by authorised charges (see paragraph 4 above and Annex
B ) . The resource implications of inspections under Statutory
Guidance given under section 34 of the 1987 Act will be dealt
with separately, as necessary, in the covering circular.

Supplementary
7.   Guidance on the effects of Part III of the 1987 Act intended
for ground management has also been produced.  Copies of the
guidance, which local authorities may wish to make available to
local sports ground management, are enclosed.  Additional copies
can be obtained from the Home Office if required.

8.   The information and advice given in this circular and
Annexes are given in good faith but it should be understood that
ultimately only the courts can rule authoritatively on points of
law.
 9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
 directed to Miss D Russell 01-273 3406.
                                              Yours faithfully



                                                 R R G WATTS
                                             Fire and Emergency
                                             Planning Department
 Enclosures:-
Enclosures:   Commencement No 4 Order
              The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988
              Guidance for Ground Management on the Operation
               of Part III
              Application Forms for a safety certificate




Copies for information to:-

     Association of County Councils
     Association of Metropolitan Authorities
     London Boroughs Association.
     Association of District Councils
     Association of Chief Police Officers
     Clerks to Police Authorities
     Clerks to Fire & Civil Defence Authorities
     Chief Officers of Police
     Magistrates Association
     Justices Clerks Society
     Sports Council
HOC 96/1988    ANNEX A
PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
SAFETY CERTIFICATION FOR REGULATED STANDS AT SPORTS GROUNDS

introduction

1.   The provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety & Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) supplement the provisions
of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (SSGA) with the aim of
improving the safety of spectators in stands at sports grounds
which are not designated as requiring a safety certificate under
the SSGA.  They follow closely the Government's proposals
contained in the Consultative Document published by the Home
Office/Scottish Office in June 1986 in response to the Final
Report of the Popplewell Inquiry.  Part III is brought into force
from 1 January 1989.  It is the final stage of implementation of
the 1987 Act's provisions on spectator safety at sports grounds
and provides for a system of safety certification for stands
determined by the local authority as able to hold 500 or more
spectators under cover ("regulated stands").

2.   Part III provides a regime of safety certification similar
to that under the SSGA but applies only to covered stands which,
in general, were seen by the Popplewell Inquiry as most likely to
pose risks from fire or structural deficiency (or b ot h ) . The
provisions of Part III apply to all types of sports ground as
defined in section 41 of the 1987 Act and section 17 of the SSGA.

General approach

3.   The safety certificate forms the main instrument of control
under Part III of the 1987 Act.   There are two sorts of safety
certificate, general and special.   The general certificate is the
main mechanism and is to be issued for an indefinite period for
specified activities taking place at the sports ground.   A
special safety certificate may be issued for a specified event or
events not covered by the general certificate.   A safety
certificate is required for each regulated stand that is to be
used by spectators for viewing activities at the sports ground.
It is the local authority who determine, subject to a right of
appeal to the courts, whether a stand is a regulated stand and
issue a safety certificate.  The stand in question remains a
regulated stand unless the local authority subsequently determine
otherwise.  Supplementary advice on safety certification is
contained in Annex C.

4.    In determining whether a stand is a regulated stand (ie able
to accommodate 500 or more spectators under cover) local
authorities are required to act in accordance with any guidance
issued by the Secretary of State under section 26(8).   Such
guidance has been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/
1988.   Local authorities are also required, under section 34, to
arrange for the periodic inspections of sports grounds which
contain regulated stands in accordance with guidance from the
Secretary of State.   Such guidance has also been issued under
cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.
SUBSTANCE OF PART III OF THE 1987 ACT

Section 26 : Safety certificates for stands at sports grounds

5.   Section 26 provides for the new system of safety
certificates for stands at sports grounds.  Under subsection (l)
Part III is applied to all sports grounds which

     a.    provide covered accommodation in stands for spectators,
     and

     b.    are not designated under section 1 of the SSGA.

Under subsection (2) a safety certificate is required in respect
   £h£ use of each stand which provides covered accommodation for
500 or more spectators to view activities at the ground (known as
a "regulated stand" under subsection (5)). Where more than one
regulated stand exists at a sports ground the local authority may
issue one certificate to cover all such stands.  The figure of
500 can be varied by the Secretary of State by Order subject to
negative resolution procedure of Parliament (subsections (3 ) and
(4)).  There are no plans at the present time to obtain such an
Order.

6.   Local authorities may care to note that it is only when a
stand is used for the purpose of viewing activities at the ground
that a safety certificate is required.  The use of a stand for
some other purpose, such as an internal activity (eg an
exhibition) would not require a safety certificate under Part


7.   Subsection (6) places    the function of determining whether a
stand is a regulated stand    and the    issue of a safety certificate
on the local authority who, under subsection (7), may apply any
appropriate criteria but who, under subsection (8), must act in
accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of State.     This
guidance has been issued under    the    cover of Home Office Circular
97/1988.  Under subsection (9) the final determination of the
local authority, subject only to an appeal to the courts (see
paragraphs 19-20 below) concludes the question of whether a stand
is a regulated stand.   This mechanism, together with service of
notice of the determination under section 28(2) on the
"responsible person" (see paragraphs 11-14 below) ensures that a
safety certificate roust be applied for if the stand is to be used
by spectators for viewing activities at the ground.

8.   Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (10) describe
respectively "general" and "special" safety certificates as
defined in subsection (11).  Here again local authorities may
wish to note that a safety certificate for a stand relates to the
use of the stand for viewing an activity or activities.
Subsection (11) provides self-explanatory definitions.  "Stand"
includes the uncovered portion of the structure for certification
purposes.  It will be noted that by use of the phrase "(not
merely temporary)" the definition of "stand" excludes from
certification temporary stands.
Section 27 : Contents of safety certificates for stands

9.   Subsection (1) requires a safety certificate to contain such
terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
expedient to secure reasonable safety in the stand and which may
involve alterations or additions to it or any installations in or
serving it (for example cables, ducts, plant equipment). There
are no obligatory terms and conditions.  However, under
subsection (2) safety certificates must include terms and
conditions required by an Order made under section 39 which
enables the Secretary of State to make an Order modifying the
provisions of Part III as they apply to any particular class of
stand.  No Order has been made under this section and there are
no current plans to do so. (see paragraph 33 below)

10.  Subsection (3) precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for determination by the chief officer of police.
Subsection (4) provides that a certificate may include a
condition on the keeping of records relating to attendance (in
practice this would apply only where access to the stand is
controlled, see Annex C) and the maintenance of safety in the
stand.  Subsection (5) requires a general safety certificate to
include a plan of the stand or stands to which it applies and the
area in the immediate vicinity of it/them.  Terms and conditions
in any safety certificate should be framed where appropriate by
reference to that plan.  Subsection (6) allows for different
terms and conditions to be included in the safety certificate for
different activities taking place at the ground.  Subsection (7)
ensures that safety certificates do not derogate from any
requirements imposed by any regulations made under section 6(2)
of the SSGA.  No regulations have been made under that section
and there are no current plans to do so.


Section 28 : Issue of certificates

11.  This section identifies to whom safety certificates should
be issued, lays down procedures for determining whether a stand
is a regulated stand, and for the issue of certificates.
Subsection (1) sets out who qualifies for a safety certificate.
In the case of a general safety certificate this is the ground
management;  for a special safety certificate it is the person
organising the activity at the ground in question.  In many
cases, of course, the holder of the general safety certificate
will also qualify to hold the special safety certificate.

12. Under subsection (2), where it appears to the local
authority that a stand at a sports ground in their area is a
regulated stand, they have to make a preliminary determination on
whether or not the stand is a regulated stand.  If the local
authority determine that it is, they must then issue a notice of
determination and the effect of it on the person who appears to
qualify for the general safety certificate (ie the person who
appears to qualify under subsection (1)(a)). A suggested draft
notice of determination is attached at Appendix D.
13.   Subsection (3) provides that the preliminary determination
becomes a final determination after two months.   Subsection (4)
allows for revocation of that determination at any time before it
becomes final or on consideration of an application for a safety
certificate.   These two subsections allow ground management an
opportunity to discuss and review with the local authority any
information or proposals which might cause the local authority to
revise their determination and save recourse to the appeal
procedure.   Subsection (5) allows the local authority to withdraw
 (rather than revoke) the notice of determination before it
becomes final and serve it on a different person - for example
where information has come to light meantime indicating that
there has been a change in the management of the ground.   When a
fresh notice is served the two month period under subsection (2)
begins again.

14.  Subsection (6) lays a duty on the local authority to make
certain determinations on applications for general safety
certificates.   (Subsection (10) (see below) imposes certain
procedural requirements on the local authority on receipt of such
an application.)   Subsection (6)(a) provides for applications for
general safety certificates which are made otherwise than in
response to a notice served by the local authority under
subsection (2);   such applications would be made where the
applicant is of the opinion that the stand in question is a
regulated stand.   Under subsection (6)(a) the local authority
must determine whether the stand in question is a regulated stand
and, if it is, whether the applicant qualifies for the general
safety certificate.   A determination under (6)(a) that a stand is
a regulated stand is immediately a final determination.
Subsection (6)(b) concerns an application for a general safety
certificate in response to a notice served by the local authority
under subsection (2).   Provided that the local authority do not
then decide to revoke their preliminary determination that the
stand is a regulated stand (in the light of further information)
they must determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a
general safety certificate.   Once these issues have been resolved
a general safety certificate must, under subsection (7), be
issued to a qualified applicant unless such a certificate is
already in operation in which case an application should be made
under section 29(5) for the transfer of the certificate.

15.  Subsection (8) concerns the issue of a special safety
certificate.  Such a certificate is only issued if there is
already a general safety certificate in operation.  The local
authority have a discretion as to whether or not to issue a
special safety certificate.

16.  In all cases where a local authority determine that an
applicant for a safety certificate does not qualify for one they
must serve on him notice under subsection (9) stating their
determination.

17.  Subsection (10) requires the local authority to send a copy
of an application for a safety certificate to the chief officer
of police and, where the local authority is in Greater London or
a metropolitan county, to the fire authority;  elsewhere, a copy
must be sent to the building authority.  The local authority must
also consult these authorities about the terms and conditions to
be included in the certificate.

18.  Subsection (11) enables the local authority to serve a
notice on an applicant requiring such information or plans etc as
they consider necessary to issue a safety certificate.  The plan
could be for an area larger than the stands.  Subsection (12)
provides that if an applicant fails to comply with the
requirement for information or plans within any time specified in
the notice or as extended by the local authority his application
will be deemed to have been withdrawn.  Thereafter, if a fresh
application is not made and spectators are admitted to a
regulated stand an offence will be committed under section 36.


Section 29:   Amendment, cancellation etc of certificates

19.     Subsection (1)(a) provides for the cancellation of a safety
certificate where it appears to the local authority who have
issued it that the stand in question is not or has ceased to be a
regulated stand - for example if the original determination was
mistaken or if the covered accommodation is reduced to below 500.
In these circumstances subsection (1)(a) requires the local
authority to revoke the determination and, by notice to the
holder, cancel the safety certificate.     Subsection (1)(b) enables
the local authority to amend the terms and conditions of the
safety certificate by notice to the holder, and subsection (1)(c)
enables them to replace the safety certificate.     Subsection (2)
enables the powers under subsection (1)(a) - (c) to be exercised
without an application from the holder (see also paragraph 21
b e lo w) . Subsection (3) applies the provisions of section 27 to
an amended or replacement safety certificate. When the local
authority amend a certificate under subsection (1)(b), the notice
must, under subsection (4), specify the operative date of the
amendment which can be later than the date of the notice.     This
enables the local authority to anticipate completion of any
remedial work or delay operation of a condition to allow for
changes to be made.

20.  Subsection (5) concerns the transfer of safety certificates.
It places a duty on the local authority to determine whether a
person is qualified to have a safety certificate issued to him on
transfer from the holder (see paragraph 11 above) and notify him
of the determination.  If the person is qualified the safety
certificate may be transferred to him.  Application for transfer
may be made by the holder or by the person to whom transfer is
proposed (subsection (6)).

21.  Copies of the application must be sent by the local
authority to the chief officer of police and, where the local
authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, to the
fire authority, and elsewhere to the building authority
(subsection 7). These authorities must also be consulted on any
proposal to amend, replace or transfer the safety certificate
(subsection (8)).

22.  Subsection (9) provides for the surrender of a safety
certificate whereupon it ceases to have effect.  Subsection (10)
gives a local authority discretion to cancel a safety certificate
if the holder dies or, if a body corporate, is dissolved.


Section 30 :    Appeals

23. All appeals under Part III are to the courts.   Subsection
(1) gives a right of appeal against a final determination that a
stand is a regulated stand.  Subsection (2) provides a right of
appeal against a determination that an applicant is not qualified
(or would not qualify in the case of transfer) for the issue of a
safety certificate.  Subsection (3) confers a right of appeal
against a refusal by the local authority to issue a special
safety certificate (other than on grounds of qualification).
Subsection (4) gives "interested parties", who are defined in
subsection (8), the right of appeal against

     a.   inclusion of anything in or omission of anything from a
     safety certificate;

     b.   refusal to amend or replace a safety certificate.

All appeals have to be brought within the period prescribed by
Regulations made under section 31, in England and Wales by way of
complaint for an order to a Magistrates Court (subsections (5)
and (6)).

24.  Under subsection (9) where a local authority have served
notice on an applicant of their determination that he does not
qualify for the issue of a safety certificate he is, unless he
appeals, deemed to have withdrawn his application once the appeal
period has expired (see also paragraph 26 below on offences under
section 36).  Subsection (10) identifies the deemed date of
withdrawal of an application in the case of an appeal which is
not upheld by the court or is withdrawn by the applicant.
Subsection (11) suspends the operation of any term or condition
in a safety certificate pending an appeal, and subsection (12)
prescribes who, in addition to the local authority, may appeal to
the Crown Court against an Order by the Magistrates Court.


Section 31:    Regulations

25. Under this section the Secretary of State is empowered to
make regulations prescribing the procedures and application
particulars for the issue etc of safety certificates, authorising
local authorities to determine fees in connection with such
applications and prescribing the time limits for appeals.   The
regulations may also contain such incidental and supplementary
provisions as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.
Regulations under section 31 have been made and come into effect
from 1 January 1989 (see Annex B for further details).

Section 32:    Alterations and Extensions

26.  Subsection (1) requires the holder of a general safety
certificate to notify the local authority of any proposed
alteration or extension to a regulated stand or its installations
which is likely to affect the safety of people in the stand
before he begins to carry out the proposals.   Subsection (2)
emphasises the need for such a notice in relation to entrances
and exits and means of access and escape.   The purpose of this
section is to guard against any alterations being made without
the local authority's knowledge and which might affect the safety
of spectators.   Failure to give notice is made an offence by
section 36(7 )(b).


Section 33:   Exclusion of other statutory requirements

27.  Subsection (1) harmonizes Part III with other legislation by
disapplying provisions of several Acts whilst a general safety
certificate for a regulated stand is in force.   Subsection (2)
suspends the operation of any term or condition in a licence
relating to a matter which is also covered by the safety
certificate for as long as the certificate is in operation.
Subsection (3) ensures that a person failing to meet a
requirement of a local Act will not commit an offence under that
Act if meeting the requirement would involve a contravention of
the terms or conditions of a safety certificate.


Section 34:   Enforcement

28.  Subsection (1) provides for local authorities to enforce the
provisions of Part III and to arrange for periodical inspections
of sports grounds at which there are regulated stands.   Such
inspections shall (by virtue of subsection (2)) be in accordance
with any guidance by the Secretary of State.  This guidance has
been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.


Section 35:   Powers of entry and inspection

29.   This section confers for the purposes of Part III a right of
entry to a sports ground at any reasonable time on persons
authorised by the local authority, chief officer of police, in
London or a metropolitan county the fire authority, elsewhere the
building authority, to inspect the stands and make any necessary
enquiries.   Authorised persons may be required to produce their
authority and may examine and copy records relating to regulated
stands.   The powers under this section apply to all sports
grounds and are in addition to powers under section 11 of the
SSGA.


Section 36:   Offences

30.  Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) create an offence
if spectators are admitted to a regulated stand on an occasion
when no safety certificate covering their use of the stand is in
operation (see paragraphs 5, 6, and 8 above); or if any term or
condition in a safety certificate is contravened.  The offence is
committed by the "responsible person" as defined in subsection
(3) and, if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder of
it. No offence is committed if the local authority have not made
a final determination or if application for a safety certificate
has been made and it has not been withdrawn or deemed to have
been withdrawn (subsection (2)).  Subsection (4) provides for
penalties on conviction and subsection (5) provides a defence on
the grounds of proof that spectators were admitted or the
contravention took place without the defendants consent and that
he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all "due
diligence" to avoid commission of the offence by himself or any
person under his control.  Subsection (6) provides a defence for
a responsible person on the grounds of proof that he did not know
the stand was a regulated stand (for example if notice had not
been served on the right person). Subsection (7) creates
offences in connection with the provision of information under
sections 28(11) and 32(1) or obstruction under section 35.
Subsections (8) and (9) apply the offence provisions to a body
corporate its officers and members.


Section 37:   Civil and other liability

31.  This section limits the effects of the provisions of Part
III in civil proceedings, and on requirements in public, local or
private Acts or in rights of action to those provided expressly
in Part III.


Section 38:   Service of documents

32.  This section makes provisions for the service of notices or
other documents required or authorised under Part III.
Subsection (1) makes general provision for such service,
subsection (2) deals with service on corporations or partnerships
and subsection (3) identifies the address to which notices or
documents are to be sent.


Section 39:   Power to modify Part for classes of stand

33.  Subsection (1) enables the Secretary of State to modify the
provisions of Part III in the way they should be applied to any
specified class of stand.  The power is exercised by Order
subject to negative resolution (subsection (3)) and after
consultation (subsection (4)).  Under subsection (2) different
modifications can be made for different activities at a sports
ground and may include such supplementary or transitional
provision as considered expedient.   Section 39, together with
section 27(2), would enable the Secretary of State to stipulate
that terms and conditions of a safety certificate should take
account of different ways in which stands are used by spectators
(see paragraph 9 above). It is an important reserve power which
is unlikely to be necessary provided terms and conditions of
safety certificates are framed to take account of the differences
experienced and observed within the stands at different sorts of
sports grounds (see also Annex C ) .
Section 40:   Application to Crown

34.  Subsection (1) applies sections 26 to 29 to premises
occupied by the Crown but substituting for the reference to a
local authority a reference to the Secretary of State who will
therefore be responsible for the certification of such premises.
Subsection (2) provides that nothing within Part III authorises
entry of premises occupied by the Crown.


Section 41:   Interpretation

35.  This section provides self-explanatory definitions of words
used in Part III.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988 ANNEX B




PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT REGULATIONS 1988


General

1.   The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988 (1988
Regulations) under section 31(1) and (2) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (1987 Act) have been made and
come into force on 1 January 1989.  The 1988 Regulations are
similar to, but distinct from, the Safety of Sports Grounds
Regulations 1987 (S.I.1987/1941).  Terms and expressions used in
the 1988 Regulations, eg safety certificate, therefore have the
same meaning as under section 41 of the 1987 Act and refer to
Part III of that Act, not the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
They prescribe the form and procedures for applications for
safety certificates under Part III, provide for the issue of
notices of certain decisions and authorise local authorities to
charge fees for work done by them or on their behalf in
connection with applications for issue etc of safety
certificates.  The Regulations also prescribe the time limits for
appeals against local authority decisions taken under Part III.


Substance of Regulations


2.   Regulations 1 and 2 concern citation and interpretation.
Regulation 3 deals with applications.  Paragraph (1 ) of
Regulation 3 and the Schedule to the Regulations prescribe the
form in which applications for the issue of a safety certificate,
either a general or special certificate, are to be made.  For a
general safety certificate the application form envisages that it
will be accompanied by details of the stand including the plans
where available.  For a special safety certificate details of the
stand will already be known from the general safety certificate
application but additional information about the activities and
any changes proposed as a result of those activities may be
required by the local authority.  Applications for both general
and special safety certificates are directed at providing
information about the stand when it is used by spectators for
viewing activities at the ground (not when it is used for some
other purpose such as an exhibition or conference for which a
safety certificate is not needed). Applications should also
provide details of the status of the applicant to enable the
local authority to determine whether he qualifies to hold a
certificate.  Paragraph (2) lays down that applications for
cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety
certificate have to be made in writing and, except for
cancellation, details must be given by the applicant of anyone
who is believed to be concerned with ensuring compliance with
terms and conditions of the safety certificate.
3.   Regulation 4 deals with notices of decisions taken by the
local authority.  Notices issued under Regulation 4 are in
addition to those issued under the 1987 Act itself by the local
authority.  Under paragraph (11 of Regulation 4 the decisions
described in (a) - (c) must be notified by notice in writing to
the interested parties (as set out in paragraph (8)). The notice
must also include details of when and where a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of the relevant application may be
inspected (paragraph (611. In the case of a refusal decision
under (c) the reasons for the refusal should be included in the
notice.

4.   Paragraph (21 requires the local authority to issue notice
on an applicant who has been refused a special safety certificate
other than on the grounds that he is not a qualified person.  The
notice should include reasons for the decision.

5.   Paragraph (3) is concerned with the transfer of certificates
and requires the local authority to serve on the holder of a
safety certificate a copy of any notice issued under section
29(5) of the 1987 Act.   (This ensures that both the holder and
the would-be holder of the safety certificate are aware of the
adverse decision.)  Similarly, where it is decided that the
applicant is qualified to hold a certificate but it is decided
not to transfer it, that decision must be notified to both the
applicant and the holder giving reasons for the decision.

6.   Paragraph (41 requires the local authority to serve notice
on an applicant of any decision to refuse an application for the
cancellation of a safety certificate under section 29(1 )(a) of
the 1987 Act and giving reasons for the decision; and paragraph
(5) requires the local authority to serve a copy of the notice of
the decision on the other interested parties as soon as
practicable thereafter.  Paragraph (61 provides that the notice
should include the information of when and where a copy of the
safety certificate and any application may be inspected.

7.   Paragraph (71 requires local authorities to publish a notice
in a local newspaper setting out the decision taken under
paragraph 1 above.  The publication should include the
information of when and where a copy of the safety certificate
and any relevant application may be inspected (as in
paragraph (6)).  Paragraph (81 defines "interested parties".


8.   Regulation 5 lays down the time limits for appeals under
section 30 of the 1987 Act.  Paragraph (11 lays down the time
limit of 28 days in the case of an appeal against a determination
that a stand is a regulated stand.  This period is calculated
from the date when any preliminary determination becomes a final
determination under section 28(3) of the Act (paragraph (l)(a))
or in the case of a final determination under section 28(6) the
date of the receipt of the notice of that determination
(paragraph (1)(b)).
9.   Other appeals under the 1987 Act must under paragraph (2\ of
Regulation 5 be brought within 28 days in the case of a general
safety certificate and 7 days in the case of a special safety
certificate from the "relevant date".  Paragraph (3 ) of
Regulation 5 sets down what is meant by the "relevant date".


10.  Regulation 6 deals with fees.  Paragraph (1) of Regulation 6
enables local authorities to determine the fee to be charged in
respect of an application (whether or not successful) for the
issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate
or in respect of an application for the cancellation of such a
certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
Paragraph f2) provides that any fee must not exceed an amount
commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done by or on
behalf of the local authority.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96 /1988 ANNEX C


PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT
1987 : ISSUE AND CONTENT OF SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Introduction

1.   This Annex provides some additional advice on the issue and
content of safety certificates which local authorities may care
to take into consideration when drawing up safety certificates
for regulated stands under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act (the 1987 A c t ) . Although directed at
certification under Part III, the underlying principles of the
advice in this Annex may also assist local authorities when
reviewing terms and conditions to be contained in safety
certificates for sports grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Local authorities may find it
useful to cross-reference this Annex with Annex A to Home Office
Circular 71/1987 and Annexes C and D to Home Office Circular No
7/1986 - some of the advice of which is reproduced below.

2.   The following advice is given in good faith but it should be
remembered that only the courts can interpret on points of law.


Reasonable Safety

3.   Part III of the 1987 Act, like the SSGA, provides that terms
and conditions within safety certificates should be such as are
considered necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety.
It would probably be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
to seek the absolute safety of everyone occupying a stand at a
sports ground.  The courts might also be sympathetic to an appeal
against a term or condition which entailed expenditure on
measures to combat a risk which was seen to be remote or did not
arise at all at the particular ground or stand.  Local
authorities should therefore consider operating on the principle
that the addition to safety which any particular measure will
produce needs to be balanced against its cost.  In some cases
certain measures may have to be taken whatever the cost,
irrespective of the size or profitability of the undertaking.
But where the difficulty and cost of the remedy are high, and
careful assessment shows the risk is not significant, it may not
be necessary to insist on action;  if the risk is significant it
may be possible to opt for a solution which will reduce it to an
acceptable level at modest cost.


General

4.   An application for a general safety certificate under Part
III should normally be accompanied by information about the
stand, a proper plan of the stand and its installations.  In
practice, not all the information necessary to draw up a safety
certificate will always be provided at the time of the initial
application.  However, local authorities are able to require, by
notice, under section 28(11) further details to enable them to
consider the application.  For an application for a special
safety certificate under Part III much information would already
be available from the general safety certificate application;
but additional information may be required if, for example, the
activities which are to take place at the sports ground for which
a special safety certificate is needed are such that the
spectator accommodation in the stand is altered or affected.

5.   A special safety certificate under Part III is issued at the
discretion of the local authority (subject to a right of appeal).
There is no time limit in which a safety certificate, whether
general or special, has to be issued.  However, a special safety
certificate will need to be issued before the event, allowing
time for any appeal.  Local authorities may therefore wish to
give ground management advice on the likely time scale which will
be needed and to remind them that a last minute application might
constitute sufficient grounds for refusal.  In general an
application lodged 3 months before an event should give
sufficient time for the procedures (including an appeal) to be
carried out.  Local authorities may nonetheless feel able to
agree to a shorter period where they are satisfied that the
application can be finalised within the lesser period of time
given.


Consultation

6.   It is envisaged that consultation between the local
authority and ground management will take place in drawing up the
terms and conditions to be contained within any safety
certificate issued under Part III.   In this way much valuable
information can be obtained in order to apply the principles of
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) so as to
meet the safety needs of the particular stand(s) at the ground in
question (see also paras 9-15 belo w) . Local authorities will be
aware of the statutory requirement to consult the police and, in
London and metropolitan counties, the fire authority, elsewhere,
the building authority, and are reminded of the potential
advantages of a safety team approach as a way of ensuring that
the professional knowledge and skills of the various disciplines
can be brought to bear on drawing up a safety certificate.


Scope and content of safety certificates

7.   Provision is made in section 27(6) for different terms and
conditions to be included in a general safety certificate for a
stand for different activities at the ground.   Where a ground is
used for several activities local authorities may therefore wish
to include, as far as possible, all the activities within the
general safety certificate, reserving the need to issue a special
safety certificate for a "one off" event when the viewing
arrangements are likely to be affected in such a way as to
require additional considerations and safeguards which cannot be
included in the general safety certificate.   Section 27 does not
have to vary to meet different needs, but as a general rule local
authorities may wish to consider inclusion of terms and
conditions which address

     a.   structural stability where elements of the stand are
     judged, from preliminary inspections, as likely to be
     inadequate for their intended function.

     b.   the maximum number of spectators who should be admitted
     to the stand(s) and different parts of it (them) bearing in
     mind the considerations set out in paragraphs 10 - 13 below;

     c.   the number, size and situation of entrances to and
     exits from the stand(s) or any part of it (them) including
     means of escape in case of fire or other emergency;  and the
     means of access to any such entrances and exits;

     d.   requirements for entrances and exits and means of
     access to be properly maintained and kept free of
     obstruction;

     e.   other fire precaution measures;

     f.   the provision for crush barriers,    if any, their number,
     strength and location;

     g.   provision for stewards, steward training,    fire drill
     procedures, first aid.

    h.   need for records of maintenance,     inspections and/or
    tests and training.

8.   If it is evident that a stand is rarely filled to capacity
the local authority may consider it proper to base the safety
requirements on the actual levels of attendance.  In such
circumstances the terms and conditions of the general safety
certificate may not be sufficient for a particularly attractive
event or fixture when a larger than normal crowd can be expected
to attend.  As some such fixtures could arise at relatively short
notice, local authorities may wish to work out in advance, the
modifications and/or additional controls to the normal terms and
conditions of the general safety certificate which would enable
an increase in the number of spectators to be accommodated;   for
example, an increase in the limit might be conditional upon the
employment of additional stewards, or more sophisticated fire
fighting equipment with trained stewards to operate it.

9.   When drawing up terms and conditions in any safety
certificate local authorities will doubtless keep in mind the
advice of the Green Guide (see paragraphs 10 and 11 below) and
the "reasonableness" of the requirements (see paragraph 3 above).
The quality or standard of measures should be stated so that the
holder knows what is required under what conditions, and does not
have to rely on carrying out work "to the satisfaction of" or "as
may be required by" the authority.  Terms and conditions
specifying work needed should include details of the increase in
the permitted spectator limit or, if there is no increase, the
restrictions on the capacity or operation if the work is not
done. The following are two examples of the sort of detail that
might, with adaptation to suit individual circumstances, be
included in a term or condition.


Example A.  (Where it is a condition that attendance records are
kept to a standard required by the authority).

"[Except as mentioned below] the holder shall keep a record [in
the form contained in Appendix   of this certificate] for [each]
[the] regulated stand to which this certificate applies of the
number of spectators admitted on each occasion when the stand[s]
is [are] used for the purpose of viewing the [specified]
activities at the ground [specified below] ...".

If a record is not required for low attendances an additional
clause might be added:-

"The number of spectators admitted on any occasion need not be
entered in the record described in paragraph   above where on any
occasion the total admission to the ground is certified by the
holder [in the record] as not having exceeded "x" by entering the
words [quote] which should be signed and dated by [the holder]."


Example B (where emergency lighting is the requirement)

"Emergency lighting for use in the event of failure of the
general lighting shall be provided on [exit] route(s) marked [
] on plan [   ] and shall include illuminated exit signs at exits
marked [   ] on plan [   ].

Emergency lighting provided under paragraph    above shall be
installed in accordance with paragraphs 166 to 169 of the Guide
to Safety at Sports Ground [except that ..... ].

On completion of the installation a certificate of completion fin
the form specified in Appendix [ ] of this certificate] shall be
obtained from a [specify] and that certificate shall [be retained
by the holder] [sent within [x days] to the authority].

Until installation as required in paragraph    above is carried
out and a certificate obtained as in paragraph    above [exit
route/s marked [   ] on plan [   ] is/are not to be used by
spectators] [the number of spectators who are to be admitted to
the stand is restricted to [   ]] [and areas marked [    ] on plan
[   ] are not to be occupied].

On completion of installation and on obtaining a certificate of
satisfaction required in paragraphs [   ] above exit routes
marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used and the number of
spectators who may be admitted to the stand is increased to [   ]
[and the area(s) marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used by
spectators.]"
Application of the Green Guide

10.   The Guide is not a statutory code providing a set of rigid
requirements to be applied in all cases irrespective of the
individual circumstances.  The diversity of regulated stands is
likely to be considerable, varying from basic, covered terracing
at, say, non-league football or rugby grounds to large, complex
buildings offering a variety of facilities to many thousands of
spectators.  The advice in the Guide has therefore to be applied
to the situation that is seen to exist at a particular ground
having taken account of such factors as location, size,
construction, condition, together with the activities undertaken
at the ground, the numbers and density of spectators who occupy
the stand or stands and their movement patterns.  The following
examples may help to illustrate how the Guide might be
interpreted without jeopardising reasonable safety.

     i.   Where it is known that the safe limit of the stand will
     not be exceeded (eg because total attendances are within
     that limit) there may be no necessity to regulate the
     admission or, in the case of standing accommodation, to
     require internal division in order to control the dispersal
     of spectators.  In such circumstances, the number, strength
     and layout of barriers (if any) for standing areas need only
     reflect the number and density of the spectators to be
     accommodated.

     ii.  A partly roofed, open sided, terrace allowing quick
     movement away from the covered area may not need fire-
     warning/ detection systems.

     iii. The strength requirements for protective guard-rails on
     stairs, gangways or exit routes and balustrading in front of
     a row of seats may well vary.  The last of these is not, for
     example, usually subjected to high pressures.  Similarly,
     side or end rails to seating rows will need to be designed
     to accommodate the forces to which they may be subjected.
     These may also vary and account should be taken of
     individual circumstances.

     iv.  Where it is known that spectators vacate an area of a
     stand more quickly than envisaged by using the G u i d e 's
     (notional) calculations, that knowledge may be taken into
     account when assessing requirements for safe egress from a
     stand.


Horseracing/greyhound racing

11.  Unlike crowds at some other sports where spectators are
essentially static for the duration of the event, there is a
common requirement for greyhound and horseracing spectators to be
mobile, with free movement to various internal parts of the stand
or racecourse to which they are admitted.  Local authorities may
find that this mobility requirement regulates the density at
which the spectators congregate on terraced areas to below the
maximum of 54 persons per 10 square metres (paragraph 222 of the
Guide) for "static spectator sports".  Even at well attended
meetings, where crowd densities are liable to be high (perhaps
approaching the maximum of 54 per 10 square metres) "surging" is
not generally experienced.  Spectators will probably be static
for only a few minutes before moving off to other parts of the
stand or ground.  This aspect of spectator behaviour should be
taken into account when considering the safety requirements of
the stand.  For example, where barriers are judged to be
necessary at all, their function is most likely to be to channel
or direct safely the movement of spectators on the terrace, and
to mitigate against any "waterfall" effect of someone stumbling
at a critical moment, whilst simultaneously allowing the free
movement desired by spectators in between races.  In such
circumstances, continuous barriers (see paragraph 113 of the
Guide) will probably not be the most suitable arrangement, and a
series of staggered short lengths may be appropriate;  the
horizontal spacing between barriers should be commensurate with
the forces likely to be generated on the terraced areas.

12.  In the case of horseracing, access and egress can often be
gained to and from a stand from the front where it discharges on
to an open "enclosure" area.  Except for those parts of the stand
to which entry is gained by additional payment, eg reserved
seating or boxes spectator movement within this enclosure area
(including the stand) is not controlled.  As a general rule
therefore it will not be appropriate, or possible, to include
terms and conditions in a safety certificate specifying the
maximum total number of spectators to be admitted to the stand or
requiring records of the total number of spectators so admitted.
This ought not to create undue difficulty especially when the
crowd density on standing areas of the stand is low and such
areas are occupied for relatively short periods of time.  It
follows however that in setting terms and conditions geared to
the normal use of the stand the local authority will have to take
account of the possibility that everyone admitted to the
enclosure area may use the stand, - although at any given time
only a proportion of spectators will do so and even then will be
dispersed within it.  These considerations may also apply to some
stands at greyhound racing courses.

13.  Discussions with local management together with observation
and information about the numbers admitted to the particular
racecourse enclosure or stand at a greyhound racing stadium
should help to form a considered view on the level of use and
dispersal of spectators on which to base the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate.  Where a racecourse or greyhound
stadium is occasionally used for a particularly attractive event
the local authority may wish to build into the safety certificate
additional terms and conditions to deal with that occasion as in
paragraph 8 above provided that they are satisfied that such
measures are sufficient to effect reasonable safety for the
number of spectators who are expected to attend.




Home Office
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988   ANNEX D


FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987


NOTICE OF A PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION UNDER SECTION 28(2) THAT A
STAND IS A REGULATED STAND


To




Name   (if any) and address of sports ground




Notice is hereby given to                         (who appears to
the                         Council to be the person responsible
for the management of the above-mentioned sports-ground and who
is therefore qualified under section 28(1) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987    (the 1987 Act) to hold a
general safety certificate for the regulated stand[s]* at that
sports ground) that the council have made a preliminary
determination under section 28(2) of the 1987 Act that the
stand[s] detailed in the schedule to this notice [is]* [are]*
[a]* regulated stand[s]* under section 26(5) of the Act.     A
regulated stand under section 26(5)   is a stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view
activities at the sports ground.


The preliminary determination of the council will become a final
determination two months from the date of this notice.     If you
consider that [the stand]* [any of the stands]* detailed in the
schedule to this notice [is]* [are]* not [a]* regulated
stand[s]*, or if you consider you are not qualified to hold a
general safety certificate you should contact the
Council at
without delay with your reasons.
You will have a right under section 30(1) of the 1987 Act to
appeal to a magistrates court against the final determination
within 28 days from the date it becomes final.        Subject to the
exercise of any appeal, on expiry of that 28 day appeal period a
general safety certificate will be required in respect of the use
of the regulated stand[s]* by spectators for viewing activities
at the sports ground.


It is an offence under section 36(1) of the 1987 Act (punishable
on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding the statutory
maximum (currently £2,000) or on indictment to a fine or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years (or both)) if
spectators are admitted to a regulated stand when no safety
certificate is in operation unless application for a general
safety certificate has been made.


Any application for a general safety certificate should be made
to t h e ..................    Council at the address given below on
the enclosed form[s]*.        Further copies of the form can be
supplied on request.




Signed
Name in capitals
Position held in local authority
Name/Address of local authority
Date
SCHEDULE TO NOTICE



1.   Number of stands to which the notice applies




2.   Name (if any) of each stand:




3.   Location of each stand:




4.   Any other identifiable feature of each stand
          ft.




                               s t a t u t o r y       INSTRUMENT



                                            1988 No. 1807
             SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
                 The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988

                          Made      -
                                                               21st October 1988
                          Laid before Parliament
                                                               31st October 1988
                          Coming into force
                                                                1st January 1989


                                                   M      r * !           “ 0 ® T * . F ir. Safety
     — on 3m of a          .
     Citation, commencement and extent

     >9«£i                                 U * 2 ^ “^             0fP1^     of Spon Regulations
       (2) These Regulation do no, ex,end          u,e Isles of Stilly.
    Interpretation


                                                      ",he 1987 A« " ">«■“ «be Fire Safety and
   Applications


   * - d e „ ^pec, *                «^»cSSL,XJL tb*fon”conaiM
                                           ^     to         dinthe 3


  ^ e ty c m i8 M tesM l^ n u d ei^T O W 0^ (f ir e°,lll,? 1,: rep,*cem“ I or transfer of a


  * . .enns and conditions o f, stfety « r t f c i £ ^ S 3 E d ^ ! & « • £ £ £ £ “
 Notices by local authorities

    4 w'                                      ! ,0c*1‘ ^ < y *“ « decided:
            certificate); or            * ' nC udin* lssue bl way of replacement of a safety
       (b) to amend a safety certificate; or

•key ^     ^     X    " d. S    U“ *
the information referred* K E S S ^ w E f ® “ Writi° 8 ° f ^      decision * « in g out
their reasons for it.       P"*graph (6) below, together, in the case o f a r e S J i t h


(•) 1987 c.27.
   (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
 determined to refuse that application on grounds other than the one set out in section
 28(9) of the 1987 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal, serve on the
 applicant notice in writing o f their decision, together with their reasons for it.
   (3) Where on an application for the transfer o f a safety certificate a local authority:
      (a) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is
          not a qualified person, they shall, in addition to the notice referred to in section
          29(5) of the 1987 Act, serve on the holder o f the certificate a copy of that notice;
      (b) determine that the person to whom it is proposed to transfer the certificate is a
          qualified person but decide not to transfer the certificate, they shall serve on that
          person and the holder of the certificate notice in writing of their decision
          together with their reasons for it.
   (4) As soon as practicable after a local authority have decided to refuse an application
 for the cancellation o f a safety certificate under section 29(1 Xa) of the 1987 Act, they
 shall serve on the applicant notice in writing of their decision together with their reasons
 for it.

   (5) As soon as practicable after a local authority have issued a notice under section
 29(1 )(a) of the 1987 Act cancelling a safety certificate, they shall serve a copy of the
 notice on the persons referred to in subparagraphs (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph (8) below.
  (6) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy o f the safety
certificate and a copy o f any application in respect o f which the local authority’s decision
was taken is available for inspection at a place and at the times specified in the notice.
  (7) As soon as may be after the decision referred to in paragraph (1) above, the local
authority shall cause to be published in a newspaper circulating in the locality o f the
regulated stands to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision
and the information referred to in paragraph (6) above.
   (8) In this regulation “interested party” means:
      (a) the holder o f a safety certificate whose application to have it amended or
          replaced has been refused;
      (b) any other person known to the local authority to be or likely to be concerned in
          ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions o f the safety certificate;
      (c) the chief officer o f police; and
      (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
          authority or, in any other case, the building authority.

Appeals under section 30 of the 1987 Act
        1) An appeal under section 30( 1) o f the 1987 Act (appeals against determination
that any stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand) shall be brought not later than
twenty-eight days:
     (a) in the case of a preliminary determination, after the date when that
         determination becomes final under section 28(3) o f the 1987 Act; or
     (b) in the case o f a final determination under section 28(6) of the 1987 Act, after the
         date o f the receipt o f the notice o f that determination.
   (2) An appeal under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of section 30 of the 1987 Act (other
appeals) shaii be brought in the case o f an appeal in respect of:
      (a) a general safety certificate, not later than twenty-eight days; and
      (b) a special safety certificate, not later than seven days,
after the relevant date.
  (3) In paragraph (2) above “relevant date” means:
     (a) in the case o f a person to whom a safety certificate is issued, the date o f the
         receipt by him o f that certificate;
     (b) in the case o f a person on whom a notice is served under section 28(9), 29( 1Kb)
         or (5) o f the 1987 Act or regulation 4( 1), (2) or (3) above, the date of the receipt
         by him o f that notice; and
          (c) in the ease of any other person, the date of the publication of the notice required
              by regulation 4(7) above.
   Fees
     6.—(1) Subject to paragraph (2) below, a local authority may determine the fee to be
   charged in respect of an application for the issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of
   a safety certificate or in respect of an application for the cancellation of a safety
   certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
    (2)      A fee under paragraph (1) above shall not exceed an amount commensurate with
  the appl ication       reas°nably done by or on behalf of the local authority in respect of



                                             ~      „                                Douglas Hurd
  2 ^O ctober 1988                                      Her MaJcsty’s Principal Secretaries of State




                                            SCH ED U LE                                 Regulation 3(1)
 PART III OF FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
 APPLICATION FOR A SAFETY CERTIFICATE FOR A REGULATED STAND
  When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive of:
       (a) the county council where the sports ground is situated in a non-metropolitan countv in
           England or W ales; or
       (b) the borough council where the sports ground is situated in Greater London;or
       (C> Engfand;C
                   OTC°UnCil Wher€ the Sp0TtS ^ ound is situated in a metropolitan county in
      (d) the regional/islands council where the sports ground is situated in Scotland.
 Background notes
 i       f enificate u.nder Pan 111 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (“the
ar«„nJCnnH1S            “ T S *61 °f i he      “ a spon ^ ound which is not a designated sports
ground under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, of each stand which provides covVred
to«™™^u!ated°stand” r m°re spectat0rs 10 view activities at the ground. Such a stand is referred

  A separate application form is required for each regulated stand at a sports ground (although any
certificate issued may cover all such stands).                                        i«uwu»n any
t,aI".n’°st        | he *ocal authority will have made a preliminary determination that a particular
Son                                                ? ,ved notice of ^ ^termination on you under
              thM                          term!naftl0n      have become a final determination for the
purposes of that Act at the end of the penod of two months beginning with the date of that notice.
A?»lHtn£!rrSUV epa^ te,yW!th the locaJauthority theQuestion whether a stand in fact satisfies the
                     ° a^ .ve’ which determines whether a stand is a “regulated stand”. An “on site”
~ K n,1?Khk?ly                "eCCSSary ,n resolvin* such a question. Alternatively you may yourself
                r        V regu,ated stand” and may app!y for a safety certificate in respect of it
without a preliminary determination being made by the local authority. Where the application is
                                thlS <)uestl0n win          have bee*1resolved because a special safety
certificate is issued only if a general safety certificate is in force.

                                   28(7) 0<rthe 1987 Act in the 0856 of a *eneral “ f«y certificate or
^ ‘“ , 5      of.the 19®7 Act inJ he case of a special safety certificate, the local authority receiving
             « ? r a Si f ty “ "I60" 6 have to determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold
   . ^ .y certificate. The applicant should therefore provide the information required below to
enable the local authority to deal with the application.
  A scale plan of the sports ground and of the relevant stands should, if available, accompany this
                                                  3
 application. However, under section 28( 11) of the 1987 Act, the local authority may require you to
 provide further information and plans of the ground.

 To be completed in all cases
I hereby apply for a ’[general] [special] safety certificate in respect of the stand described below at
the ..................................... .... ................. .....................................................................................

sports ground to be issued to                           ................................................................................................

I make the application *[on behalf ofl [as]....................................................................................

o f t ...................................................................
Date...............................................................         Signed...............................................................
Address............................................................

           ........................................................... Tel. No.............................................................
• Delete as appropriate
t I f applying on behalfo f a sports club, company or some other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).

   1. (a) Name and address of sports ground




        (b) Name of the occupier.............
               Name and address of the owner


              Location and name (if any) of the stand for which application is being made


        (c) Names and address of any persons other than the proposed holder of the certificate who
            to his knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with the terms and
            conditions of the safety certificate for which this application is being made.




Complete Part I only for an applicationfor a general safety certificate (to cover activities held over an
indefinite period)

Complete Part II only for an application for a special safety certificate (to cover one occasion or a
series of occasions)
                                                             PARTI

                                          GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


#                                                       pn,vide!                                 “ “ «*“ » « » i*




        3.
            S i l ! nhfe,nvP, ? i mate d*te ° f
      and details                               con$truction of     stands for which application is made
                            subsequent extension, major alteration or re-construction of it, together with
      relevant dates




     ground?iVe partiCUlarS ° f current fire certificates covering any premises on any pan of the sports
          (a)   name of issuing fire authority
          (b)   name of holder of fire certificate...................................
          (c)   date of issue of fire certificate ................................
          (d)   description of premises covered by the fire certificate..................................

     pms o n ICPaniCUlarS 0f any current statutory licences granted in respect of the sports ground or
          (a)   name of licensing authority.....................................
          (b)   name of licensee....................................................
          (c)   type of licence (liquor, gaming etc.)........................................
          (d)   date of expiry............................................
          (e) description of the pan or parts of the sports ground covered by the licence.................

      6.-(a) State maximum capacity of the accommodation in the stand for spectators to view
             activities at the sports ground:                                                     ^ ° ICW
              (i) maximum no. of seated spectators ...........................
             (ii) maximum no. of standing spectators......................
         (b) State any restrictions on that capacity:
              (i) seated spectators..............................................................
             (ii) standing spectators.......................................................

      7. Is the number of spectators admitted to the stand controlled on entry to that stand? Yes/No

       8. I f the answer to question 7 is "Yes", set out below for each of the last three « « «  ic
    (settirfe out the DeccmJer) “ d f?r “ ch of the activities listed in answer to question 2 above
    (setting out the year and activity in question), the following information, narady-
         (<l) S e £ S \ h ^ Umber ° l spectators admitted to the stands on any occasion during each of
                                                                    number of ^           “ d            ™         *

        <b’                                                                           lh" * ! " hre' ^       “ d
               (i) any occasion when no charge was made for, or in respect of, admission; and
              (u) any occasion when the number of spectators admitted was less than 100.




                                                            5
                   Activity             Total                    Number of               Highest
                                        attendance               occasions               attendance
                                                                                         (a) seated
         ________________                                                               (b) standing

    9.     If the answer to question 7 is "No", set out below for each of the last three years (that is,
 ending on 31st December) and for each of the activities listed in answer to question 2 above
 (setting out the year and the activity in question), the following information, namely-
       (a) the highest number of spectators who had access to the stand on any occasion d u ring
           each of the last three years, and
       (b) the total number of spectators who had access to the stand during each of the last three
           years and the number of occasions when they had access, but excluding-
            (i) any occasion when no charge was made for, or in respect of, admission to the sports
                ground so as to have access to the stand; and
           (ii) any occasion when the number of spectators so admitted was less than 100.

 Year              Activity             Total                   Number of               Highest
                                        attendance              occasions               attendance




                                               PART II
                               SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
  10.    Name activity (or activities) for which the stand provides viewing accommodation and
which are to be covered by the special safety certificate.




  11. Give date(s) of occasions) when it is proposed that the stand will be used for the activity
(or activities) listed in paragraph 10 above.

   12. Set out below the information required in respect of each occasion during the last three
years (ending on 31st December) when spectators were admitted, or had access to, the stand to
view activities which are the same as, or similar to, those listed in answer to question 10 above. The
name and date of the occasions in question should be given together with the total number of
spectators who had access to the stand.

Year                                Occasion                                 Maximum number of
                                                                             spectators who had
                                                                             access to the stand




  13. State what changes or adaptations (if any) are proposed to the stand or to arrangements for
entry and control (if any) of spectators to and from the stand.




                                                 6
                                 explanatory n o te
                         (This note is not part of the Regulations)

   These Regulations, which apply throughout Great Britain (except the Isles of Scilly)
         certlficat« under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
 1987 (by virtue of sections 26(2) and 41 of that Act referred to as “safety certificates”).
Such a certificate which is issued by a local authority (as defined by section 41) is
required in respect of the use, at a sports ground which is not a designated sports ground
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (c.52), of each stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view activities at the ground. Bv
virtueof sections 26(5) and 41 of the 1987 Act such a stand is referred to as a “regulated

           0f1^ eeoF/iI eI Sf!foty a" d Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (Commencement
*    ^ iota u               1988/1806), Part III of the 1987 Act comes into force on 1st
January 1989, the same date as the coming into force of these Regulations.
   Regulation 3(1) of, and the Schedule to, these Regulations prescribe the form of
application for a safety certificate and regulation 3(2) makes provision for other
applications in respect of certificates. Regulation 4 requires local authorities to give
notice (including, under regulation 4(7), notice in a local newspaper) of certain of their
decisions in respect of safety certificates. Regulation 5 prescribes the time within which
appeals in respect of a local authority's decision must be brought. Regulation 6 concerns
the fees a local authority may charge in respect of work done in connection with
applications for the issue etc. of safety certificates.




                                          7
         STATUTORY                         INSTRUMENTS



                             1988 No. 1807
SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
 The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988




                                  £1.60 net
                            ISBN 0 11 087807 8

         Printed in the United Kingdom for Her M ijeity'i Stationery Office


   790   W 0 l7 0 l   C15    10/88     452/3     4235     PS 8901376      882887D
                                                      HOME OFFICE
                                               Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                      Direct line: 01-273
                                                     Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference: FEP/87 6/233/19/21                   15 November 1988
Your reference:


      The Chief Executives
      County Councils
      Metropolitan District Councils
      London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London


       Dear Sir


      HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 97/1988

       FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
       PART III - SAFETY OF STANDS AT SPORTS GROUNDS


                  a.   STATUTORY GUIDANCE BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                       UNDER SECTION 26(8)

                  b.   STATUTORY GUIDANCE BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                       UNDER SECTION 34(2)


       Introduction
       1.   This circular introduces (a) Statutory Guidance under
       section 26(8) of the 1987 Act to local authorities in discharging
       their function of determining whether a stand at a sports ground
       is a "regulated" stand;   and (b) Statutory Guidance under Section
       34(2) on inspections, of sports grounds containing regulated
       stands.
       2.   Local authorities may find it useful to cross reference this
       circular with Home Office Circular No 96/1988 giving general
       guidance on the operation of Part III of the 1987 Act and also
       with Home Office Circular 72/1987 which covers Statutory Guidance
       under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 on inspections of
       designated sports grounds.


        General
        3.        Both sets of Statutory Guidance ar.e accompanied by
explanatory notes and commentaries.  Local authorities are
reminded that whereas these supplementary commentaries are not
binding the Statutory Guidance under sections 26(8) and 34(2) is
mandatory.


Resource implications

4.   No resource implications result direcitly from the Statutory
Guidance under section 26(8) which provides no more than a basis
for determining whether, in borderline cases, a stand is a
regulated stand.

5.   Inspections of sports grounds containing regulated stands
under the Statutory Guidance made under Section 34(2) are not
expected to give rise to significant resource implications.
These inspections are not intended to be as detailed or the same
as those carried out by the local authority when drawing up, or
amending, a safety certificate; nor is it intended that they
should duplicate those required to be carried out by or on behalf
of the holder under the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate.  Subject to the size, condition of a particular     (
sports ground and the stand or stands to be inspected, it is not
expected that inspections should take more than 2 man days per
ground on average and in some cases it may be less.


Supplementary

6.   Any enquiries about this circular or the Statutory Guidance
should be directed to Miss D Russell on 01-273 3406.

                                         Yours faithfully



                                           R R G WATTS
                                       Fire and Emergency
                                       Planning Department


Enclosures:   Statutory Guidance under section 26(8)
              Statutory Guidance under section 34(2)


Copies for information to:-

    Association of County Councils
    Association of Metropolitan Authorities
    London Boroughs Association
    Association of District Councils
    Sports Council
    Magistrates Association
    Justices Clerks Society
    Association of Chief Police Officers
    Clerks to Fire & Civil Defence Authorities
    Chief Officers of Police
FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987




     STATUTORY GUIDANCE UNDER SECTION 26(8)



     STATUTORY GUIDANCE UNDER SECTION 34(2)




                 HOME OFFICE
          Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
HOC 97/1988


STATUTORY GUIDANCE UNDER SECTION 26(8) TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES FOR
THE DISCHARGE OF THEIR FUNCTION UNDER SECTION 26(6) OF THE FIRE
SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987


The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 26(8) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987.


Purpose and Scope

1.   Local authorities are required by section 26(6) of the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987    (the 1987 Act) to
determine whether any and, if so, which of the sports grounds in
their areas provide covered accommodation in a stand for 500 or
more spectators to view activities at the ground.    A certificate
under Part III of the 1987 Act is required for such a stand
(which expression is defined by section 26(11)   of that Act).
This guidance provides criteria for the purpose of calculating
the number of spectators for whom such accommodation is provided.


Calculation of the capacity of the accommodation to view the
activities
2.   Both seated and standing accommodation to view the
activities at the ground should be taken into account and
aggregated as necessary.


3.   Where the accommodation consists of fixed seating for
spectators the capacity of that accommodation should be
determined as follows


     i.    where individual seats are provided, by counting the
     number of seats;
                                                           *
     ii.   where bench seating is provided and


           a.   it consists of marked places, and


           b.   the result of dividing the length of the bench by
            the number of marked places is that no such place
            exceeds 550mm in length,


     by counting the number of places;".


     iii.    for bench style seating Where (ii) above does not
     apply by calculating on the basis that one person occupies
     each 530mm of benching and disregarding any portion of a
     bench of less than 530mm which remains after that
     calculation.


4.   Where the accommodation consists of a terraced or sloped
viewing area for standing spectators the capacity should be
determined by dividing the net standing area of the accommodation
in question excluding any gangways, stairways, landings by the
factor of 2.7 persons to 1 square metre.    (1 person to .37 square
metres)


5.   Where the accommodation (whether at ground level or above)
consists of a flat area without fixed seating, its capacity
should be determined by using the calculation of paragraph 4
above to a depth of up to 2 metres from the front of that part of
the accommodation in question from which the activities at the
ground can be viewed.    Any area behind the 2 metres referred to
should be disregarded for the purpose of calculating the number
of spectators.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
HOC 97/1988


Supplementary advice and explanatory notes to the Statutory
Guidance to Local Authorities given by the Secretary of State
under section 26(8) of the Fire Safety and safety of Places of
Sport Act 1987



Introduction

1.   This advice supplements and comments on the Statutory
Guidance issued under section 26(8) of the 1987 Act.  It does not
form part of the Statutory Guidance itself.  The advice contained
in the following paragraphs is not binding on local authorities
and although it is given in good faith it should be remembered
that only the courts can rule authoritatively on the
interpretation of points of law.


Objectives of the Statutory Guidance

2.   The objective is to achieve a measure of consistency by
local authorities when they determine under section 26(6) whether
a stand is a regulated stand if there is doubt, or dispute as to
the stand capacity.  The Statutory Guidance is not intended for
use for any other purpose.  In most cases the capacity of the
accommodation will be manifestly above or below the 500 level.

Calculation

3.   The figures used in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Statutory
Guidance are notional. They are solely for the purpose mentioned
above and are only in respect of the covered areas of the stand
(which must be an artificial structure) used by spectators for
viewing activities at the ground.  For bench seating consisting
of marked places paragraph 4 of the Statutory Guidance allows up
to the maximum width recommended in the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds (the Green Guide). Otherwise, for example where such
seating does not have places marked, the notional figure of 530mm
is used instead.  The figure of 2.7 persons per square metre for
standing spectators is in line with paragraph 222(b) of 'the
Green Guide'.  It not only allows for potentially different crowd
densities and mobility requirements which, in practice, may apply
to different sports but also produces an area of similar size to
that for seated spectators (using the notional "unit width" and
allowing 610 mm to 760 mm for seat depth).
                                                        *

4.   Once the local authority have determined that a stand is a
regulated stand, the actual capacity permitted by any safety
certificate will where appropriate be determined by the safety
requirements for the stand.  That figure may be less than 500
unless required remedial work is carried out on the stand.
5.   Local authorities may wish to bear in mind that in
calculating the capacity for standing accommodation the Statutory
Guidance refers to the net area, ie it excludes existing
gangways, 1andings, e t c .

6.   Paragraph 6 of the statutory Guidance applies to both ground
level and raised areas of a stand such as executive boxes,
balconies, together with bars, restaurants etc which are also
used for viewing.  Although more people may be accommodated in
such areas, it is assumed that spectators are unlikely, in
general, to be able to view an event beyond a depth of 2 metres
from the limit of the viewing area.  Local authorities will note
the discretion given by use of "up to" so that a lower figure can
be adopted, for example if the sight line is obscured for some
reason.  Stands which contain multi facilities are liable to hold
well over 500 spectators so calculations under paragraph 6 of the
Statutory Guidance may not, in practice, prove necessary in such
cases.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
STATUTORY GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON INSPECTIONS TO BE
CARRIED OUT UNDER SECTION 34 OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF
PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 ON SPORTS GROUNDS CONTAINING REGULATED
STANDS


The following guidance is given by the Secretary of State in
pursuance of section 34(2) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987.



General


1.   For the purpose of this guidance "regulated stand" has the
meaning given by section 26(5) of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 and includes any installations in or
serving the stand which are the subject of terms and conditions
in the safety certificate.


2.   Each regulated stand at a sports ground in respect of which
a safety certificate under Part III of the 1987 Act has been
issued is to be inspected in accordance with this guidance.


3.   The local authority should be satisfied that inspections
under this guidance are carried out by a person or persons
qualified for that purpose.


Frequency of Inspections


4.   Where a sports ground has a regulated stand which is the
subject of a safety certificate and which, in the opinion of the
local authority, contains accommodation under cover for over
2,000 spectators to view activities at the ground an inspection
under this guidance of all the regulated stands at that sports
ground should be carried out in the calendar year following the
date of issue of the last safety certificate.   Thereafter, an
inspection of the regulated stands under this guidance should be
carried out at least once in every calendar year following the
date of the last inspection.
5.   In any other case of a sports ground containing a regulated
stand or stands which is/are the subject of a safety
certificate(s) at least one inspection under this guidance of the
regulated stands at that sports ground should be carried out
within two years from the date of issue of the last safety
certificate.    Thereafter, an inspection should be carried out at
least once in every alternate calendar year following the date of
the last inspection.


Scope of Inspection


Certificates and Records


6.   Inspection should, where possible,    include inspection of the
following certificates of testing and records as may be required
under the terms and conditions of the safety certificate to be
kept by the holder and/or submitted to the local authority in
respect of the regulated stands:


     a.   any certificate covering the testing of:-


          i.     strength/loading capacity of guard rails, hand
          rails, balustrading and any crush barriers


          ii.    condition, stability of the stand


          iii. inspections and condition of electrical
          installations.


     b.   any records of the following:-


          i.     spectator attendances where appropriate;


          ii.    accidents involving spectators;            t

          iii. maintenance and other inspections of components
          and installations together with identified deficiencies
          and recorded remedial measures taken;
           iv.    tests and checks on emergency lighting, public
           address system, fire fighting equipment,   fire warning
           system (if installed);


           v.     emergency evacuation procedures and any steward
           training sessions.


7.   Inspection under this paragraph relates to the regulated
stands only and should normally include inspection of the
following items


     a.    any part of the stand or stands where an accident or
     incident resulting in serious injury to spectators has
     occurred since the last inspection;


      b.    any recorded defect or deficiency which has arisen
     since the last inspection and which, in the opinion of the
     inspecting officer, would be likely to lead to an accident
     which could result in serious injury to spectators;


     c.    major remedial work carried out since the date of the
     last inspection;


     d.    all public stairways for their general condition, slip
     resistance; condition of hand rails for overt signs of
     weakness    (see also (j) below), trip hazards especially at
     the head of stairways, adequacy of lighting and structural
     fire separation;


     e.    all egress routes used by the public,   including
     emergency exit routes, for obstructions, operation of exit
     gates and/or doors, adequacy of sign-posting and lighting;


     f.    fire fighting equipment and fire warning system (if
     installed);


     g.    generally for the presence of any accumulation of
     litter;
     h.      any emergency lighting system including any generator
     or batteries;


     i.      any first-aid facilities and equipment;


     j.      10% of any crush barriers and other protective
     barriers on gangways, stairways, exit routes for overt signs
     of weakness which might signal the need for further testing,
     remedial action or (additional) restriction on the number of
     spectators allowed to occupy that part of the stand or
     stands;


     k.      10% of the terraces or viewing slopes for general
     surface condition,      evenness and slip resistance;


     1.      anchorage and   fastening of 10% of any fixed seating;


     m.      any provision   for disabled people.


Where the inspection of a sample in paragraphs (j),          (k) and (1)
reveals matters giving rise to serious concern for the safety of
spectators, all the items in that part of the stand(s) where the
sample indicated that there were deficiencies should be
inspected.



Testing of Equipment


8.   For each of the regulated stands at the sports ground the
following tests should, wherever possible, be carried out to
confirm that the following are in working order:


     a.      lighting,   particularly on stairways and   exit routes;


     b.      emergency lighting;


     c.      public address system, (including the proper
     functioning of zoning where this facility is        part of the
     requirements of the safety certificate);
     d.   fire warning system (if installed);


     e.   10% of any metering system for recording the admission
     of spectators to parts of the stand or stands.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
SUPPLEMENTARY ADVICE AND EXPLANATORY NOTES TO THE STATUTORY
GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES GIVEN BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
UNDER SECTION 34(2) OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF
SPORT ACT 1987


Introduction

1.   The following advice does not form part of the Statutory
Guidance given under section 34 of the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 A c t ) . The following advice is
given in good faith but it should be remembered that only the
courts can rule authoritatively on interpretation of points of
law.

General

2.   The Statutory Guidance follows similar lines to that which
accompanied Home Office Circular 72/1987 in respect of designated
sports grounds except that the Statutory Guidance under section
34(2) is limited to inspections of the regulated stands for which
a safety certificate is likely to have been issued.

3.   As the size, age, condition, type of seating (if any) and
use of the regulated stands, as well as the attitude or ability
of management, can vary considerably, the discretion of local
authorities to carry out more frequent and/or more extensive
inspections than those under the Statutory Guidance is not
restricted.  The frequency and extent of the inspections under
the Statutory Guidance have been set at what is seen as a minimum
likely to achieve the objectives described below.   It leaves
authorities with discretion to add to the inspections and
increase their frequency according to locally determined needs.
The Statutory Guidance also concentrates on certificated stands -
i.e. those which will be occupied by spectators.  However, the
duty of section 34(1) of the Act applies to the whole of a sports
ground which contains a regulated stand irrespective of whether
or not a safety certificate has been issued.  It will be for each
local authority to decide, in the light of local knowledge, the
extent of inspection of other parts of a sports ground which
contains a certificated stand, and the inspection requirement for
a sports ground containing an uncertificated stand.   Local
authorities may wish to note that some additional flexibility on
inspection frequency is built into the Statutory Guidance by the
use of the term "calendar year" rather than "12 months".

4.   Local authorities are reminded that inspections under
section 34 are in addition to, not a substitute for, those which
may be required to be carried out under the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate by or on behalf of the ho ld e r .t

Objectives

5.   The object of inspection under the Statutory Guidance is
primarily to monitor the suitability of the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate in the light of any change in
conditions of the regulated stand and to help ensure that the
stand is maintained and occupied in compliance with these terms
and conditions.

6.   Inspections under the Statutory Guidance are not intended to
shift responsibility for safety away from the holder of the
safety certificate or ground occupier;  rather they are to help
him succeed in achieving (and maintaining) safety standards
intended to be set by the certificate for the numbers of
spectators who are to be accommodated within the regulated
stands.

Inspection Team

7.   The Statutory Guidance allows the local authority to
determine how best to arrange and effect inspections under
section 34.  Local authorities are however reminded of the advice
contained in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the supplementary notes and
guidance accompanying the Statutory Guidance issued with Home
Office Circular 72/1987.

Scope of Inspections

8.   Where a regulated stand or stands is the subject of a safety
certificate all the items listed in paragraphs 6 - 8 of the
Statutory Guidance should wherever possible be inspected and
tested.   It is recognised however that there may be occasions
where one or more of these elements cannot, for some reason, be
inspected or tested at the same time.   For this reason there is a
degree of discretion within paragraphs 6 - 8 of the Statutory
Guidance.   In this way it is hoped to avoid the situation where
the local authority have to pay unnecessary repeated visits to a
ground in order to comply with the Statutory Guidance.

9.   The Statutory Guidance does not require that an inspection
should take place at any particular time so the local authority's
discretion to carry out an inspection whilst the ground is in use
is not restricted.  An "in-use" or "during performance"
inspection could therefore constitute part of the inspection
required by section 34 even though it might not be sufficient
(having regard to the requirements of the Statutory Guidance) to
be an inspection itself.

Records

10.  Local authorities will doubtless need to keep a record of
all inspections carried out under the Statutory Guidance and may
wish to consider whether a copy of any report/record could be
sent to the holder of the safety certificate.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
10 November 1988
                                                                              / £ / / a/£-x   H

                                               HOME OFFICE
                                      Queen A nne’s Gate, LONDON. SW1H 9 AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-213 4080
                                             Switchboard: 01-213 3000


Our reference:                              7 February      1986
Your reference:

Chief Executives - Metropolitan District Councils
                   London Boroughs
                   Common Council of the City of London

Clerks,           Joint Fire and Civil Defence Authorities) Copies and full
                                                           ) enclosures
Chief Fire Officers
Chief Officers of Police                      )   Copies and Annexes only
Chief Executives, County Councils             )
Director General, GLC                         )




HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 7/1986

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975:             LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 1985

Introduction

1.  HOC 54/85 and 5/1986 were copied to Chief Executives of
Metropolitan District Councils and London Boroughs in view of the
forthcoming transfer to them of responsibility in the Metropolitan
counties and Greater London for the administration of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA).         The purpose of this circular is to
advise successor authorities of the changes to the SSGA brought
about by the Local Government Act 1985 (LGA) and to give guidance
on discharging these responsibilities.         It is not intended to affect
any internal or locally agreed arrangements which may be in train to
ensure that all those who have an interest in securing safety at
sports grounds are fully c o n s u l t e d .

SSGA      1975

2.  The SSGA gave effect to the main recommendations contained in
the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds which
was prepared by Lord Wheatley following the serious accident at
Ibrox Park Football Ground in 1971.

3.      The main provisions of the Act are:

        a.  A power, exercisable by the Secretary of State, to
        designate sports stadia with a capacity for more than
        10,000 spectators. Once designated, a stadium will require
        a safety certificate from the local authority.

        b.  An obligation on the local authority to issue such
        certificates.
                                                                                  ♦        *

E.R.
            c.  A discretion for the local authority to set terms
            and conditions under the certificate with the object
            of securing a reasonable degree of safety for spectators.
            Safety certificates are of 2 kinds - firstly, the general
            safety certificate (the main form of control) and,
            secondly, the special safety certificate (for occasions
            or activities not covered by the general certificate).

            d.  A right of appeal to the Secretary of State, in
            relation to the issue of safety certificates and their
            contents, the procedure for which is set out in
            regulations made under s.6(1) of the Act.

            e.  Rights of various interested bodies (police, building
            authorities or, in the Metropolitan county areas after
            "abolition", fire authorities) to consultation, access to
            grounds and information and to the appeals procedure.

            f.   An emergency procedure for       restricting the admission
            of spectators to a wider range        of sports grounds than
            those to which the designation        provisions apply, if the
            risk to spectators is seen (by        the courts) as justifying
            this .

            g.  Powers of entry and inspection to sports grounds;
            and prescribed penalties for offences under the Act.

   A sports ground is, broadly speaking, any place where sports or
   other competitive activities take place in the open air and where
   accommodation has been provided for spectators.  A sports stadium is
   a sports ground where accommodation for spectators wholly or
   substantially surrounds the area used for the activities taking
   place therein.

   LGA   1985

   4.  The combined effect of s . 16 and Schedule 8 paragraph 7 of the
   LGA is to transfer to Metropolitan District Councils and London
   Boroughs the functions, duties and powers as the local authority
   responsible for administering the SSGA in place of the Metropolitan
   County Councils and Greater London Council.    A summary check list of
   these responsibilities is contained at Annex A for ease of reference.

   5.  Paragraph 7(3) of Schedule 8 of the LGA redefines "local
   authority" in England and Wales for the purposes of the SSGA as
   meaning:

            a.  in Greater London, the London Borough Council or
            the Common Council of the City of London;

            b.  in England, in the Metropolitan counties,           the
            district council;

           c.  in England outside Greater London and the
           Metropolitan counties, or in Wales, the county council

   6.  In order to avoid any anomaly or duplication arising out of the
   Metropolitan District C o u n c i l s ’ and London B o r o u g h s ’ responsibilities
E.R.
    as "Building Authority", paragraph 7(2) of Schedule 8 of the LGA
    redefines, for the purposes of the SSGA, "building authority" in
    England and Wales as meaning:

             a.  in England, outside Greater London, and the
             Metropolitan counties, or in Wales, the district
             council.

    The effect of this, together with amendments to Sections 3(3), M 7)
    and (8), 5(5), 10(4) and 11 of the SSGA resulting from paragraph 7(1)
    of Schedule 8 of the LGA, is that in Metropolitan counties and
    Greater London, where the "building authority" and "local authority"
    are synonymous, the local authority is not required to refer safety
    certificate applications to the building authority or consult it
    about the terms and conditions of a certificate.  Similarly the
    building authority in these areas does not have the status of
    "interested party" and has no need of the right to authorise entry
    and inspection ofa sports  ground because these powers are vested in
    it as the local authority.

^   7.  An additional change brought about by paragraph 7(1) affects the
    role and status of the Fire Authority in Greater London and the
    Metropolitan counties.  The   converse of paragraph 6 applies in
    respect of the Fire Authority which,   from 1 April 1986, has the status
    of "interested party" in Metropolitan counties and Greater London.
    In these areas the local authority is required to refer safety
    certificate applications to   the Fire Authority and consult it about
    the terms and conditions of   a safety certificate; and the Fire
    Authority will have the right to authorise entry and inspection of
    a sports ground.  The reason for these changes is that the newly
    constituted fire authorities will not (as in the past) be the same
    as the local authority.

       Transitional Arrangements

    8.   Under article        2 of the Local Government Reorganisation (Transitional
    Provisions) Order          1985 (SI 1985 No 1781), London Borough Councils and
    Metropolitan District Councils will acquire certain anticipatory powers,
    including powers in respect of safety certificates for sports grounds.
    The provisions of SI 1985/1781 were explained in DOE circular LGA(L)
    (DOE) 13/L G A (M C )(D O E )16 of 26 November 1985.   The Secretary of State
    takes the view that Metropolitan County Councils and the GLC are not
    empowered to issue new safety certificates or amend existing safety
    certificates to take effect on or after 1 April 1986: SI 1985/1781
    therefore allows successor authorities to consider, before 1 April,
    applications for certificates to come into effect on or after 1 April.
    Successor authorities will therefore wish to ensure that they are kept
    informed of the progress of safety certificate applications or am e n d ­
    ments to existing certificates now under consideration by the Me tr o ­
    politan County Councils or GLC. Much of this information will a u t o ­
    matically have come to successor authorities in their present role as
    building authorities but they may nonetheless wish to establish
    early contact with the current 'certificating' authority to ensure a
    smooth transfer of responsibility from 1 April 1986 without impairing
    the safety cover afforded by the certification process. In this
    context successor authorities will no doubt wish to bear in mind
    that applications for special safety certificates for events on or
    after 1 April 1986 may require advance consideration if a certificate
    is to be issued in time. Similarly, successor authorities will doubtless
    wish to be acquainted with any other action or initiatives currently
    in hand by the present certificating authority in respect of sports
    grounds in their area.
Guidance to the SSGA procedures

9.  A copy of the SSGA and the Regulations (Statutory Instrument
1263 1976) are enclosed with this circular.   A detailed description
of the Act and its provisions is contained at Annex B.  The Regu­
lations set out the procedures and time limits associated with
safety certificate applications and appeals.   These same regulations
also empower local authorities to determine fees in respect of
applications for the issue or amendment of safety certificates. A
guide to the procedure for the issue of a general safety certificate
is at Annex C.  Similarly, the procedure for the issue of a special
safety certificate is at Annex D.

10.  The following points are highlighted as being of particular
potential interest to local authorities:

    a.  Procedure under s . 10. Paragraph 21 of Annex B refers.
    Authorities may wish to note that this procedure can be
    applied to all sports grounds within the meaning of the Act,
    not just to stadia.   It is hoped that authorities will not
    feel inhibited from invoking the procedure, as necessary,
    where they perceive the risks to be such that urgent action
    is required to provide reasonable safety for spectators.

    b.  The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football) (The
    Green Guide).  Attention is drawn to paragraphs 5 and 6 of
    Annex B and paragraph 3 of Annex C.  Authorities will no
    doubt bear in mind the contents of paragraph 4 of HOC 54/1985
    dealing with action on the Interim Report of the Inquiry
    contains additional recommendations on the content and
    structuring of the Green Guide which will be revised as soon
    as possible.  In the meantime the existing guide, a copy of
    which is enclosed, may be used until such time as the revised
    version is available.

Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds

11.  The Final Report of Mr Justice Popplewell's Committee of Inquiry
into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds was published on
16 January 1 986 (Command 9710). A separate Home Office circular,
number 5/1986, was sent to local authorities - including Metropolitan
District Councils and London Borough Councils - on 20 January 1986,
giving details of the Government's response to the safety recommend­
ations contained in the Report, and next steps.

Other

12.  A list of designated stadia for England and Wales is attached at
Annex E.  Management of those stadia in Metropolitan counties and
Greater London have been informed of the change in responsibility for
administration of the SSGA and have been advised to copy applications
for special safety certificates or amendments to existing general
certificates to successor authorities (see Annex F).

13. This circular is copied to Chief Executives of County Councils,
 Secretaries of the successor authority coordinating committees, and
 to Chief Fire Officers for information.  Paragraph 10 is of
 particular relevance.
E.R.

       14.    Any enquiries should be directed   to:

             Mrs R Da .vies   (01 ) 213 5566

             Mr D J Mould     (01) 213 3582



                                                       Yours faithfully




                                                            f




                                                       P CANOVAN

       Enclosures

       1 copy SSGA 1975
       1 copy SI 1263 (Regulations)
       1 copy Green Guide
                                                                            ANNEX A




                     SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE POWERS, DUTIES
                             AND FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES




                                Duties of the local authority



S .2(1)(2) and S.3(l)(2)    To determine whether or not an applicant for a safety certificate
Safety of Sports
                            is a "qualified" person - ie likely to be able to prevent con­
Grounds Act 1975
                            travention of the terms of issue; and if so to issue such a

                            certificate which must contain certain minimum safety

                            specifications.



 S.4(5)                     To determine the qualification of a transferee of a
jSafety of Sports
                            certificate.
 Grounds Act 1975



S . 3(3),4(7),4(8)          In Metropolitan counties and Greater London,    to copy such
Safety of Sports
                            applications to, and consult, the Chief Officer of Police and the
Grounds Act 1975
                            fire authority,   elsewhere to copy and consult the Chief Officer

                            of Police and the "building authority".



S.4(4)                      To specify the date of operation in any notice of amendment of
Safety of Sports
                            a safety certificate.
Grounds Act 1975



S.5(1)                      To serve notice on the person concerned of the decision that
Safety of Sports
                            he is not a "qualified person".
Grounds Act 1975



S.5(8)                      To give effect to any determination by the Secretary of State
Safety of Sports
                            of an appeal lodged under section 5 of the Act.
Grounds Act 1975
                        Powers o f th e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y


S.2                To insert into a certificate of safety such terms and conditions
Safety of Sports
                   as are considered necessary or expedient to secure safety at a
Grounds Act 1975
                   stadium, and discretion to include within the certificate a

                   condition requiring records to be kept of spectator attendances

                   and safety maintenance; and to include different terms/conditions
                   for different events.


S . 3(4)           To require an applicant to furnish information or plans as
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975   considered necessary by the authority.



S . 4(1)           To amend or replace a safety certificate.
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975


S . 4(10)          To cancel a safety certificate on death of the holder or
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975   dissolution of the corporate body.



S.7(4)(5)          To apply to a Magistrate^ Court for a safety condition to operate
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975   pending an appeal against that condition to the Secretary of State



S.10(l)(2)         To apply as a matter of emergency to a Magistrates'   Court for
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975   an order to limit or prohibit spectators at a sports ground to
                   apply for modification of an order.


S.10(4)            To appeal to Crown Court against an order under section 10(1)
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975   and (2) or refusal of an application for such an order.



S . 11             To authorise entry to a sports ground to inspect or make enquiries
Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975
                                                                 ANNEX B




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

Background

Wheatley Report

1.   The terms of the Inquiry extended to sports grounds generally but because the

immediate concern at the time related to soccer grounds, its Report concentrated

on crowd safety in such grounds, and included Rugby Union and Rugby League g r o u n d s .

Lord Wheatley had no doubt, that the then existing controls over safety at
football grounds were inadequate.    He found that the voluntary system of certifi­

cation of grounds introduced by the Football Association some years previously laid

down no requirements as to the competence of persons who carried out the annual
inspections of grounds and there were no guidelines to assist those persons in

their assessment of safety standards.     Moreover, a review of the statutory provisions

relevant to the safety of spectators at football grounds convinced Lord Wheatley

that the law also fell short of providing proper and effective control over
football grounds as a whole.     The building regulations,   for example, provide for

the basic structural safety of new buildings within a football ground but they do
                                                                  not apply to existing

buildings, except where alterations are to be carried out, nor do they apply to a

ground as a whole.   In any case, most football grounds were built before national

building regulations were introduced.


2.   Lord Wheatley concluded that only a specially devised statutory scheme could

ensure comprehensive controls at football grounds in the interests of safety and he

recommended a statutory licensing system.     He proposed that these controls should

be introduced by stages, the larger or more important grounds, broadly speaking,

being dealt with first.    Lord Wheatley also recommended that there should be a

right of appeal for the clubs concerned against any decision of the licensing
authority.   The Report showed Lord Wheatley's awareness of the need to reconcile

the paramount aim of ensuring the safety of spectators with what would be reasonable
and practicable for the clubs.



3.   Lord Wheatley also provided, as a technical appendix to his report, guidelines
to safety standards at football grounds designed to assist the local authorities

in their task of enforcement.
C o n s u lt a t io n s on th e Report

4.    When the Report was published,             those bodies mainly concerned,   including the

local authority associations and the football authorities, were consulted about

Lord Wheatley's proposals.               The football authorities made it clear that they were

apprehensive at the financial implications for the clubs, but there was general

agreement with the proposals themselves.               Detailed consultations were held on the

guidelines contained in the technical appendix to the Report and these, duly

amended, were finally published by the Home Departments in November 1973 as a
special booklet,        "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds".         It was revised in 1975

in the light of practical experience of its application and specifically targeted

on football grounds-



Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds              (Football)

5.     The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds has no statutory force.               Its primary

purpose is to set out principles or guidelines which the local authorities will

no doubt wish to keep in mind in enforcing the Act.                 The Guide therefore deals

with matters such as the provision of adequate entrances and exits, means of

escape, the slope of terracing,              the strength and siting of crush barriers,   the

construction of staircases, and measures to ensure the safe movement of spectators

both under normal and emergency conditions.                 The Guide is not a set of requirements

to be rigidly applied, regardless of individual circumstances.                 As Lord Wheatley

recognised, it is important to maintain the maximum flexibility in any system of

control so as to take account of the differing circumstances at individual grounds:

factors such as age, size and mode of construction differ widely from ground to
ground.



6.     While the basic principles set out in the Guide are relevant to all sports

stadia, modifications may well be necessary where sports other than football are
involved.



General Approach to the Act

7.     The main instrument of control under the Act is the safety certificate issued by

the local authority.           A safety certificate is needed in respect of every stadium

which is the subject of a designation order, made by the Secretary of State.                    The

certificate enables the local authority to impose such terms and conditions as

are necessary to ensure a reasonable standard of safety at the stadium in question.
8.    The approach to designation was based on a phased programme so that the more

important grounds regularly attracting the largest attendances were dealt with
first.     The international stadia at which soccer and Rugby Union were played plus

stadia used by soccer clubs in Division 1 of the Football League were designated

in 1976.    This was followed in 1979 by designation of stadia of clubs in
Division 2 of the League and thereafter on promotion of a club to Division 2.

Following the    fire    at Bradford City FC in May 1985 all the remaining stadia

liable to designation used by clubs in Divisions 3 and 4 of the Football League,

and qualifying stadia of clubs in Division 1 and 2 of the Rugby League were

designated.



Substance of the Act

9.    The first 5 sections establish the main system of control under the Act, that

is to say, the safety certificate, issued by the local authority for the area in

which the stadium is situated, which is required for every sports stadium desig­

nated for that purpose by order of the Secretary of State.



10.   Section 1 empowers the Secretary of State by order to designate any sports

stadium having accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators as requiring a

safety certificate.     Safety certificates are of two kinds, general and special.
A general safety certificate is the main continuing form of control and is issued

for an indefinite period in respect of a specified activity or activities

regularly taking place at the stadium.     A special safety certificate may be issued

at the discretion of the local authority for a special event or other circumstances

not covered by the general safety certificate.     Such an event might be an evangel­

istic rally which might call for special arrangements if, for example, seating were

provided for the congregation on the playing area.     A special safety certificate

can be issued only in respect of a sports stadium for which a general safety

certificate is already in force.



11.   The contents of safety certificates are dealt with in section 2 .   The local

authority is empowered to include in the certificate such terms and conditions as
are necessary to secure, at the stadium in question, a reasonable degree of safety.

Without prejudice to this general power,    the section requires certificates to contain

terms and conditions relating to major matters such as entrances and exits, means of

escape in emergency,    the number, strength and situation of crush barriers, and the

maximum number of spectators who may be admitted to the stadium or any part of it.

To remove any possibility of doubt, sub-section    (3) makes it clear that a certificate

may include a condition relating to the keeping of records relating to attendance and
the maintenance of safety.
12.   An earlier Bill, introduced in 1973, limited the terms and conditions

imposed under a safety certificate to what was necessary to secure a reasonable

degree for'Members of the public."    There was some difficulty over this term

because it might have excluded,    for example, members of supporters' clubs.       This

particular problem was by the definition of "spectator" in section 17, that is,

any person occupying accommodation provided for spectators.        On the other hand,

it seemed     right that all the peole present on the occasion of a match or other

activity for which a ground has a certificate should be taken into account for the

purpose of the safety certificate,    for example, people using a squash court or

other facilities at the ground.     Accordingly,   the general power of the local

authority under section 2 ( 1 ) to include in a safety certificate such terms or

conditions as are necessary omits any reference to people and speaks only of

securing "reasonable safety at the stadium",       (although the terms "safety", as

defined in section 17, does not include danger arising from participation in a

sport).     Certain provisions must, however,   be specifically linked with spectators

(who are, after all, the people the Act is mainly designed to protect and who will

be greatly in the majority).     Thus section 2 ( 2 ) requires the certificate to state
the maximum number of spectators who may be admitted.




13-   Section 3 sets out the broad procedure to be followed when a local authority

receives an application for a safety certificate.       It requires them to determine

whether an applicant is, in their opinion, a qualified person, ie a person likely

to be in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions imposed

in the certificate.     If so, they are then under a duty to issue a general safety

certificate to him.     In this respect,   the general safety certificate is different

from the fire certificate issued under the Fire Precautions Act 1971:        the latter

is issued only after necessary safety works have been completed, whilst the

safety certificate under this Act can be issued almost from the outset, and is an

instrument of continuing control.     The issue of a special safety certificate,

ho wever, is left to the discretion of the local authority, as already explained,

because only they can judge whether it is appropriate to issue it for the special
occasion in question.



14.   In Metropolitan Counties and Greater London (from 1 April 1986) the local

authority is required to send a copy of any application for a certificate to the

police and the Fire Authority, and must consult them about the terms and conditions




                                      iv
to be included in the certificate.      Elsewhere a copy must be sent to, and

consultation take place with, the police and the Building Authority.         The need

for such consultation is self-evident:       there must be close co-ordination of the

interests of the different authorities directly concerned with different aspects

of safety at football grounds.



15.      Section 4 provides for the amendment, replacement,   transfer, surrender and

cancellation of safety certificates.       It is of primary importance that a local

authority should have power to amend a safety certificate where it appears

appropriate for them to do so, for example,      if they find in the course of a

routine inspection that a part of a ground has become so dangerous as to demand an

immediate restriction on its use or some other necessary safeguard.         Again,   they

must have power to relax a requirement where,      for example,   certain improvements

have been carried out to make this possible.



16.   Section 5 provides for appeals by interested parties against decisions or

requirements of the local authority in connection with safety certificates.          Appeals

lie to the Secretary of State, who has power to set up a formal inquiry.



17.   Section 6 ( 2 ) empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations relating to

the safety of spectators at sports grounds.       This is in the nature of a reserve

power which could be used,    for example,   to give backing to requirements of the

local authorities which in the light of experience had been shown to be essential.

This section also empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations for various

other purposes connected with the Act.       To date no regulations have been made
under this sub-section.



18.   Section 7 provides for some supplementary matters on determinations and

appeals. Sub-sections     (1) and (2) provide for the deemed withdrawal of an applica­

tion for, or the surrender of, a safety certificate when a local authority

determines that a person is not, or has ceased to be, qualified to hold it.          The

section also provides for the suspension of a condition in a certificate pending

determination of an appeal against the inclusion of that condition, although a

court,    on the application of the local authority,   may order that such a condition
remain in force pending the determination of the appeal.




                                       v
19.   The holder of a general safety certificate is required by section 8 to
notify the local authority of any proposed alteration or extension of a stadium.
The purpose of the clause is to guard against any alterations being made, without

the local authority's knowledge, which might affect the safety of spectators.



20.   Section 9 provides for the harmonisation of the Act with other legislation

which may affect sports stadia.


21.   Section 10 is an important power which authorities should not feel inhibited

from using where the danger to spectators are such that use of the ground, or part

of it, should be prohibited or restricted.     Should a magistrates' court, on the

application of a local authority,   consider that the risk to spectators at any

sports ground is so great that their admission should be prohibited or restricted

until remedial action has been taken,    the court may make an order accordingly.

This power applies to any sports stadium or ground, whether or not it is designated

as requiring a safety certificate.    Where a general or special safety certificate

is in force,   local authorities may prefer to remedy an unsatisfactory situation

by amending the certificate,    in cases where there is sufficient time to do so.

In respect of sports grounds and the smaller stadia, consultations between the

local authority and the club would usually be expected to secure, on a voluntary
basis, a reasonable standard of safety; however, where management appears to be

unwilling to undertake the necessary measures or is slow to act on advice,      this
additional power can be used.



22.   Section 11 confers rights of entry and inspection on persons appointed by the

local authority and others involved in the task of ensuring crowd safety at sports

grounds.   Section 12 deals with offences and penalties.



23-   Section 13 deals mainly with civil liability.      Its purpose is to make clear

that while nothing in the Act itself confers a right of action in respect of a

contravention of regulations or of conditions in a safety certificate,      the existing

rights of a spectator injured at a football stadium to bring an action for negli­

gence against the occupiers is entirely unaffected by anything in the Act.



2^.   The Secretary of State is empowered by section 15 to extend to classes of

sports grounds other than sports stadia such provisions of the Act as are not

already expressed to apply to them.     For example,   it enables the Secretary of

State by order to extend the safety certificate procedure to such places as
race-courses.   Only a class of sports ground may be the subject of an extension
order under this clause:   an individual sports ground (other than a stadium)

cannot be designated until section 1 of the Act has been applied by an order

under section 15 to the class of sports ground to which it belongs. To date,

the powers under this section have not been used.



25.   Section 16 applies the Act, subject to necessary modifications,   to the

Crown.   Section 17 deals with interpretation.


26.   Section 18 provides that orders and regulations, except commencement orders,

made under the Act are subject to the negative resolution procedure.     It also

imposes a duty on the Secretary of State, before making any orders or regulations,

except commencement orders or orders relating to the Isles of Scilly,    to consult

with such persons as appear to him requisite.
                                                                    ANNEX C


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

PROCEDURE REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES


1.   The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 provide that any application

for a safety certificate shall be made in the form contained in the Schedule to

the Regulations or a form to the like effect.      An application should be accompanied

by detailed information as to the structure,     capacity, etc of the stadium, includ­

ing plans of the stadium, certificates relating to the testing of crush barriers

and evidence of the applicant's status.     It is, however, open to a local authority,

under section SC1!) of the Act, to require, by notice in writing, such further

information of this kind as it may consider necessary to enable it to determine

the terms and conditions to be included in the certificate.


2.   On receipt of an application for a general safety certificate, the local

authority must first determine whether the applicant is a qualified person, ie a

person likely to be in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and con­

ditions to be imposed in the certificate.      If it considers him to be such a person
the authority is then under a duty to issue a general safety certificate to him.

In the case of a general safety certificate, where considerations of time are not

paramount,   the regulations impose no specific time limit for such a determination.

In any event,    it seems prima facie unlikely that an application for a general

safety certificate would be made by an unqualified person.       There is, h o w e v e r , a

right of appeal against a determination by a local authority that an applicant is

not a qualified person (see paragraph 10).


3.   In Metropolitan counties and Greater London (from 1 April 1986) the local

authority is required, by section 3(3) of the Act, to send a copy of any appli­
cation for a safety certificate     (general or special)   to the appropriate Chief

Officer of Police and the fire authority, and must consult them about the terms

and conditions to be included in the certificate.      Elsewhere in England and Wales

the local authority must send a copy to and consult with the Chief Officer of

Police and the building authority.      In framing such conditions,   local authorities

will no doubt wish to keep in mind the principles or guide lines set out in the

Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.      In this connection local authorities are

reminded that,    this non-statutory document is not a set of requirements to be

rigidly applied regardless of individual circumstances.        The maximum flexibility

should be maintained to take account of the different circumstances of individual

grounds deriving from differences in such matters as age, size and mode of con­
struction.    In this regard,   it should also be noted that the Act provides that the
terms and conditions should be such as "necessary or expedient to secure reason­

able safety" and it would be unreasonable,     even if it were practicable,   to seek

the absolute safety of everyone attending the sports stadium.



JJ.   It is envisaged that there will be a good deal of consultation between the

local authority and the stadium representatives in the process of drawing up the

certificate conditions.     In this way,   if evidence is advanced that a ground is

rarely filled to capacity,    the local authority may consider it proper to base its

requirements on actual levels of attendance over a given period rather than on

maximum capacity.     On the rare occasions on which a capacity crowd could be

expected, separate provision might be made for this contingency on the lines
indicated in paragraph 7 below.     Again,   if a stand were found to be structurally

weak, the local authority might, in consultation with the stadium representatives,

offer the choice of having any necessary remedial works carried out or of restrict­

ing admission to the stand until it had been strengthened.



5.    As will be apparent from the foregoing paragraphs, the form and content of a

safety certificate is likely to vary according to the circumstances of the indivi­

dual case.     Accordingly, a standard form of certificate would not be appropriate.

It must however contain full details of the terms and conditions imposed including,

in particular,    the matters referred to in section 2(2) of the Act and have annexed

to it a plan of the stadium by reference to which the terms and conditions will be

framed.    The certificate when first issued may contain restrictive conditions which

can then be relaxed or deleted by amendment of the certificate.       The local

authority may find it convenient to list, in a covering letter to the certificate,
such modifications as will be subsequently permitted, eg in the form of a state­

ment of the increased spectator capacities:    to be allowed for the separate sections

of the ground when the various stages of any future .works programme

agreed with the stadium authorities are completed.       This arrangement,   by

excluding’from'" the certificate itself proposed conditions which would
apply only to future works, should serve to obviate confusion.       At the same time,

however, care must be taken not to exclude from the certificate any restriction

germane to current conditions, since section 5(3) of the Act provides for an

interested party to appeal to the Secretary of State against the inclusion of

anything     in, or the omission of anything from, a safety certificate, and these

rights must not be prejudiced in any way in consequence of the form of the
certificate.
6.   As regards the scope of a general safety certificate, section 2(5) of the
Act provides that different terms and conditions may be included for different

activities.    Although,   therefore, a stadium may be in regular use only as a foot­

ball ground,   in cases where it is also used from time to time to stage other

events it would be desirable, and in many cases obviate the need for special

safety certificates,    if the terms and conditions appropriate to those events were

to be included in the general certificate.      It is suggested that any such events

for which it is considered desirable to provide might conveniently be divided into

2 classes


     1.     those sufficiently similar in character to the main purpose of the

     stadium for the normal terms and conditions to be equally applicable;



     2.     those of a fundamentally different character,   eg boxing matches,   pop

     concerts, etc which may involve all or part of the playing area being given

     over to   spectator accommodation and for which separate terms and conditions

     will have to be devised.     It is not, of course, necessary to provide for

     these contingencies in cases where no clear need is foreseen by the stadium

     authorities.



7.   There may also be circumstances in which the terms and conditions applicable

to the normal activity of the stadium may be found to be inappropriate, eg when a
special event, such as a cup tie or a "local Derby", is expected ifo attract signi­

ficantly more than the usual attendance.     In the case especially of cup re plays

these special events may arise with only a few days' notice, within which it would

not be possible to accommodate the whole of the statutory procedure appropriate to

the grant of a special safety certificate.      In order to overcome this difficulty,

it would seem desirable for the local authorities and stadium authorities to seek

to work out in advance the modifications to the normal terms and conditions which

might be appropriate to such occasions,    eg the admission of increased numbers to

certain areas on the condition that extra stewards and police are employed,       that

notice is given to the local authority, and so on, and to provide for their

incorporation in the general safety certificate.



8.   Once a general safety certificate has been issued, subject to the determina­

tion of any appeal,    the terms and conditions can be varied only by formal amend­

ment of the certificate, which may be at the initiative either of the holder of

the certificate or of the local authority     (see section ^(2) of the Act) and will

presumably reflect changes in circumstances occurring since the grant of the
original certificate.       It will thus be to the mutual benefit of local authorities
and clubs/stadium authorities for a close liaison to be maintained after the

issue of the certificate and certainly while any further works of safety measures

are being carried out.      It is likely to be in the stadium operators'       financial

interest to get the safety certificate amended as soon as possible after work

has been completed, and they should accordingly ensure that the local authority

is kept informed of progress.       For     its part the local authority will no doubt

wish to co-operate by arranging matters so that, following completion of the

work, the certificate can be amended without delay.



9.     After a certificate has been granted, an application may be made for the

transfer of the certificate to another person.          Similarly, while a local

authority is considering an application for a certificate and before the certifi­

cate has been granted,      it may be asked to substitute some person other than the

original applicant as the person to whom the certificate should be granted.            These

are, however,    likely to be rare occurrences in the case of general safety certifi­
cates, where an application will normally be made on behalf of a club or a stadium

organisation by an authorised official of the club or representative of the

organisation.    However,    if it does happen,    the local authority will be required in

both cases to determine whether the substituted nominee is a qualified person.

Thereafter,    in the first case, the procedure laid down in the regulations to

giving notice of, and the reasons for, the determination will apply together with

any necessary appeals procedure.          In the second case,   there is no reason why the

local authority should not treat the application in all respects as a new applica­

tion in the terms of the original one and process it from the point it had already

r ea ch ed .



10.    In addition to the right of appeal by an applicant for a general safety

certificate against the determination that he is not a qualified person (see

paragraph 2 above), which, of course, applies also in the case of a proposed

transfer of a certificate,     the Act provides a further right of. appeal to any

"interested party"    (which term includes the holder of the safety certificate)

against the inclusion of anything in or the omission of anything from a safety

certificate or against a refusal to amend or replace a safety certificate.            The

regulations provide that, in the case of a general safety certificate, notice of

any such appeal shall be given within 28 days following receipt of a notice of

the local authority's decision, or, in the case of persons who are not notified,

the publication by the local authority of its decision in a newspaper circulating

in the locality.
11.    In this connection, Regulation 7 requires a local authority, on issuing or
amending a safety certificate or refusing to do so, to give notice to certain

specified "interested parties" and also to advertise their action in the press.

It is regretted that it has been necessary to incur the trouble and expense of

advertising, but, since Section 5(5) of the Act is not specific in the definition

which it provides of "interested party", no other means could be found of ensuring

that all persons who might validly claim to be "interested parties" within the

meaning of the Act should be able to acquaint themselves with the local authority's

decision, and failure to bring the decision to their notice could result in a

denial of their     rights of appeal or of a hearing by the Secretary of State. For

the same reason     a similar obligation has been imposed on an appellant (by

Regulation 8(7)) to advertise his intention to appeal, and a person wishing to

appear before a person     appointed by the Secretary of State under Section 5(^)     of

the Act is required to     give notice within 28 days of such advertisement.



12.    Any appellant is required (by Regulation 8(5)) to give the local authority

notice of appeal, accompanied by the relevant documents appertaining to the

appeal.    It will then be for the local authority,     in accordance with Regulation

8(9), to inform the Secretary of State in writing within 28 days whether it

wishes to oppose the appeal.      With any such notice,   the local authority is
required to submit its reasons arid any relevant supporting documents and to state

whether it wishes a hearing under Section 5       of the Act.    (The procedure govern­

ing the conduct     of all such hearings is set out in Regulation 10.)


13.    It is also   open to the Secretary of State,   if he considers it necessary,   to
order a public inquiry     under Section 5(6) of the Act in relation to any appeal.

In such a case, the procedure to be followed      is laid down in Regulation 12.

1*1.   It would be helpful if local authorities could continue the existing

practice of copying to the Home Office newly issued or amended safety certificates.




                                     v
                                                                            ANNEX D




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

PROCEDURE REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES


1.   The regulations provide that any application for a safety certificate shall
be made in the form contained in the Schedule to the Regulations or a form to the
like effect.     Part II of the form and its frontispiece should be completed in the
case of applications for special safety certificates.      In any case where an
application for a special safety certificate is not made by the holder of the
general safety certificate, it should be accompanied by evidence of the appli­
cant's status.     Details of any plaljried changes to the normal standing and seating
arrangements for spectators should be provided, together with such further
information in support of the application as is considered necessary to enable
the local authority to discharge its functions under the Act.      However, it is
open to a local authority, under section 3(4) of the Act, to require, by notice
in writing, any further information of this kind which they may think it
necessary to have to enable them to determine the terms and conditions to be

included in the special safety certificate.


2.   A major difference in the grant of general and special safety certificates
is that, once the local authority has determined that an applicant is a quali­
fied person, the issue of a general safety certificate becomes mandatory,
whereas the issue of a special safety certificate remains at its discretion.
But an applicant has a right of appeal to the Secretary of State against a

refusal (see following paragraphs for details).


3.   An application for a special safety certificate should normally be made at
least 3 months before the date of the proposed event, but a local authority has
discretion to permit an application within a lesser period if it is satisfied
that the procedures (including appeals procedures) required under the Act and
Regulations can, in the particular case, be carried out within that lesser period,
eg when the applicant is known to be a qualified person.      On receipt of an
application for a special safety certificate, the local authority must first
determine whether the applicant is a qualified person, ie a person likely to be
in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions to be imposed
in the certificate.     The local authority is required by regulation 5 to make
this determination within 14 days of receiving the application.       There is a
right of appeal against a determination by a local authority that an applicant
is not a qualified person (see paragraph 9), and, under regulation 5, the
applicant must be furnished with the reasons for such a determination.




                                      i
4.   It next requires to be considered whether the application should be refused

on grounds other than that the applicant is not a qualified person.      This

decision must, in accordance with regulation 6, be made within 28 days of the

receipt of the application, not only in cases where the local authority has

determined that the applicant is a qualified person but also in those where

it has determined that he is not and an appeal has been lodged and remains to

be considered.     There is also a right of appeal against a refusal on grounds

other than a determination that the applicant is not a qualified person (see

paragraph 9).     In the event of such a refusal, therefore, the local authority is

again required, under regulation 6, to give the applicant the reasons for its
decision.



5.   When the first 2 stages have been completed, should it have been decided

that a special safety certificate should be issued, the local authority in

metropolitan counties and Greater London (from 1 April 1986) is required,       by

section 3(3) of the Act, to send a copy of the application to the Chief Officer

of police and to the fire authority and to consult them about the terms and

conditions to be included in the certificate.     Elsewhere in England and Wales

the local authority must send a copy to, and consult with, the Chief Officer of

Police and the building authority.     The special safety certificate must, in

accordance with regulation 6(2),    then be issued not less than 28 days before

the proposed event is due to take place.



6.The form and content of a special safety certificate is likely        to vary

according to the circumstances of each individual case and a standard form of

certificate would not be appropriate.     (In suitable cases, however, regard may
be had to the guide lines set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

(Football) on the basis indicated in paragraph 3 of the paper relating to the

"Procedure Regarding Applications for General Safety Certificates".)      Any

special safety certificate must, however,    contain full details of the terms

and conditions imposed,    including in particular the matters referred to in

section 2(2) of the Act, and as required by section 2(4) should be framed where

appropriate by reference to the plan attached to the general safety cartificate.



7.    Once a special safety certificate has been issued, subject to the deter­

mination of any appeal, the terms and conditions can be     varied only by formal

amendment of the certificate.     This may be on the application of the holder of

the certificate or at the discretion of the local authority     (see section 4(2)

of the Act).     This seems an unlikely eventuality in the case of a special safety
certificate, otherwise than in the exceptional case where the certificate has

been issued well in    advance of the event to which it relates.    Any such amend­

ment must, however,    be publicised as in paragraph 10 below.



8.    Considerations   of time render the transfer of a special safety certificate

to another person an equally unlikely contingency.      Any possible difficulties

in this connection are likely to be obviated, however,     if the holder of the

general safety certificate applies for the special certificate.        Nevertheless,

should an application for transfer be made, the local authority must decide

within 14 days if the proposed transferee is a qualified person and, if it

decides to the contrary,   the procedure laid down in the regulations relating

to giving notice of, and the reasons for, the determination will apply, as will

the appropriate appeals procedure, should the need arise.        In the case of an
application for transfer before a special safety certificate has actually been

issued, there is no reason why the local authority should not treat the applica­

tion in all respects as a new application in the terms of the original and pro­

cess it from the point already reached.


9.    Reference has already been made to the rights of appeal against a deter­
mination that the applicant is not a qualified person (paragraph 3) and against

the refusal of an application on other grounds    (paragraph 4).     In addition the

Act provides   (in section 5(3))a right of appeal to any "interested party"

against the inclusion of anything in or the omission of anything from a safety

certificate or against a refusal to amend or replace a safety certificate.

The regulations provide that, in the case of a special safety certificate, notice

of any such appeal shall be given within 7 days following receipt of a notice

of the local authority's decision, or, in the case of persons who are not

notified,   the publication by the local authority of the decision in a newspaper

circulating in the locality.



10.   As in the case of a general safety certificate,    regulation 7 requires a

local authority, on issuing or amending a safety certificate or refusing so

to amend it, to give notice to certain specified "interested parties" and also

to advertise its action in the press.     A similar obligation falls on an appellant

(under regulation 8(7)) to advertise his intention to appeal, and a person wish­

ing to appear before a person appointed by the Secretary of State under section

5(4) of the Act is required to give notice within 7 days of such advertisement.

(The reasons underlying these requirements are set out in paragraph 11 of the
paper relating to the    'Procedure Regarding Applications for General Safety

Certificates'.)
11.   Any appellant is required (by regulation 8(5)) to give the local authority

notice of a p p e a l ,   accompanied by the relevant documents appertaining to the
appeal.    It will then be for the local authority,      in accordance with regulation

8(9), to inform the Secretary of State in writing within 7 days whether it

wishes to oppose the appeal.         With any such notice,   the local authority is

required to submit its reasons and any relevant supporting documents and to

state whether it wishes a hearing under section 5(4) of the Act.           (The pro­

cedure governing the conduct of all such hearings is set out in regulation 10.)



12.   It is also open to the Secretary of State, if he considers it necessary,

to order a public inquiry under section 5(6) of the Act in relation to any

appeal.    In such a case, the procedure to be followed is laid down in
regulation 12.



13-   It would be helpful if local authorities could continue the existing

practice of copying to the Home Office any special safety certificates issued.




                                      iv
V
      *        *•




      •4
                                                                                           ANNEX E

            GROUNDS DESIGNATED UNDER THE SAFETY DF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975



                                            DATE OF                                                   DATE OF
                    CLUB GROUNDS                               ,            CLUB GROUNDS
                                          DESIGNATION                                                DESIGNATION

    Football League Club Grounds
         Arsenal                          August   1976            Burnley                           August 1979
           Aston Villa                   August    1976            Cambridge United                  August 1979
           Birmingham City               August 1976               Charlton                          August 1979
           Bristol City                  August    1976            Crystal Palace                    August 1979
      <t Cardiff City                    August    1976            Fulham                            August 1979
           Coventry      City            August    1976            Luton                             August 1979
          * Derby County                 August    1976            Notts County                      August 1979
           Everton                       August 1976               Oldham                            August 1979
           Ipswich                       August    1976            Orient                            August 1979
           Leeds United                  August 1976               Preston                           August 1979
     ^ R , e i c e s t e r City          August    1976            Shrewsbury                        August   1979
           Liverpool                     August    1976            Swansea                           August 1979
           Manchester City               August    1976            Watford                           August 1979
           Manchester United             August 1976
                                                                   Blackburn                         August 1980
           Middlebrough                  August    1976
           Newcastle United                                        Grimsby                           August   1980
                                         August    1976
      * Norwich City                     August    1976
                                                                   Rotherham                         July 1981
           Queens Park Rangers           August    1976
                                                                   Barnsley                          July 1981
           Stoke City                    August    1976
           Sunderland                    August    1976            Carlisle United                   August 1982
           Tottenham Hotspur             August    1976
                                                                   Huddersfield                      July 1983
           West Bromwich Albion          August    1976
           West Ham United                                         Portsmouth                        July 1983
                                         August    1976
      <i Wrexham                         August    1976
                                                                   Oxford United                     July 1984
      6 Wembley                          August    1976
                                                                   Sheffield United                  July 1984
      <zS Twickenham                     August    1976
                                                                   Wimbledon                         July 1984
      4 National Ground, Cardiff         August    1976

                                                                   Bournemouth                       August   1985
           Chelsea                       August    1977            Aldershot                         August 1985
           Nottingham Forest             August    1977            Blackpool                         August   1985
           Wolverhampton Wanderers       August 1977               Bradford City                     August   1985
                                                                   Brentf ord                        August 1985
           Bolton                        August    1978
                                                                   Bury                              August 1985
      <i> Sheffield Wednesday            August    1978
                                                                   Chester                           August   1985
           Southampton                   August    1978
                                                                   Chesterf ield                     August 1985

           Brighton and Hove Albion                                Colchester                        August 1985
                                         August    1979^
                                                                   Crewe                             August 1985
           Bristol Rovers                August    1979

                                                           i
                              DATE OF                                           DATE OF
         CLUB GROUNDS                                CLUBS GROUNDS
                            DESIGNATION                                       DESIGNATION



Darlington                  August   1985    Hull                             August 1985

Doncaster                   August   1985    Hull Kingston Rovers             August 1985

Exeter                      August   1985    Keighley                         August 1985

Gillingham                  August   1985    Leeds                            August 1985

Halifax Town                August 1985      Leigh                            August 1985

Hartlepool                  August 1985      Oldham                           August 1985

Heref ord                   August 1985      St Helens                        August 1985

Hull City                   August 1985      Salford                          August 1985

Lincoln                     August 1985      Swinton                          August 1985

Mansfield Town              August 1985      Wakefield Trinity                August 1985

Millwall                    August   1985    Warrington                       August 1 9 ^ ^

Newport County              August   1985    Widnes                           August 1985

Northampton Town            August 1985      Wigan                            August 1985

Peterborough                August   1985    Workington Town                  August 1985

Plymouth Argyle             August 1985

Port Vale                   August   1985
Reading                     August 1985      <t> Designated because their grounds were
Rochdale                    August   1985         used for international or quasi­
Scunthorpe                  August   1985         international matches.
Southend                    August   1985
                                             *    These clubs appealed but their appeals
Stockport                   August   1985
                                                  were withdrawn before any hearings were
Swindon                     August   1985
                                                  held.
Tranmere Rovers             August   1985
Walsall                     August   1985    ■f   Year in which all clubs in the second
Wigan                       August   1985         division were designated.
York                        August   1985
Rugby League Club Grounds   August   1985
Barrow                      August   1985
Batley                      August   1985
Bradford Northern           August 1985
Castlef ord                 August 1985
Dewsbury                    August   1985
Featherstone Rovers         August   1985
Halifax                     August   1985
Huddersfield                August 1985




                                        ii
BG
                                                                                 ANNEX F



           HOME OFFICE
           Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                         D irect line 0 1 -2 1 3
                                        Sw itchboard 0 1 -2 1 3 3 °°°



                                                               Your reference
Secretary
        AFC
                                                               O ur reference
        RLFC
        Wembley Stadium Ltd
                                                               Date
        R/U Twickenham
                                                                         Feb.ruaryl986

Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975: LOCAL GOVERNMENT REORGANISATION

1,   The purpose of this letter is to inform you of the effects on the Safety of           ___
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA) of Local Government reorganisation in the Metropolitan
counties and Greater London brought about by the Local Government Act 1985.

2.   With effect from 1 April 1986 responsibility for administering the SSGA 1975 will,
in the Metropolitan counties and Greater London, transfer to the appropriate
Metropolitan District Council (MDC) or London Borough (the "successor" authorities).
They will be responsible for, among other things, the issue of and amendments to safety
certificates.  A consequential effect of Local Government reorganisation is that the
current certificating authorities in the Metropolitan counties and Greater London are
not in the meantime empowered to issue or amend safety certificates for any period
commencing on or after 1 April 1986.  Such certificates or amendments will fall to be
issued by the successor authorities.  It is therefore in the interests of applicants
in these areas to ensure that applications for special safety certificates, or amendments
to existing certificates, which are to come into effect on or after 1 April 1986 are
copied to the appropriate successor authority who should be kept informed of developments
and progress so as to be in a position to assume responsibility for the case in question
with the minimum of delay and inconvenience.

                                                                        Yours faithfully




cc   Football Association
     Football League
     FG IT
     Rugby League
                                                      H OM E OFFICE
                                        Q u e e n A n n e 's Gat e L o k d o n        1H 9 A T
                                                          D n e : ; line0 i-2i3
                                                      S-uchbojrd      Pi •2 j3 3000


Our rcfercncc
V o w rc'erenci



     Judges of the Crown Court
     The Circuit Administrator
     The Courts Administrator
     The Chief Clerk of the Crown Court
     The Clerk to the Justices
         (extra copy to the Chairman of the Bench)
     T h e Clerk to the Magistrates' Courts Committee
     Th e Chief Officer of Police in England and Wales




                                                                              5 August       1968




     Dear         Sir/Macam

     H OME OPPICE CI RCULAR NO 68/1988

     A L C O H OL AND DISORDER

     1.    The Government is concerned about the link between heavy
     drinking and public disorder.        There is a growing number of
     reports of disorder in rural areas, and of incidents of football
     hooliganism, in which alcohol has played a significant part.        The
     recent report by the Assoc iat io n of Chief Police Officers which
     surveyed incidents of public disorder in non-Metroplitan areas of
     En gland and Wales in 1987 found that alcohol featured in 90% of
     such incidents.   V io l en c e in the cities remains a problem and the
     connection with alcohol misuse is often clear.

     2.      The purpose of this Circular is to draw attention to the
     wide powers available to the courts, licensing justices and
     p o lic e to prevent and curb disorder, infringements of the
     licensing law and drunkenness.     The Circular also provides
     information about possible crime prevention measures.

     3.           An nexes A-C to this Circular list:

     A.           The powers available to control licensed premises and deal
                  with breaches of the licensing laws;

     B.           The main offences of drunkenness,                indicating maximum
                  penal t i e s .

     C.           The main offences of disorder,           violence ana vandalism,                  again
                  indicating m ax im um penalties;
POW ER S OF TEE COURTS AND LICENSING JUSTICES

4.    The licensing laws provide wide discretion to 9 J a n t » refuse,
renew or revoke licences.   The following paragraphs draw
attention to some particularly important provisions r e . a . m g to
licences in force.   But it is especially i m p o r t a n t , when
considering applications for new licences and for the t.answer o^
licences, to ensure that the prospective licensee is aware of
his/her responsibilities under the law and has mafie arrangements
for the effective management of the premises, including the
training of staff.   These aspects can best be addressed by
q uestioning the applicant.

Powers to close licensed premises

5.        The power of licensing justices to close premises which are
badly managed or which are the scene of regular disturbance and
disorder can be exercised at present only once a year, at the
annual renewal of the licence.          This occasion provides the
opportunity for the justices, police, local residents or loca*
council to object to a licence remaining in force.                 The grouncs
on which renewal may be refused are wide-ranging and are not^                            ^
specified.          They may include reports of disorder at or associa.ec
with premises, convictions or warnings for infringements of the
l i c e n s i n g laws (eg sales to under 18s or a ft e r- ho u r s ^ d r i n k i n g ),
examples^of bad or lax management and a poor standard of service,
car-parking problems, rowdyism or litter.

6.    With the introduction of three y e a r ^licences^in February
1989, the Licen si ng Act 1988 will give licensing justices the
power to revoke a licence at any licensing session o n _a n y _grounds
on which they may refuse to renew a licence. _ An application .or
revocation may be made by anyone or the justices may themselves
initiate proceedings.    The power will come into effect on 1 March
1989 .
7.   The new powers of revocation will enable justices to
exercise greater and more immediate control o v e r troublesome
premises, and the power to refuse renewal of a licence (in future
once every three years) will remain.

p a y to day running of licensed premises

 8.       Most licensing committees make it their practice to v ^sit
 licensed premises in their area both to make contact with the
 licensee and see for themselves the premises, staff ana
 clientele.            Ro utine visits to premises remind licensees of the
 role of licensing justices and of the importance of observing the
 law.       They also give licensing justices local knowledge of their
 pr emises and the likely trouble spots.             Points to note or enquire
 into include: whether staffing levels are adequate (slow customer
 service may trigger violence); arrangements for staff training
 including awareness of the licensing law and handling of              . ..
 difficult customers; methods of dealing with disorder, including
 police liaison; numbers of persons on the premises ( o v e r c r o w d i n g
 can be another source of t r o u b l e ); design and layout, with
 particular reference to good visibility from the bar area,                 ^
 arranaements for supervising the departure of customers late a.
 n i g h t " ( c l u b s , for example, may wish to arrange for a degree o.   -
supervision outside the premises).     Visits   on similar   lines by
the police can also be valuable.

Underage drinking

9.   The Licensing Act 1988 has strengthened the offence of
selling to those under 18, shifting the burden of proof to the
licensee but providing a defence if he can prove he exercise^ all
due diligence to avoid the commission of an offence or that he
had no reason to suspect the customer was under 18.   The maximum
fine for selling to under-age customers is raised from level
2(£100) to level 3(£400).  The powers of magistrates to order the
forfeiture of a licence on a second or subsequent conviction are
retained.  It is also an offence for a person under 18 to buy or
attempt to buy alcohol on licensed premises, or to consume
alcohol in a bar.  A person who buys alcohol for consumption by
an under-age person in a bar also commits an offence.

 10.  The 1988 Act requires all sales of alcohol by staff aged
 under 18 in off-licensed premises (including supermarkets) to be
 specifically approved by the licensee or an adult acting on his
 behalf.  W hol es al e premises are also subject to the law on sales
 to and by persons under 18.

 11.  Assess in g a person's age is one of a licensee's most
 difficult responsibilities.    Some pubs deliberately set out to
 attract young customers and it may be all too tempting for
 licensees to'turn a blind eye.    Measures taker, to prevent
 under-age sales, including appropriate staff training anc design
 of premises, will be important points to stress when considering
 licensing applications and during visits to licensed premises.
 In response to the 1986 Act provisions, voluntary identity card
 schemes are attracting interest amongst the trade.     Schemes are
 in operation in a number of areas.

 L ate -night   licensing extensions

  12.  Incidents of disorder often occur when customers leave
■ late-night clubs and discos at the same time, whether midnight,
  or 1 am or 2 am.    The Licensing Act 1964 presently requires the
  justices to grant regular late-night extensions (special hours
  certificates) provided certain criteria are met.    The Licensing
  Act 1988 strengthens the available powers by giving licensing
  justices (or magistrates' courts in the case of registered
  clubs), discre tio n to grant or refuse special hours certificates,
  even though the criteria are satisfied, and a power to attach
  limitations to certificate's operation, eg to curtail the closing
  hours.  The right of the police to apply for the curtailment or
  revocation of a certificate if premises give rise to disorderly
  conduct will remain.    The new provisions will come into effect on
  22 August.

 13.  The new powers provide scope for discussion between
 justices, the police and local councils (who license premises
 used for entertainment) to determine a policy for late-night
 premises, eg their closing hour.  It would also be possible, for
 example, to limit the numbers present in night clubs if there is
 evidence of overcrowding which results in disorder.
use of exclusion orders

14   The Licensed Premises (Exclusion of Certain Persons) Act
1960 enables the magistrates' court, when sentencing a person
convicted of violence or threatened violence on on-licensed
premises to make an 'exclusion order' prohibiting him/her from
entering those or any other specified p r e m i s e s (for b e l i c e n s e e
months and 2 years) without the express consent of .he licensee.
Thus a person convicted of a violent offence in a public house
may be banned from that pub and from others which are named in
the order.   A police constable or the licensee has specific power
to expel from licensed premises a person whom he reasonably
suspects to have entered premises in breach of an exclusion
order.  The Act applies in England, Wales and Scotland.             This is
a useful power to prevent known troublemakers from entering pubs
in the area.   The trade would welcome its greater use.

Section 188 of the L ic ens in g Act 1964

15.  This section provides that where a riot or tumult (incident
of serious disorder) happens or is expected to happen m any ^
county, any two justices may order every holder of^a Dustices
licence in the area of likely disorder to close his premises for
such time as the justices may order.   The maximum a n e .or
disobeving an order is £400.   If any order is maae, it will app-y
to all'licensed premises - pubs, restaurants, hotels, wine^bars,
off-licences and supermarkets.   In practice, when trouble is ^
expected eg in the vicinity of football grounds, the police w . U
advise particular licensees to close and most are happy to
comply.  But justices should be aware of this important reserve
power.

B om e Office Cir cu la r 62/1988

  16.  The Go ve rnment considers it important for those accused of
  involvement in outbreaks of hooliganism to be brought promptly
  before the courts.    Home Office Circular 62/1988, to be issued
  shortly, will provide guidance and a general framework for the
. development of local plans to provide special arrangements for
  bringing people quickly before the court when this seems
  desirable.

 A p p e al s to the C ro wn Court

 17.  Judges h earing appeals against the decisions of licensing
 justices on any aspect of licensing will wish to bear in mind the
 importance of m ai ntaining public order and preventing crime as
 well as legal considerations.

 P o w e r s of the p ol ic e

 18.  Police knowledge of trouble on the ground is essential to
 the consideration of licensing applications.  The L i c e n s i n g Ac
 1964 provides a power for the police to enter l i c e n s e d premises
 whether at the invitation of the licensee or not.       Police may
 also object to the grant, transfer or renewal of a licence or
 apply for its revocation.
19      It is important for the police as well as the courts _o be
aware of the wide powers available to deal with infringements o.
the"licensing law.       Much can be achieved by providing help and
advice to landlords, as well as drawing the attention o. t4Je
owner/brewer to troublesome premises.       But if co-operation is not
forthcoming and trouble continues, it will be necessary to
consider whether a licence should continue in force.       In such_
circumstances, police will wish to consider the case for lodging




                                                                            y
a f o r m a l objection to the licence (rather than submitting genera




                                                                             it*
comments) and/or taking the initiative to apply for revocation o
the licence.

Crime p r e v e n t i o n
20   This Circular stresses the need for firm action to close
problem premises and deal with trouble makers.              But it is equally
important to target resources and make best use of crime
prevention o p p o r t u n i t i e s . There is scope for co-operation
between the courts, the police, 1 i c e n s e e s ,            ‘ " £ e?^!erS ’
good deal of useful crime prevention work is a                     b ®;n? .
carried out in relation to licensed premises; Annex D to th.s
Circular gives examples.




                    D E R FAULKNER                  J A CHILCOT




 DS78
L ICE NS IN G ACT 1964    (AS   AM EN DE D   BY   THE   LICENSING   ACT   1986)
EXISTING POWERS


Section 3            Lice ns in g justices have         discret io n to grant, renew
                     or transfer a justices'            licence to any person they
                     think fit and proper.

S ec ti on 4         W hen granting   a new   justices'    on-licence,  the
                     licensing justices may attach to it such conditions
                     governing the tenure of the licence and any other
                     matters as they think proper in the interests of
                     the public.    A new on -l icence shall not be granted
                     if the premises are not st ru ct ura ll y adapted to the
                     class of licence required.

S ect io n 7         The   occasion      of   licence  renewals  provides  an
                     oppo rt un it y   for   anyone   (including  police,  local
                     residents       and   licensing  justices)  to object    to
                     renewal     on wide variety       of grounds - see
                     p aragraph 5 of the circular.

Se ct io n   19      L icensing justices have power to require structural
                     alterations to on-licensed p remises - on renewal of
                     licence - "to secure the proper conduct of the
                     business".

Section      20A     (Inserted by section 12 of the 1986 Act.)         From
                     1 March 1989, licensing justices will have power to
                     revoke a licence at any licensing sessions either
                     on an application        or of their own motion.
                     Rev oc at io n is ex er cisable on any ground on which
                     the renewal of the licence may be refused.

Sec ti on    67A     (Inserted      by section 3 of the 1988 Act.)         From
                     22 August,       licensing  justices,   or   magistrates'
                     courts in respect of clubs, will have power to
                     grant      a  restriction  order   requiring   particular
                     p re mi s es to close their bars during the afternoon
                     to avoid or reduce any disturbance,           annoyance or
                     disorde rl y condut.

Se c t i o n s 70,   L ice ns in g justices, or magistrates' courts in
               71,   respect of clubs, have d i s c r et i on to grant extended
            •' 72    hours orders       (to 1 am)  for restaurants providing
                     musical entertainments.

S ect io n 73        Police may apply for           ext en ded hours order        to   be
                     revoked eg on grounds          of d is orderly conduct       in   or
                     around the premises.
Se ctions 76,        (As amended/i ns er te d by section 5 of the 196.
          77,        From 22 August, licensing justices, or mac.s.rewe-
          78,        courts in respect of clubs, will have discretion to
          78A,       grant or refuse special hours certificates anc a
          80         power to limit its hours.       Police have power to
          81         apply for revocation or curtailment of hours, eg wO
          81A        reduce  disorderly      conduct   and  disturbance   ana
                     annoyance to local residents.

S ection 169         (As amended by section 16 of the 1988 A c t -)  Ifc is
                     an offence for a licensee to sell alcohol to a
                     person under 18; knowingly to allow a young person
                     to consume alcohol in a bar; and knowingly a* o'*
                     any person to sell alcohol to a person under 16. _A
                     person   under    18 commits  an offence on licer.sec
                     premises if he buys or attempts to buy aicohc..
                     And it is an offence for any person to buy aiconox
                     for a p e rs on under 18 to consume in a bar.

Section       171A    (Inserted by          section  18 of the 198 6 Act.)             *n
                      o ff -l ice ns ed    premises,   it is an offence fo^r the
                      licensee to         allow staff under 18 to sell a.cohoi
                      unless that         sale has been s p e c i f i c a l l y approved by
                      the licensee        or by an adult acting on his bena--.

Section       172     It is an offence            for a licensee to allow
                      drunkenness or to            sell alcohol to a drunker;
                      customer.

                      It is an      offence      to   pr ocure   alcohol   for    a   c r u r.k e n
S ection      173
                      per s o n .

 Section      181A    (Inserted by section       17 of the 198 6 Act.)   A
                      who le sa le r commits an offence on wholesale premises
                      if he sells alcohol to a person under 16 or allows
                      staff under 18 to sell alcohol unless that sale has
                      been specif ica ll y approved by the wholesaler or by
                      an adult acting on his behalf.         Ana it is an
                      offence for a person under 18 to buy or attempt to
                      buy alcohol on w holesale premises.

 Sec t io n   186     A c onstable has a right of entry to licensed
                      pre mi se s "for the p ur po se of preventing or
                      detecting the commission of any offence" under the
                      1964 Act.

 S ect io n   188     J u sti ce s have      power    to order licensed premises to
                      close       in the     event     or expe ct at io n of serious
                      di s o r d e r .


 L IC E N S E D PREMISES   (EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN PERSONS)            ACT   1980

 S ect io n    1       Magistrates'          courts,     when    sentencing   a person
                       convicted         of   violence      or  threatened   violence     on
                       on-l ic en se d premises,         may make an e x c l u s i o n order
                       p r oh ib i ti ng    him from      e ntering   those  or other
                       specified pre mis es for           b etween three months ana two
                       years.
                            DRUNKENNESS OFFENCES



Metropo li tan Police Act 1839

Section 44:  any shopkeeper etc in the MPD who 'wilfully or
knowingly' permits drunkenness or other disorderly conduct on his
premises is liable to a m ax imum fine at level 1.

Town Police Clauses Act 1847

S ection 61:  offence to drive a hackney carriage      while   drunk -
level 1 fine.

Li ce n si n g Act 1872

Section 12:  offence to be drunk on any highway or other public
place or on any licensed premises - level 1 fine.

L ic en si ng Act   1902

Section 1 : offence of being drunk and incapable       on a n y highway or
other public place or on any licensed premises -       to be 'dea.t with
according to l a w ' .

Section 2:  offence of being drunk in charge of a child under 7
level 2 fine or one month imprisonment.

L ice ns in g Act   1964

Section 172:  offence for licensee to permit drunkenness on his
premises, and to serve a drunken customer - level 2 fine.

Section 173:  offence of procuring drink for a drunken person and
of aiding a drunken person to obtain or consume alcohol in
licensed premises - level 1 fine.

Section 174:  licensees have express powers to refuse to admit to
or expel from, licensed premises any drunken person.  Failure to
leave - level 1 fine.

Criminal    justice Act 1967

 Section 91:        drunk and disorderly in a public place - level 3
 fine.

Late Night Refreshment Houses 1969

 Section 9(i):  licensee knowingly permitting drunken or disorderly
 persons to assemble or remain on premises - level 4 fine anc, o
 three months imprisonment.
Section 9(iv):  refusal by drunk etc person to leave late night
refreshment house - level 1 fine.

Sporting Events   (Control of Alcohol   Etc) Act 1985

Section 1(2):  knowingly causing or permitting intoxicating licuor
to be carried on a vehicle on the way to or from a designated
sporting event - level 4 fine.

Sections 1(3) and 2(1):  possession of intoxicating liquor during
a designated sporting event or while in a vehicle on the way to or
from a designated sporting event - level 3 fine or three months
imprisonment or both.

Section 1(4) and 2(2):  being drunk during, when entering or
trying to enter a designated sporting event or on a vehicle on the
way to or from a designated sporting event - level 2 fine.




DS92
                                                                  ANNEX   C



MAIN OFFENCES OF DISORDER, V I O L E N C E , VA ND A LI S M ETC


Offence                                           Ma ximum penalty

T hreatening or disorderly                        Level 3 fine      (£400)
behaviour (general - Section 5)

Th re atening or disorderly                       6 months     )
behaviour (towards another -                      Level 5 fine ) (£2,000)

Affray                                             3 years and fine

V i o l e nt disorder                              5 years and fine

Riot                                               10 years and fine


Of fences of violence against the person

Assault                                            2 months or level 3 fine

As sa ul t on police                               6 months

Actual Bodily Harm                                 5 years

Unlawful wounding                                  5 years

W o un d i n g with   intent to do GBK             Life imprisonment

Ro bbery                                           Life imprisonment

P os s es si on of offensive weapon                2 years and unlimited fine

♦Possession of knife or sharp                      Level   3 fine
bladed instrument in a public
place without good reason or
lawful authority


Of fences against prop er ty

Ar s on                                            Life imprisonment

 Criminal Damage                                    10 years and unlimited fine

 Criminal damage endangering life                  Life imprisonment

 Theft,    handling stolen goods etc                10 years


 * When the relevant sections of the Criminal Justice Act come into
   force



 DS86
                                                           annex     d




CRIME PRE VE NT IO N




1.       E xa m in at i on of local
targetted on the specific problems eg. m a "* g e m® " a _ D l e J in
p r e m i s e s , late night transport arrangements. Example
Coventry and Newport.

2.   Sussex L ic en si ng Project - a police led                   r e l a t e d ^ 0" '
which has resulted in a significant drop 1
arrests.

3.    Other   initiatives:
v o l u n t a r y identity cards to show b o l d e r i s over 19 (Witney)       and
 •Pubwatch' schemes with early warnings of suspicious
disorderly behaviour (Brentwood).




4.    Re po rts   to Standing Co n fe re n ce on Crime Prevention.


18 November     1986:    w or ki ng G r ou p on the P r ev ent ion of violence
Associated    w i t h Licensed Premises:

24 November       1987:   W ork in g G r o u p on Young People and Alcohol.
