                                                                                                                    * • •



_v _                                  ■ ' ■



                                                       - - i-wxvy:: : >                                                  ;
 *■
                                          180K/BK/KT
                                          180N/BN/MT



      ■■■       ''     '        ' . ' :        ■               ■     ■■   ■         ■                      .   .,   ..   .   .   .
I::..---;.-'.'"                                                                                 . ••


                                               of a meeting held on 25 May to discuss Hillsborough: Cost of
                                          investigations by West Midlands Police
■ v-                                                                                                   ■
                            : '--J    .                    -



                                 ..
                                      Present:                       J_   -   -
                                                                                          Lord Ferrers
                                                                                        .. __   -                                          Cllr Ablett - Chairman
                                                                                          Mr Addison                                       Cllr Carless - Vice-Chairman
                                                                                          Mr Nagler                                        Cllr Sir Neville Bosworth
                     .-V,                  .       '   .       ■ .                • ■
                                                                                          Ms Ransford                                      Mr W E Jarvis
                                                                                          Miss Nicholson                                   Mr Dear - Chief Constable
                                                                                                                                           Mr Barnfield - Solicitor
                                                                                                                                           Mr Williams - Treasurer
                                                                                                                                           Mr Tomlinson - Assistant Clerk

^r-vivo-v•
                                      Having
                                         Aay thanked
                                             uui     Lord Ferrers for the_ meeting Cllr Ablett explained
                                      that the reason for seeking the meeting was to try and resolve the
                                      quandary his Authority was in over the financial implications of
                                      the investigations into the Hillsborough disaster. This matter he
                                      had to be sorted out and it had to be made clear, at the earliest
                                      opportunity/ where the costs involved should fall.   If the
                                      ratepayers of West Midlands were liable it had been estimated that
                                      the loss of interest in capital would be about £400K. His view
                                      though was that as the investigation had been initiated by the
                                      Home Office (Sir Richard Barrett having contacted Mr Dear) the
                                      costs should fall to the Home Office. Mr Ablett then handed the
                                      meeting over to Mr Dear so that he could give an account of the
                                      events which led the West Midlands Police Authority being involved.

                                 2. Mr Dear explained that on the Sunday following the tragedy he
                                 had been contacted by Sir Richard Barrett by 'phone and had been
                                 asked whether he would agree to being the assessor or the chief
                                 constable leading the investigation - or both (it had transpired
                                 later that he could not be the assessor). Mr Dear subsequently
                                 contacted Peter Wright (Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police)
                                 that afternoon to confirm the situation. Mr Dear mentioned that
                                 he had asked Mr Wright specifically whether he had understood that
                                 he was reporting to the enquiry to which Mr Wright replied that he
                                 did. Mr Dear added that it was his hope that in reporting
                                 directly to Lord Justice Taylor any suggestion of a police cover
                                 up could be countered. He then referred to telephone calls which
                                 he had made to the Home Office in the light of the statement which
                                ~the Home Secretary was making to the House on Monday 17 April. He



                                                                                                                                               /said that he had


                                                                                                                                     -1-
IV I   fc   -jkl   f   I   ;
E.R.

   said that he had not been happy with the text of the draft
   statement and had made it clear at that time that he would not
   work to 2 masters but only to Lord Justice Taylor. He said that
   the draft had been amended, not exactly as he would have wished,
   but enough to have satisfied him. Because of his concern about
   this matter he had sought a meeting with Lord Justice Taylor at
   which it had been confirmed that there was only one enquiry. As
   regards the enquiry itself Mr Dear refered to the various
   investigtions which were taking place# eg, into the construction
   of the ground and who paid the stewards simply because
   Lord Justice Taylor wanted a thorough investigation. Given these
   circumstances Mr Dear said that he was absolutely certain that he
   was working for Lord Justice Taylor; that he was under his control
   completely and that therefore mutual aid could not be a matter for
   consideration.

^^3.    Lord Ferrers said that he fully appreciated the concerns which
“ had been expressed but that as he understood it, the decision to
    request the assistance of the West Midland's was because Mr Wright
    believed that South Yorkshire were too close to the incident and
    that another force should be called in. This had led to
    Mr Wright's contacting Sir Richard who then contacted Mr Dear.   In
    response to this Mr Dear said that South Yorkshire's involvement
    in the decision had not been mentioned by Sir Richard. Mr Addison
    was able to advise Mr Dear that there was nothing unusual in
  I this:  the Inspectorate often liaised between forces in this way
  ! when they were asked to advise on the possiblity that an
    investigation should be conducted by an outside force.

   5. Mr Addison referred to his recent meeting with officers of the
   South Yorkshire Authority, who, he said had accepted that the
  .initiative had coffie f rorrr their Chief Constable. It was not
   suTjnri^xng "therefore that there should be some confusion although
   having heard what Mr Dear had to say he wholeheartedly accepted
   his account of his part in the events. The matter was clearly
   open to interpretation and it was quite possible that the Chief
   Constable of South Yorkshire had a different recollection. Mr
   Dear referred to the immense pressure which had been placed upon
   Mr Wright at the time and which had led him to contact
   Sir Richard. Noting Mr Dear's comments Mr Addison said that it
   was quite understandable that the invitation may have appeared to
   have come from the Home Office, but this was not the case. As far
   as the Home Office were concerned the distinction between the Lord
   Justice Taylor enquiry and the South Yorkshire investigation had
   always been recognised.

  6. Lord Ferrers referred to the Home Secretary’s letter to Roger
  King MP (copy attached) in which it was made clear that additional
  -eosts would not be met by the West Midlands.  It also had to be
  remembered, he said, that in practi.ce, with the Home Office paying



                                            /51% generally through....
                                   -2-
E.R.

   c^!L9e?e£ all£ throu3h Police specific grant, taken with the Rate
   7 nl £    fanJu the Government would in effect be paying roughlv
   70% towards the costs of the enquiry. Mr Ablett. while
   LoJS°?i      9     existence of the communication referred to by
   guarantee?18 S          th® Authority had received no direct

    ™ ^ r -Ablfti: referred to the bills which the Authority were now
   Itc       He9sfid l h a * fc^ings as accommodation and telecommunications
        i        said that since section 14 of the Police Act 1964 fl-iri nnt-
   apply the Authority (remaining of the view that they had not been
   l u l £ e
           A   b y . S 0 U t h  Y? rks^ r e to conduct the investigation) Sad no
   authority to pay the bills. Moreover there was, in their view
   doubt about whether they could have lawfully paid for items such
      i                        even under section 14. They’had b e L a d v i s e H f
   that fhfi                               gal adviser Mr Barnfield who confirmed
               fh! h 1?               nS understanding. Asked by Lord Ferrers
   25 S ? L J hey              consulted with South Yorkshire about this aspect
   Mr Ablett replied that they had not. This he said was simolv
  notain6any e v e n ? ^ ^      h ®*" made.by South Yorkshire and this was
            “J event covered by section 14 which dealt only with
                             fesource grounds. As matters stood Mr Ablett
  that his^utho^iVhaving no authority to pay, the result might be
   v?* u     Authority would be forced to no longer retain buildina<s
  S i i L S T TbeiJ V Sed f° r the PurP ^ e s of thS investigation?
  Invited by Lord Ferrers to comment Mr Addison said that the
  assistance given did not in his view fall strictly under
  Section 14, but that it was analogous. Moreover it was not
                 °ne P°;ic? !orce t0 lnvite another to oonduct an
  investigation on its behalf. The most obvious example was in the
  SthLs    ^ o S e v e r ^ 31^ discfPline.enquiries but there had been
  S m c n e g a Y f ^ e ? " . 4116 P01"tS raiSed °OUld be S0U9ht £rom

                  (J reasurer> estimated that the cost of the
  investigation so far was c £2 million per month. This accounted
  £200°000 o   f   accommodation - the accommodation coming to about
         V of.that ®u m ‘ If the Authority were not reimbursed on a
                         calculated that the interest charges per
  month would be somewhere in the region of £50 K.

  It L?hiLF^ rerS £ei^eratea the state of play as he understood
  force conduct t h ^ ? n      J?rkshire who had recommended that another
  torce conduct the investigation and that therefore it had alwavs
  E ! ? L aCC?eted       the Home office reimbursement would be a matter
  between forces in the first instance, as was the case in mutual
          i- l    ?•f? rther understood that the investigation was to look
  into the policing of South Yorkshire. Lord Justice Taylor's
  S ? i n a ys a ^ ?h?h I * S°w6 ways connected was a separate matter.
  Having said this though Lord Ferrers said that he accepted that



                                                   /West Midlands had

                                        -3-
4 E.R.

         West Midlands had drawn quite a different conclusion. He referred
         again to the Home Secretary's letter to Mr King in which assurance
         was given that the West Midlands would not be expected to meet
         additional costs.

      10.  In drawing the meeting to a close Lord Ferrers undertook to
      consider at the earliest and to write to the Authority advising
      them of what action they should take with regard to bills. He
      also promised to consider the cash-flow difficulties# to get clear
      what had transpired when asking the West Midlands Police to become
      involved and the extent to which the work was being undertaken by
      West Midlands was not specific to the South Yorkshire policing
      enquiry.



  *




                                  BARBARA NICHOLSON
                             Assistant Private Secretary




      30 May 1989

      Private Office# QAG.




      cc    Mr Walters
            Mr Yates
            Mr Chilcot
            HMCIC
            Mr Woodcock
            Mr Brownlow
            Mr Boys Smith
            Mr Malone-Lee^
            Ms Edwards#
            Mr Addison4'
            Mr Sandiford
            Mr Nagler
            Mr Whalley
            Ms Ransford
            Mr Lidington
                                                           27 April 1989




        We have spoken in the House about the costs incurred by the West
Midlands police in their inquiries following the Hillsborough disaster.      You
and other West Midlands MPs are understandably anxious that these should not
fall on the West Midlands police authority.


        It seems   to me quite clear that, wherever the costs fall,        they
should not and do not fall to the West Midlands.   The Chief Constable of the
West Midlands was initially invited by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
to review all aspects of the police operation.       And subsequently it was
agreed that the results of these inquiries should be made available to the
public inquiry which I announced on 24 April to be conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor.


        It will take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the
West Midlands police should be reimbursed.    But I can guarantee now that at
the end of the day no additional costs will be borne by the West Midlands.




                                              O
                                  1                            /




Roger King, Esq., MP
