Andrew:


A few more thoughts on Eastwood.

1.   For barriers of more than two spans, say Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 the
test seems to have gone as follows:

     i.     load spans 1 and 2   (three cycles),

     ii.    load spans 2 and 3   (three cycles),

     iii.   load spans 3 and 4   (three cycles).

This is reasonable so far as loading goes, but incomplete as
regards measurements of deflections. His records show only one
deflection measured for each two-span loading, which means that
our span remained unmeasured during the sequence.  If that
deflection (or recovery) had been unusual, it would not have been
noticed.

2.   In 1988, barriers 124A, 133, 136, 137 and 144 deflected
considerably more than the average. No. 133 was a particular
offender. Curiously, its recovery was perfect - but its
deflection actually increased in successive cycles of loading, a
clear danger signal.  In the event, extensive corrosion was
spotted (presumably visually, so what was the value of the
test?), and the rail was replaced. The rail on No. 144 was also
replaced. But nothing seems to have been done about the others.

3.   As regards No. 124A, the 1988 record shows a residual
deflection of 17mm after the three cycles of loading, compared
with an initial deflection under load of 29mm. This is a very
poor recovery.

4.   HSE cannot find the 1983 test record.         They are still
searching.




                                            Len
                                            15 June 1989
NOTE FOR THE INQUIRY


1.   Management at the Club

     There is not much evidence so far of a coherent management
     structure. The Board is responsible for all legal,
     financial and operational activities, and would be expected,
     in the normal way, to delegate execution of its policies to
     designated officers.  It is not clear how this has been
     done. An organisational chart, extending down to stewards,
     would be useful. And perhaps the accounts presented to the
     Annual General meeting would shed some light.

2.   Responsibilities for Safety

     The central body appears to be the Officers Working Party.
     It is composed of representatives from the City Council,
     the South Yorkshire Police, the South Yorkshire County Fire
     Service, the South Yorkshire County Council all taken from
     Minutes, 1985); sometimes representatives of the Club are
     present.  It does not seem to have an appointed Chairman,
     and it is not clear to whom it is accountable.

     Page 27 (Club file) sets out the delegations made bx "Area
     Officer Working Parties" in 1976. Page 29 records a letter
     from the Chief Executive, County Council, to the Chief
     Constable delegating "its responsibilities under the (1975)
     Act to the Fire Service Committee." There must be a serious
     question as to the effectiveness of the various
     relationships involved.

     Procedures for granting Safety Certificates do not seem to
     work very well, if at all. It is preposterous that there
     should be a delay of three years (so far) in amending the
     original after the first notice of inadequacy made by the
     City on 5 June 1986.

3.   The Ground

     Evidence has identified many deficiencies, including the
     physical arrangement of turnstiles and their relationship to
     public roads on the one hand and viewing areas on the other,
     signposting, communications, emergency equipment of various
     kinds and, most obviously, emergency evacuation from
     restricted Pens.

     The lay-out of crush barriers departs from the Green Guide
     in only a few areas, but they are critical, and the margins
     of safety in the older barriers are suspect (HSE tests to
     follow).

4•   Crowd Control

     The principal deficiencies include limited preparation for
     the management of crowds assembling outside the Leppings
     Lane turnstiles (particularly inside the boundary fence);
     virtually no control inside the turnstiles, lack of police-
steward co-ordination;  inadequate use of CCTV and direct
surveillance of crowds (influenced not only by conditioning
for hooliganism but also by the genuine difficulty of
detecting local disturbances in a large, excited crowd);
and weak direction from the police Control Box.

Individual efforts by police officers were of the highest
order. Many fans and stewards also showed great courage.

Supporters1 Behaviour

It is likely that a proportion of supporters behaved
irresponsibly. But it is virtually impossible to quantify
this effect. The arrival of large, late influxes - probably
containing a higher proportion of trouble-makers - should be
less surprising in the future.

The Combined Effect

If any one of the major sources of the disaster had been
suppressed, the result would probably have been very
different. But the combination could not be contained.




                                   LM
                                   14 June 1989
