             From: "sir ^John t?6odcock CB&,%ibPM, CBIM.




                                                 cc.   Mr Yates
                                                       Mr Hammond



                                                       23rd July 1990,




                     RE;   HTT.T.SBOROUGH DISASTER

     Thank you for bringing to mv notice the details of the
report submitted by your                   touching upon remarks
alleged to have been made m his presence by the      Rt Hon Lord
Justice Taylor to Geoffrey Dear (then Chief Constable of the West
Midlands Police) on 18th April 1990 at Hillsborough.

     As agreed, Sir Clive Whitmore, Permanent Under Secretary of
State at the Home Office, and myself saw Lord Justice Taylor by
appointment at 9.30am on Friday, 20th July 1990, at the Royal
Courts of Justice in London.     Sir Clive outlined the details
contained in the report which Lord Justice Taylor immediately
rejected and described as nonsense. Understandably he could not
recall the details of what was discussed but was perfectly clear
that there had     been no comment as alleged by     the police
constable.

     At 4.30pm the same day I saw Mr Geoffrey Dear, H.M.
Inspector of Constabulary, in his Worcester Office.          After
outlining the allegations, he stated that he could not recall
details of the conversation that took place but was emphatic that
had there been any suggeistion of bias, either then or later, he
would have remembered and would have objected to it. He further
emphasised that at all times Lord Justice Taylor was scrupulously
fair, absolutely correct and quite unequivocal in his pursuit of
the truth.

     I feel that this matter cannot be taken any further.
However, it is worth mentioning that although Lord Justice Taylor
carried out the      inquiry alone, he did have the benefit of
advisers, one of   whom was Mr Brian Johnson, the Chief Constable
of Lancashire.

     I trust this    information will assist you to finalise the
issue in question.




R B Wells Esq., QPM.
Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police.
   RDB 8
   REPROGRAPHIC ORDER                   —       CLASSIFIED MATERIAL

«■ File No.                                 Classification
    Descjflttion of document


   Number of copies                         Number of pages i
   required_______                          to be copied    I
   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS




   Signat                                                            3.6 ...
   Narrp^LGCK CAPI^AtsV..-.%?(£?£«!*,...                     Rank . * . . . ^

    uM    M J O U ..................................   Tel No3dLl.iw£.....
    Room . S } # . ................ ... Building... .CSl..&.(\.........
    Notes
    1. This form should be:
    (a) used for material classified as Confidential or above;
    (b) signed by an officer of HEO rank or above;
    (c) submitted in duplicate.
    2. The duplicate RDB 8 will be returned to the Division, which
    should indicate on the reverse of the docket to whom copy docu­
    ments are sent; the duplicate RDB 8 must then be placed on the
       iropriate file.
   f   R USE BY REPROGRAPHIC BRANCH

    Machine/Unit
    Signature & date
    S 527                                        35566 9/85 XBD
