  From: Paul Pugh                      cc: Mr Michael               Mr Middleton
        Head of Operational                Mr O’Brien               Mr R Evans
        Policing Policy Unit               Mr Howarth               Mr Edmwndson
        Room 529                           Lord Williams            Mr Butler
        Queen Anne’s Gate                  Mr Omand                 Ms Clifford
        « 0171-273-3141                    Mr Boys Smith            Mr Warner
        11 February 1998                   Ms Wheldon               Mr Owen




  Home Secretary


 HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER TO LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


 Issue

 You should now write to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to inform him of how you intend to
 handle publication of his report.

 Timing

 2.          Your letter should go as soon as possible.

 Summary

3.    Now that the date of publication is settled, and you have decided the broad
terms of your response to the Judge’s report, it would be a courtesy for you to write
personally. A draft is attached.




                                         PAUL




f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\pp0J88pd. doc
                  DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



  Personal and In Confidence
  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 Royal Courts of Justice




 I am now able to let you know how I intend to respond to the report of your scrutiny
 of the evidence about the disaster at Hillsborough.


 I will be making an oral statement to the House of Commons and publishing the
 report on the afternoon of Wednesday 18 February. I have considered your report
 very carefully, and I am very grateful for the thoroughness with which you have set
 out the relevant evidence and the reasons for your conclusions.               I am entirely
satisfied that your central conclusions are right, and I shall be making that clear
when I publish the report. I will ensure that you receive a copy of the text of my
statement when it is available.


In your letter of 29 January you referred in particular to the publication of the
evidence which you considered during your scrutiny. As I said in the House of
Commons on 30 June, I intend to be as open as possible with relevant material. I
shall be publishing the transcripts of oral evidence and the written evidence of those
listed in paragraph 4 of Appendix 1 to your report and in paragraph 5 of Appendix 1,
with the exception of the reports which relate solely to the death of Kevin Williams. I
do not think it would be right to publish material which relates specifically to the fate
of individual victims, except those cases which are covered in the main text of your
report.         For that reason I do not intend to publish Appendix 9 in full:      I will be
arranging for the relevant sections of that Appendix to be sent to the individual
families concerned. I am enclosing a copy of what will be the published text of
Appendix 9.                For the same reason, I agree that the transcripts of your private
discussions with relatives and the submissions which they sent to you should not be



f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\ppOJ88pd. doe
 published. It will of course be open to the individual families if they wish to disclose
 such material to third parties. I intend to publish the transcripts and written material
 arising from your discussions with those listed in paragraph 6 of Appendix 1.          I
 understand that those people have in general provided assistance to your scrutiny,
 rather than evidence about the disaster itself; but I think this is a distinction which
would be difficult to defend if the material in question were not made public.




f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\ppOJ88pd.doc
APPENDIX 9




Some individual cases


In his report as submitted to the Home Secretary, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals in
Appendix 9 with a number of questions put to him by the families o f particular
victims about the exact circumstances in which their relatives died and with
difficulties which they said existed with the police documentation.

Given that the appendix deals with individual cases, the relevant passages have been
sent directly to those concerned rather than included in the published report.
