                           From:   John Greenway, M.P.




                           HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                                    01- 219 3000



16th November 1989



Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London  SW1A 9AT




I was very glad to have the opportunity of meeting you with colleagues from
the House of Commons Allparty Football Committee earlier this week. Thank you
for giving us so much of your time and allowing us such a wide ranging
discussion.

During discussion on the Football Spectators' Bill you posed the question        of
what alternatives might be available to what the Government has in mind.

When I addressed the Chairmen of the Third and Fourth Division clubs at their
AGM in June, I was able to obtain their unanimous agreement to the following
proposal.

Entry to sections of the ground reserved for away supporters would be by ticket
only, with tickets allocated strictly on the basis of current membership of
the away team's travel club.    No tickets would be available for sale on the
day of the match for those terraces.      This builds on existing practice at a
number of grounds for bigger matches where tickets are often at a premium,
e.g. the Liverpool v. Arsenal Championship deciding match in May.

Clubs would then promote membership schemes for their regular supporters offering
discounts to encourage such membership with access to grounds through members
only turnstiles as appropriate.    Casual supporters would gain entrance through
the remaining turnstiles.

The danger of away fans travelling to games without tickets and trying to gain
admission to the wrong end of the ground seems only likely to arise for matches
involving clubs which have a large following.     Those games could be made all
ticket, as is often the case now with the club and the police consulting over
the appropriate arrangements for each ground on a match by match basis.

But as you will know, the majority of games involving Third and Fourth Division
clubs do not attract large numbers of away supporters and these proposals would
not create any more difficulty for the police and club authorities in segregating
fans or identifying trouble makers.


                                                                            /.
Indeed  there   would   be benefits over existing arrangements. The   Police
Federation have consistently pointed out that most violent incidents involve
away supporters.    They travel to matches in order to be with their pals in
the away section of the ground, whether standing or seated, and it does not
seem unreasonable to suggest that the denial of such access in future would
act as a deterrent against unruly behaviour.

Individual clubs would also be able to take speedy action against fans who
caused trouble and ban them from the travel club and therefore access to
tickets.   This seems to me to have practical advantages over the more lengthy
process of a court hearing leading to the conviction needed for a fan to be
excluded from the Football Membership     Scheme.  Nevertheless the provisions
 f the 1986 Act with regard to exclusion orders would still apply and both

#olice forces and    football clubs could liaise perhaps more than they
over the identities of known trouble makers.
                                                                         do now



I think that   what really emerged from our discussion Tuesday evening   was
that, short of depriving a fan of his liberty, there is no certain way of
keeping trouble makers out of grounds.  The above plan does not offer the ideal
solution, but nor does the Football Spectators' Act.    At least this idea has
the support of the 48 Third and Fourth Division clubs and I hope that you will
find the proposal of interest.
