 From: Sarah Clifford
 Communication Directorate
 X2284

26 June 1997



                                                                    cc: Mr Michael
                                                                        Mr O’Brien
                                                                       Mr Howarth
                                                               Sir Richard Wilson
                                                                   Mr Boys Smith
                                                                          Mr Pugh
                                                                   Mr Edmundson
                                                                Mr Kieran (Parly)
                                                                        Mr Warner
                                                                         Mr Owen


2. Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH - HANDLING OF MONDAY’S ANNOUNCEMENT

Issue

How and when on Monday you tell the families, local MPs and the media.

Timing

Pressing - arrangements need to be finalised tomorrow.

Consideration

You are scheduled to make your statement at 3.30pm, depending on
parliamentary business on the day. CD recommend that a final copy of your
statement is issued to national and regional media at 3.30pm.

Families

The families will want to be told first - in theory, you could tell them any time
that day, up to around 2.30pm. If you ask them to, they are likely to respect
the parliamentary embargo (although this cannot be guaranteed). However
the longer the time lapse between the meeting and your statement, the more
likely it is to leak especially if the families are critical of its content.
MPs

You could then see opposition spokesmen and local MPs at around 3pm. Any
news leaking out as a result of the meeting at that time would more or less
coincide with your statement. Again, if you brief MPs much earlier than that -
eg in the morning, the news is likely to break well in advance of 3.30pm.

Media

You will have the opportunity to do broadcast one to one interviews on your
return from the House at around 4.45pm.

However, the two local evening papers - the Liverpool Echo and the Sheffield
Star - are keen to have the story for their final editions (to hit the streets at
3.30-4pm) - but this would mean briefing them at the latest by 1-1,30pm.

The two papers - particularly the Echo - were very involved in the original
disaster and its aftermath and need to be kept on board as much as possible.
In view of the need to maintain good working relationships we think the
chances of them breaking the embargo are extremely small. The editors have
assured us they would adhere to any conditions attached to a briefing at
lunchtime.

However this would mean they would know the details of the announcement
before the families, MPs and Parliament.

Ken Sutton is arranging a brief meeting this afternoon or tomorrow to discuss
how you wish to proceed, particularly in light of the Speaker’s concerns about
today’s media coverage.
