 HILLSBOROUGH’, GRANADA TV - SHOWN 5 DECEMBER
1996


Allegations made in the programme


{Note - the programme lasts ju st under 2 hours. The timings shown below are those
on our videotape - which includes 35 - 40 minutes o f 'News at Ten ’ halfway through
the Hillsborough film. Times given are fo r the approximate start o f the sequences
described).


05.00 -         Superintendent Duckenfield struts about, then addresses his officers at
               the ground - they must be ‘firm but fair’, ‘nobody gets in without a
               ticket’, ‘nobody gets in who is drunk’. But they don’t seem to pay
               attention - some put a bet on the game. Some abuse Duckenfield, say
               he is new in the job.

               Allegation - Duckenfield stiff, remote, inexperienced - his officers
               didn’t respect him.

07.30 -        Technician (Houldsworth) checks CCTV camera - perfect close-up
               pictures of police officers standing on terrace.

               Allegation - video cameras OK.

08.30 -        Trevor Hicks in Leppings Lane says ‘police checked our tickets last
               year - they had barriers all down the road’ - also ‘people who knock the
               police are the first to go running to them when there’s trouble’

               Allegation - policing arrangements significantly different in 1988
               (also makes point that the Hicks family are law abiding people who
               support the police - soon to be disabused).

10.20          Policeman (Superintendent?) in control box gets radio message ‘shall
               we fill the pens one by one?’ - looks to Duckenfield for response, gets
               none, then replies ‘just let them in - the fans will find their own level’ -
               Duckenfield looks uninvolved, as if he doesn’t know what’s going on.

               Allegation - poor leadership by Duckenfield, who didn’t realise the
               significance offilling pens one by one.

11.30          Liverpool fans on way down Leppings Lane being matey with the
               police - happy, cheerful crowd.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
               Allegation - fans not aggressive or drunk, not anti-police.

12.00           Liverpool fans at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground - policeman
                says ‘you’re all going in Leppings Lane’ (whichever part of ground
                they have tickets for).

               Allegation - police action increased size of crowd at Leppings Lane
               end of the ground.

12.30          Chaos at Leppings Lane turnstiles - fan (PC Bruder?) says to a
               policeman ‘ do what you did last year, form a cordon, get them into
               queues’.

               Allegation - police let situation at turnstiles get out o f hand, didn ’t
               do what they did in 1988.

12.50           Police Superintendent (?) in control box sees turnstile chaos on CCTV,
                says ‘we’ll get them in alright’.

               Allegation - police control complacent, didn’t respond to danger
               signs at turnstiles.

 13.50         BBC commentator John Motson notices spaces on the Leppings Lane
               terrace - says crowd might be below capacity.

               Allegation - Motson could see something odd about the way the
               terrace was filling up.

14.30          Police Superintendent outside Leppings Lane turnstile tells
               Duckenfield on radio ‘you’ve got to open the gate or someone will be
               killed ’ - Duckenfield dithers - then says ‘if there’s going to be
               serious injury or death, I ’ve no option but to open the gate’.

               Allegation - Duckenfield not in control.

15.00          Trevor Hicks stands on half-empty terrace next to packed Pen 3, shouts
               to nearby policeman ‘it’s packed in there, empty here - can’t you do
               something?’. Policeman says ‘shut your fucking prattle’, goes away -
               meanwhile squeals of pain come through the crowd noise.

               Allegation - police on scene treatedfans with contempt, didn’t
               see/care about clear overcrowding in the pens.

15.30          CCTV technician (Houldsworth) watching monitor in club control
               room sees fans streaming through gate, says ‘where are they all going
               to go? - for God’s sake shut the tunnel, it’s packed’.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
               Allegation - technician could size up the situation on CCTV - so
               why couldn ’t the police?

18.30           Fans coming over fence - Duckenfield tells ACC ‘it looks like a pitch
                invasion’. Officer shouts to resting PC’s in canteen ‘Pitch invasion,
                Liverpool end’.

               Allegation - police reacted to a pitch invasion, not what was
               actually going on.

20.40          FA Secretary Graham Kelly asks Duckenfield ‘What’s going on?’ -
               Duckenfield says ‘fans forced the gate, fans forced their way in - this is
               the result’.

               Allegation - Duckenfield lied.

22.00          Fire engine arrives outside ground, fireman says to a policeman ‘we
               got a shout, oxygen and wire-cutters’ - policeman says ‘don’t think
               you’re needed mate’. Ambulance arrives, driver asks policeman if he
               can drive onto the pitch - ‘no, they’re still fighting in there’. Queue
               of ambulances seen outside ground.

26.20          Trevor Hicks gets into ambulance with Victoria, leaves Sarah lying on
               the pitch - is to ld ‘Sarah will follow in the next ambulance’ - but
               on the way ambulanceman sees this hasn’t happened ‘ ‘how come
               nobody is following us up?’.

               Allegation - police incompetent, impeding rescue.

29.00          BBC commentator John Motson overheard ‘there was one moment
               when a section of Nottingham Forest fans did taunt Liverpool
               supporters .... on the pitch. Fortunately that was stopped’.

               Allegation - police did not have any real worry about disorder
               amongfans

32.00          Chaos at police information points as Mr and Mrs Hicks
               separately enquire.

               Allegation - loss o f control by police

35.00          speech to camera by Trevor Hicks

                7 spoke to Tony Edwards, the ambulanceman who took Victoria to
               hospital. He described rows and rows o f dead bodies [in the gym -
               CBJ. He kept on saying, did anyone even try with them? Because
               there ’d been no basic medical equipment around, no tubes fo r airways,
               nothing. They told me Sarah would come in the next ambulance.


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
                There wasn ’t a next ambulance. No other ambulance followed Tony
                Edwards onto that pitch. Outside the ground, an army o f highly
                skilled people, ambulancemen, paramedics. Inside the ground, people
                like me - OK, they were doing their best, but - people died who might
                have been saved - his words, Tony Edwards’s words, not mine ’.

               Allegation - incompetent handling o f crisis meant that even more
               people died.

38.30          police sit exhausted in canteen - officer comes round saying ‘don’t
               put anything in your notebooks’. One PC says ‘put everything in your
               notebooks’.

               Allegation - cover-up under way.

41.30          PC outside gym mortuary tells Trevor Hicks, who wants to see his
               daughter ‘you have no rights - this is designated as a temporary
               mortuary and everything here belongs to the South Yorkshire coroner’.
               They argue.

43.00          Mrs Hicks looks at rows of photographs of dead bodies - Trevor Hicks
               ‘did they have to make us look through them all - they could have
               separated male from female, adults from children’.

45.30          Hicks interviewed by a policeman who asks him how much he had to
               drink - other police put the same question to other relatives/spectators.

48.00          John Glover tells surviving son Joseph ‘they toldme you were dead as
               well’.

               Allegation - police crude, arrogant, incompetent, treat
               relatives/survivors with contempt - trying to spread myth about
               drunken fans.

49.00          Trevor Hicks speaks to camera

               "they treated us like scum - it’s guilt - all these people dead, thanks to
               them - they don’t think o f them as people, they think o f them as scum '.

51.30          Trevor Hicks to camera again

               7 can come to terms with what happened at Hillsborough, ju st about,
               but what happened next, over the next few months, I ’ll never come to
               terms with that’.

NEWS AT TEN ON TAPE. AFTERWARDS -




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
  1.38.40       policeman talks to journalist in bar - ‘fans pissed on the dead, attacked
                police, robbed the dead’ - journalist sceptical ‘do you think my editor
                will buy that?’ - then a Sun headline ‘THE TRUTH’ (denounces
                Liverpool supporters as the main cause of the disaster).

               Allegation - police disinformation was behind the Sun’s treatment
               o f the disaster

1.48.00         At inquest - Dr Slater says crush asphyxia very rapid - then PC
                Bruder (Liverpool copper who was spectator at match) is seen at home
                telling somebody (investigating policeman?) ‘I got to that boy at half
                past three’ - the boy was ‘still alive, vomiting, had a pulse,
                convulsing’ - Dr Slater then phones him to ‘clarify medical details’ -
                Bruder then tells his visitor ‘OK I’ll change my statem ent    clarify a
                few points’.

1.50.00        Dr Slater tells Coroner - ‘I spoke to PC Bruder. I’m confident that
               the boy was dead and there is nothing anybody could have done for
               him after that time [unspecified - 3.15? - CB] including PC Bruder’.
               Then Dr Slater says the dead ‘felt no discomfort, no pain’.

1.51.00        Mrs Hicks to camera - this was ‘exactly what I wanted to hear, my girls
               didn’t suffer - it meant less money o f course as we could not claim fo r
               pre-death trauma. But later, much later, I found out that they did
               suffer, other specialists told me that Sarah and Vicky did suffer... ’.

1.52.00        John Glover at families’ meeting - this was ‘the cheapest disaster in
               history - was my lad’s life worthless?’.

               Allegation - medical evidence at the Inquest was wrong on time &
               manner o f death - pathologist distorted it, leant on key witness - this
               spared relatives’feelings, saved the authorities money, got the police
               off the hook.

1.53.00        DPP has preferred no charges - Trevor Hicks says ‘families do not
               accept that justice has been done - we look for a manslaughter verdict
               at the Inquest’.

1.57.00        The resumed Inquest - families’ barrister, Mr King, says ‘ they’ve
               brought in the cavalry, there’s ten of them’ (i.e. ten different lawyers
               representing chief constable, Duckenfield, etc) - everybody testifying
               for the families is going to get a hard time’.

1.59.00        Mr King explains to families that ‘the Coroner won’t take evidence
               about anything that happened after 3.15 ... because the damage had
               been done by then’.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
                Mrs Glover says her son was still alive at 3.35, doctor found a pulse at
                3.35. King - they were all dead by 3.15, that was established at the
                earlier Inquest - Mrs Glover - we never got a chance to challenge that
                evidence.

                John Glover says that only 14 of those who died got to hospital -
                where were the ambulances, why didn’t they go on to the pitch? There
                were policeman taking people’s pulses with their bloody gloves on,
                and that was after 3.15 and that wants addressing.

                Eddie Spearitt - we’ve been stuffed at every stage, we want a
                manslaughter verdict - there were coppers talking about a pitch
                invasion while people were dying and that went on till well after 3.15
                and I want the Court to hear about it ....

2.03.00         a pub landlord tells Coroner about Liverpool fans drinking - so does a
                WPC, who describes demeanour of crowd as ‘evil’ - senior W
                Midlands officer tells the Coroner that the crowd had a high proportion
                of people who had been drinking and had no tickets, and could only
                gain access by creating a crush.

2.05.00        Eddie Spearitt - talking to camera - 'the evidence was a bloody
               disgrace. The Coroner said he ’d tell the jury to disregard it, but how
               could he expect them to - it fe d the myth - a gang o f drunken yobboes
               storm through the gate and crush the people at the front - that’s the
               myth, isn ’t it?.

               Here’s the truth - a quarter of all the people who died went through
               that gate - they were sent through it by South Yorkshire Police ’.

2.07.00        Joe Glover gives his evidence - intimidated by Court - feels he has let
               his dead brother down, again.

2.09.00        Eddie Spearitt gives evidence - he was in pen with son Adam, saw a
               police officer a few feet away and begged him to open the gate - but
               officer didn’t do anything - Eddie couldn’t lift Adam out - nobody
               opened the gate - if the officer had opened the gate Eddie could have
               got Adam out. Adam fainted at 2.55 - but he was in the pen for 25
               minutes before anybody got him out.

               Coroner - ‘that may be true, but we’re not exploring that aspect of the
               matter now’.

               Allegation - Inquest rigged in favour of the authorities - families
               not given a fair chance - couldn’t get their points across.

2.19.00        PC Bichard (police CCTV operator) gives evidence - vital camera had
               been faulty, they hadn’t used it much because of a substandard picture.


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
                Coroner - would it have been recording before 1502 - ‘yes’ - Coroner
                ‘so there ought to be a film of it’ - ‘yes’ - Coroner ‘if I were to tell
                you that we can’t find it would that make any difference to your
                answer?’ - Bichard looks non-plussed‘I ’ve no idea at all where it
                could have gone to, it was part of the tape and the tapes were all sealed
                up at the end of the day’.

               Mrs Glover speaks to camera - ‘that camera recorded the state o f the
               pens ju st before the police allowed 2,000 people into them. It
               recorded exactly what the police could see. But that evidence
               disappeared. Never mind, they said, that camera was faulty anyway'.

                Mr King (families’ barrister) questions PC Bichard ‘do you maintain
                that it is not possible to zoom in and clearly identify a given
                individual? - ‘yes’ - ‘Are you equally confident about what you can
                and can’t see on the terraces generally, about not being able to pick out
                overcrowding and so on?’ - ‘yes’ - ‘But you can zoom in and clearly
                see facial features, can’t you?’ - ‘I don’t think so, sir’.

                Film then shows a man on terraces sweeping them up - his face is
                seen clearly. Mrs Glover and Houldsworth discuss this - Houldsworth
                says the police had a camera like this on the day.

                Mrs Glover speaks to camera again - ‘this man could contradict police
                evidence - he was never called - he told me he was in the Sheffield
                Wednesday control room, he could see everything the police could see,
                and he knew the pens were chocka. Stevie Wonder would have known'.

               Allegation - police video evidence showed they were - or should
               have been - well aware o f the condition ofpens 3 and 4 before they
               opened Gate C. The police did not produce this, or destroyed it, then
               lied about it. Houldsworth could have exposed all this - but he was
               not called to give evidence.

2.21.00        Mr Duckenfield gives evidence - 7 was in the control box. I had a
               view - 1 saw nothing untoward on the terraces from my position in the
               control box and the angle I was a t Mr King - ‘ you say you didn’t
               know the precise contents of the safety certificate?’ - Duckenfield
               ‘difficult to recollect’ - ‘did you have a copy?’ - Duckenfield ‘I can’t
               remember’ - ‘Did you ask for one?’ - Duckenfield ‘I remember
               asking about it’.

               King ‘you say your knowledge of the ground was limited?’ - ‘yes’ -
               King ‘based on how many journeys round the ground?’ - ‘I can’t
               remember, I ’d be guessing’. King ‘did you know the club were not
               going to steward the Leppings Lane terraces?’ - ‘I don't remember’ -
               King ‘can you honestly say that you regarded yourself as competent to
               police the Hillsborough ground?’


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
2.22.00         Coroner warns Duckenfield this is ‘definitely an incriminating question
                and you should think hard before you answer it’. Duckenfield (after a
                pause) ‘I was something of a generalist as opposed to a specialist’.

               Allegation - Duckenfield dishonest as well as incompetent - refused
               to admit his responsibility - took refuge in evasions - Inquest let him
               off the hook.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
EDITING OF JOHN MOTSON COMMENTARY TN THE ‘HILLSBOROUGH’
TV PROGRAMME




 What the ‘Hillsborough ’programme has




29.00 on tape.

Scene - the Glovers’ living room. Mr & Mrs Glover watching disaster on TV. John
Motson commentary overheard:

          ‘There was one moment || when a section o f Nottingham Forest fans did taunt
          Liverpool supporters || the pitch. Fortunately that was stopped....’.


There are two momentary breaks at points marked ||.




What John Motson actually said (as recorded on the BBC tape).


1.01.40 on the BBC tape (about 15.38 real time on the day). John Motson says:

         ‘There was one moment a few seconds ago when a section o f Nottingham
         Forest fans did taunt Liverpool supporters who raced down the pitch.
         Fortunately that was stopped....’.




G: \HILLSBOR \MAIN\MO TSON. 082
