HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

As agreed, I attach preliminary drafts of a submission and letter
to the Chief Secretary.I am happy to have   a word about these if
you would find it helpful.

I am preparing a draft note for Mr Addison to send to HMCIC, with
the aim of finding out as much as possible about how Mr Dear was
asked to set up his investigation.

At the meeting with the Treasury, I said I would find out from
SHHD whether there was any precedent for paying for a police
investigation in the case of Ibrox Park.   Mr Waghorn has spoken
to his SHHD contact (Mr Keir Wilkie) who said that there was no
major police involvement in the Ibrox inquiry (which was
conducted under the Fatal Accidents (Inquiry) Scotland Act 1895.
There were no allegations of any actions by the police
contributing to the disaster and no major police work conducted
on behalf of the inquiry (which at least in a negative sense
bears out that the major police involvement in the current
inquiry depends on the need to investigate the actions of South
Yorkshire police).




                                             P RANSFORD

                                             5 June 1989
FI Division
                               DRAFT

From: [Mr Nagler]                              cc   Ms Adams
                                                    Mr Yates
                                                    Mr Chilcot
                                                    HMCIC
                                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                    Mr Malone-Lee
                                                    Miss Edwards
                                                    Mr Addison
                                                    Mr Sandiford
                                                    Mr Whalley
                                                    Mr Archer
                                                    Ms Ransford
                                                    Mr Durbin

Mr Storr


HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


This submission concerns the request from West Midlands Police
Authority that the Home Office should meet the costs of their
investigation into the Hillsborough tragedy.   It recommends that
the costs of that investigation should fall initially on South
Yorkshire Police Authority, whose Chief Constable initiated the
investigation.   It also proposes that the Home Secretary should
seek approval from the Chief Secretary for South Yorkshire to be
offered a special payment on terms similar to those which applied
in the miners' strike, which means that of estimated costs of £4m
to £5m the Home Office would pay £3.015 to £4m.


Home Secretary's undertaking on costs


2.   The Home Secretary has already accepted, in his reply of 28
April to a Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in
his letters to West Midlands MPs, that the additional costs of
    the police investigation by West Midlands police officers should
    not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority.    He has not given
    any specific undertaking on how the costs should be met.


    West Midlands' position


    3.     Lord Ferrers met the West Midlands Police Authority on 25
    May.    The members of the Authority said that the Home Office
    should meet West Midlands costs directly.    They claimed that the
m   investigation was in effect being conducted for Lord Justice
    Taylor's enquiry.    The Chief Constable of West Midlands, Mr Dear,
    who was also at the meeting, said that he had been asked by HM
    Chief Inspector of Constabulary to conduct the investigation and
    that in his view he had been asked to conduct it and was
    conducting it on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor, not on behalf of
    Mr Peter Wright.


    4.     Lord Ferrers explained that it was our understanding South
    Yorkshire's position that the investigation had been initiated
    by Mr Wright and was for his benefit, although it was also being
    placed at the service of the Taylor enquiry.


    South Yorkshire's position


    5.     Home Office officials from the police and finance manpower
    departments met the Clerk of South Yorkshire Police Authority and
    an Assistant Chief Constable for South Yorkshire Police on 18
    May.    The south Yorkshire position was somewhat different from
    West Midlands in that they accepted that Mr Wright had initiated
the investigation.   They claimed however that it had subsequently
been largely taken over by the Taylor enquiry; Mr Dear was
reporting directly to Lord Justice Taylor.    They suggested that
the scope of the investigation was being dictated primarily by
the needs of the national enquiry and that the whole costs should
be borne by central government.    South Yorkshire have since
indicated that they wish to pursue this case at a meeting with
Lord Ferrers.


Origin and purpose of investigation


6.   It is fairly clear that, whatever Mr Dear's interpretation
of events, Mr Wright was the initiator in seeking an
investigation by an outside force.    This is borne out by the
terms of South Yorkshire Police's own press notice about the
investigation (copy attached at Annex A).


7.   Although the decision was taken early on to place the
results of the investigation directly at the service of the
Taylor enquiry, the main subject of the investigation concerns
the policing of South Yorkshire.   An investigation into the
events of the day would have needed to be conducted whether or
not there was a public enquiry and Mr Wright very properly
decided that an investigation by an outside force would be
desirable.


8.   It has been suggested that the scope of the investigation
has been considerably broadened because of the Taylor enquiry.
It appears that there are elements of the investigation which
have been prompted by the needs of the enquiry - such as seeking
evidence on the design of football grounds and the procedure for
issuing safety certificates.     It also appears that the taking of
witness statements for a public enquiry would normally be
performed by Treasury Solicitors, whereas in this case the police
are performing that function since they are interviewing most of
those who would be called to give evidence to the enquiry in the
course of their investigation.


9.    Nevertheless it remains the fact that the investigation as a
whole is primarily concerned with the policing of the events on
the day and that it would have been necessary to the Chief
Constable for his own purposes: in order to provide evidence to
coroners' inquests as well as to Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry,
and in order to satisfy himself as to the conduct of his police
force and draw any necessary lessons for future events, as well
as to deal with any possible complaints against his officers.
(No complaints have been received as yet but the Police Authority
has received some claims for compensation.     It is conceivable
that complaints could follow.)    South Yorkshire should therefore
meet the costs of the enquiry initially.     There is a strong case
for a special payment to be made to them in order to assist with
meeting the costs.


Costs of Investigations


10.   The Treasurer of West Midlands Police Authority said at the
meeting with Lord Ferrers on 25 May that costs were running at
around £2 million per month in the early stages of the
investigation (which involved some 350 officers at that stage).
Having spoken to the Deputy Treasurer of West Midlands' Police
Authority we understand that their best estimate at present for
the total costs of the investigation, which is likely to be
scaled down in the next couple of weeks, is some £4-5 million.


Casefor a special payment to South Yorkshire


11.   Special payments have previously been made in cases of
exceptional and unforeseen expenditure, where the efficiency of
the force would be threatened if no assistance were given.      The
Hillsborough expenditure would certainly have been unforeseen and
is well in excess of a lp rate product for the area (the
threshold which was applied in the miners' strike) which would be
£1.5 million.   The costs would also be a substantial proportion
of the Authority's total budget of £85m and, even net of police
grant, would substantially erode their balances, which at the end
of 1988-89 stood at around £2 million.


12.   If a special payment were made on miners' strike terms, the
police authority would receive police grant on normal terms (51%)
until the costs reached the product of a lp rate (£1.5 million),
when the Home Office contribution would be 90% (51% police grant?
39% special grant).   Again, if the miners' strike precedent were
followed, the Police Authority contribution in total would not be
more than the product of a 3/4p rate (£1 million). Once it had
paid that amount, the Home Office would pay 100%.   By way of
illustration if costs reach £4m, the Home Office would contribute
£3.015m and the Police Authority £0.985m.   If costs reach £4.15m,
the threshold of a 3/4p rate contribution for the police
Authority is reached.   The Police Authority would have
contributed £1 million and the Home Office £3.15 million; all
further costs thereafter would fall on the Home Office (see Annex
B).


Discussions with Treasury


13.   We have discussed this with the Treasury at official level.
Their preliminary view was that the costs ought to fall initially
on South Yorkshire, but they saw a case for a special payment to
South Yorkshire.   They queried whether the terms of the miners'
strike payment were applicable, as a different, slightly less
generous level of assistance was now available to local
authorities under a DoE scheme (the "Bellwin scheme"). We made
the point that single service police authorities in particular
were less well-equipped than councils to absorb excessive and
unforeseen expenditure and said that we would be advising that a
payment on miners' strike lines would be appropriate.


14.   The Treasury were clear that they would not favour a payment
direct to West Midlands.


Issues at stake


15.   In our view there are important issues of principle at
stake, with implications for funding of policing generally.    It
is accepted that the costs should not fall on West Midlands.    But
if payments were made directly from central funds to West
Midlands it would imply that the investigation was being
conducted solely at the behest of and for the benefit of central
government.   Since that it not in fact the case - the
investigation having been instigated by South Yorkshire and
dealing with matters which are primarily the concern of South
Yorkshire Police - a direct payment could leave us open to
similar claims on any occasion when an investigation was being
conducted by an outside force and there could be said to be a
national interest in the outcome.   This could apply to any
incident of a major scale where possible allegations of police
misconduct were involved (eg Wapping).


16.   Difficulties have already been experienced in a case
involving allegations of wrongful conviction (Guildford and
Woolwich bombings) and the lesson drawn that any approach needs
to be carefully routed via the original investigating force.    In
this case, however, it was South Yorkshire as the force
originally involved which made the approach to West Midlands but
it is still being suggested (by West Midlands Police Authority)
that because of the involvement of HM Inspector of Constabulary
in the negotiations with West Midlands, and because of the
decision to make the results of the investigation available to
the Taylor enquiry, that South Yorkshire are not even parties to
the agreement and that therefore payment should be made direct to
West Midlands.   There would be very wide implications for police
funding generally if we accepted that position.
Recommendations


17.   We recommend that, for the reasons given in paragraphs 15
and 16 above, the costs of the Hillsborough investigation should
fall initially to South Yorkshire Police.   South Yorkshire should
be offered a special payment to help meet the costs, following
the formula used in the miners' strike as described in paragraph
12 above.


18.   A draft letter seeking approval for the course proposed from
the Chief Secretary is attached.
The planning and the operational decisions of South Yorkshire Police

officers will form a major aspect of the enquiry to be .held into the

events which led to the tragedy at the Sheffield Wednesday football

ground on 15 April.



The Chief Constable Mr Peter Wright Judges it essential that the

gathering and assessment of evidence in relation to these matters

should be carried out by officers from another Force.   He has

therefore asked Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West Midlands, to

nominate a senior officer to lead the enquiry.
                                                         Annex B




Application of miners' strike formula for assistance to South
Yorkshire's estimated costs for Hillsborough investigation




                        Home Office      Police Authority

First £1.5 million         £0.765m            £0.735m
 (product of lp rate)       (51%)              (49%)
                                                            £lm
Next £2.65 million         £2.385m           £0.265m
                            (90%)              (10%)




When total costs reach £4.15 million, the Police Authority
contribution reaches £1 million. Thereafter all costs would fall
to the Home Office.
    *1                                                                 FILE NUMBER----------------- -----------------
   *




DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE----------

 TO                                           ENCLOSURES                    COPIES TO BE SENT TO
  Rt Hon John Major MP                                                      Prime Minister
  Chief Secretary                                                           S of S for Environment
  Treasury                                                                  S of S for Scotland
                                                                            [S of S for Wales]
                                                                            Chief Whip




  m
        (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                                         (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                        LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y...............................................................
                                                                      (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                         HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS

                         My officials have been in contact with yours about the
                         policing costs of this investigation and the arrangements
                         which we would like to make, by way of a special payment
                         to help South Yorkshire Police Authority to assist in
                         meeting the costs.

                         2.   West Midlands Police, initially at the invitation of
                         the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, is conducting an
                         investigation into the events of Hillsborough. When it
                         was decided that Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry should be
                         established, it was agreed that the information obtained
                         by the West Midlands Police should be placed at the
                         disposal of that enquiry.

                         3.   The additional costs of the investigation were
                         initially estimated to be running at £1.7 million per
                         month. This covered both the direct overtime worked by




        H.O. EST. 112
 • SM                                                                                                   3MM9.S6 XNW
the 250 or so officers involved and the consequential
overtime worked in West Midlands to cover for their
absence. It also includes accommodation costs, transport
subsistence and the like. There may be further costs
associated with the investigation, such as use of
computer facilities and helplines, which may add to the
costs. On the other hand we understand that the
investigation is likely to be scaled down in the next few
weeks. West Midland Police Authority's initial tentative
estimate of the total additional costs is around £4-5
million.

4.   West   Midlands have asked that the additional costs
should be   met directly by central government. South
Yorkshire   Police Authority have indicated that they would
also like   the costs to be met directly by us.

5.   It is clearly right that the additional costs should
not fall on West Midlands Police Authority, which has no
interest in the outcome of the investigation. I have
therefore given an assurance, in my replies to members of
Parliament concerned about the matter, that wherever the
additional costs might fall, they would not fall to the
West Midlands.

6.   I believe that it is right in principle that the
costs should fall initially to South Yorkshire Police
Authority. The investigation was initiated by the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire and is concerned primarily
with matters of policing in South Yorkshire.

7.   I should add that because of the decision tomake
the results directly available also to the Taylor
enquiry, there is an element in the investigation which
is, for the sake of convenience, being conducted for the
benefit of that enquiry. Police officers are obtaining
information about design and safety of sports grounds for
the enquiry, and by taking witness statements from those
who may be giving evidence for the enquiry are
effectively providing a service which would normally be
undertaken by Treasury Solicitors for a public enquiry.

8.   Moreover, the likely costs of the police
investigation could not be absorbed within South
Yorkshire Police Authority's budget without serious
detriment to the efficiency of the force. The costs
could not have been foreseen when the Authority set its
budget and are likely to place a serious strain upon it.
The Authority's gross budget is some £85 million and
they had balances at the end of 1988-89 of around £2
million. They need to keep some of that for other
possible contingencies such as public disorder or a
criminal investigation.

9.   I would like to make South Yorkshire an early offer
of assistance, in an endeavour to persuade them to agree
to meet the initial costs of the investigation and thus
relieve West Midlands, which is seriously resentful of
the drain on its own policing resources.

10. There is a risk that matters could come to a head at
an early stage, and there is a complication in that the
Chief Constable of West Yorkshire has told us that his
understanding has always been that he was conducting the
investigation solely on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor.
This may be in part a confusion which arose because when
he was initially approached by HM Chief Inspector of
Constabulary the possibility was raised that he might be
an assessor for the Taylor enquiry as well as conducting
the investigation (although it was then decided to
separate the two roles). Whatever the reasons, it would
be very difficult to find ourselves involved in any
public dispute over the events which led up to the
investigation.

11. We hope that the South Yorkshire Police Authority
can be persuaded to accept responsibility. I believe
that our best hope of achieving this is to make an early
offer of a special payment recognising both the financial
burden which this places on South Yorkshire and the
extent to which the investigation serves the purposes of
Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.

12. Turning to the possible terms of the special
payment, I believe that it should be based on the formula
used in the miners' strike, namely that for costs above a
threshold equivalent to the product of a penny rate for
the area, (ie £1.5 million) we should meet 90% of the
costs (or 39% in addition to the usual police grant) and
that we should place a ceiling on the South Yorkshire
Police Authority's overall contribution, equivalent to a
3/4p rate product for the area ie £1 million. The
ceiling could be reached if the costs were to reach £4.15
million.

13. I believe that it would be very difficult to justify
being less generous than in the miners' dispute in this
particular instance.

14. Robin Ferrers is meeting the South Yorkshire Police
Authority on 20 June. It is imperative that we should be
able to say how the Government proposes that the costs
should be met, and how West Midlands Police Authority is
to be reimbursed, at the earliest possible date and we
certainly need to be in a position to make a clear and
reasonable offer at that meeting.

15. I should therefore be very grateful for an early
reply.
