HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - CALLS FOR A FRESH INQUIRY

Accusation

There should be a fresh public inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster after new
revelations that police statements made following the disaster were altered to remove
criticisms o f the police operation.

Facts

T he Sunday Telegraph (28/2/99) carried a report alleging that it had uncovered new
evidence o f the extent to which statements made by police officers following the
H illsborough disaster were altered to rem ove criticisms o f the control o f the police
operation on the day. The tenth anniversary o f the disaster in which 96 people died will
be m arked on 15 April this year. T he article claims that the scale and im portance o f the
alteration o f statem ents was underestim ated by L ord Justice Stuart-Smith w hen he
conducted a scrutiny at the H om e Secretary’s request to determ ine w hether there was
significant new evidence about the disaster which was n o t available to the earlier inquiry.

Shortly after the disaster, the police officers w ho had been present at Hillsborough were
required to record their recollections o f the day. T he officers’ statements were
subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise w hether they were in a suitable
form for submission to the judicial inquiry led by Lord Justice Taylor. In the majority o f
cases, no recom m endations were made on the officers’ statements. In some, though,
advice was given to rem ove com m ent, hearsay or inappropriate language. The South
Yorkshire Police’s own evidence collation team also recom m ended some am endments o f
a similar nature, w ithout reference to the solicitors.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, published in February 1998, indicates that he
investigated this m atter thoroughly after it was brought to his attention by the South
Y orkshire Police. H e did n ot criticise the procedure followed, b ut there were several
statements where he believed it w ould have been preferable for the am endments n o t to
have been made, because w hat was rem oved was either factual or com m ent where factual
m atters were implicit. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that the Taylor Inquiry were aware
that the statements had been vetted in this way and he was satisfied that it did not
materially affect the outcom e o f the Inquiry or other proceedings.

Line to take

Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith investigated the alteration o f police statements in detail in the
course o f his scrutiny o f the H illsborough disaster which reported in February last year.
His findings were set out at length in Chapter Four o f his report.

A lthough Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that there were some alterations which it would
have been preferable n o t to have made, he was satisfied that the procedure followed by
South Yorkshire Police had had no material effect on the outcom e o f the Taylor Inquiry,
the coroner’s inquest or the decision o f the D irector o f Public Prosecutions.

T he H om e Secretary accepted Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusion that there were no
grounds for a further inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#90212#l
