                                1/OpN     ft   visifc

                                                               All correspondence must be
                                                               addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                               P 0 Box 22 (S West PDO)
                   CO               l& fc .                    Chester House
                                                               Boyer Street
                           (V'V.                               Manchester M16 ORE
                                                               Telephone 061 855
                                                               Fax 061 872 4145

                                                               Your reference
                                                               Our reference    GMG/JD
                                                                                6MG/JD
                            jty.
                                                               When calling or telephoning
                                                               please ask for
                                                               Date        16 October 1989




Dear Mr. Whalley,

          INCIDENCE OF CROWD BEHAVIOUR AT MAINE ROAD FOOTBALL 6RQUND
                       MANCHESTER. SATURDAY 23 September 1989
          Further t o our recent meeting in Manchester, I t r u s t t h a t both Lord
J u s t i c e Taylor and y o u r s e l f derived some b e n e f it from th e v i s i t s t o the
Manchester Football and Salford Rugby grounds.

     Immediately p r i o r t o th e meeting, as you w ill r e c a l l , a request was
made on behalf of Lord J u s t i c e Taylor, f o r d e t a i l s of th e in cid en t of
crowd d iso rd e r which had occurred during th e derby fo o tb all match between
Manchester City and Manchester United on 23 September. I caused the
Ground Commander, Chief Superintendent S h e r r a t t , t o provide a report
regarding th e in c id e n t and have pleasure in forwarding a copy of same.



                                        Yours s in c e re ly




                                   A ssista n t Chief Constable



R.Whalley Esq.,
Room 662,
Home O f fic e ,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON SW1H 9AT
r'ORM 27

                      GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE
            Hie Chief Superintendent    MEMORANDUM         The Assistant Chief Constable
            'E' Division                                   Uniform Operations
    From:                                          To:




            Sir,

            Incidence of Crowd Disorder at Maine Road Football Ground on Saturday,
            23rd September 1989

            Handlester City -v- Manchester United Derby

            The near capacity crowd was in a state of high tension in the tradition of local
            Derby games. At the South End of the Kippax Stand Terraces the supporters of
            the two sides were segregated by a ten feet wide corridor of substantial
            railings and considerable disorder took place on either side of the segregation
            area prior to and during the first portion of the match. This was due to two
            reasons, firstly there was a state of tribal antagonism towards each other which
            manifested itself in gesticulations, shouting, jumping up and down and by
            throwing coins at each other     Numerous injuries were caused on both sides of
            this area and one man had to be taken to hospital by ambulance with a
            substantial gash to the scalp. The other problem was caused by the infiltration
            into the Manchester City side of this area of large numbers of Manchester United
            fans who were clearly bent on causing trouble and were of course highly
            successful. This area of problems was by far the worst and most threatening and
            the fear of myself and my senior officers on the day was a breach of the open
            gates and a major attack by one side upon the other. The media hardly noticed
            and no report of this was made by the Press except in reflection of a later
            quote by me. This was no doubt because the problems never spilled onto the
            playing area.

            Before the match the police were in receipt of intelligence from various sources
            both inside and outside the Ground and although one significant item of
            intelligence concerned the infiltration of the North Stand (almost diametrically
            opposite the problems I have described in the above paragraph) it was not
            possible to assess that the trouble would be any worse there than it would be in
            the Kippax Stand the Visitors Stand (Platt Lane) or indeed the Main Stand and
            there were instances of disorder in all of these areas. Large numbers of police
            officers were therefore not deployed into the North Stand where the most
            dramatic reported disorder occurred because we did not have a crystal ball. A
            Sergeant and ten Officers were nevertheless deployed into the North Stand and
            there was a Sergeant and four Officers on the playing area side of the perimeter
            fence along that Stand. The point I wish to make here is that intelligence was
            not ignored in spite of having other expected problems.

            The Lord Justice Taylor recommends that the police should provide sufficient
            reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside
            or outside the Ground.      I have implemented this recanmendation from the
            beginning of the Season and normally I have a Sergeant and ten Constables who I
            have had specially trained for this purpose and they are used exclusively so.
            For this particular match I doubled this reserve and had two Sergeants, each
            with ten Constables, all commanded by an Inspector. At the time of the incident
            in the North Stand this total reserve was already deployed to the Kippax Stand
            where calls of assistance had been received from police officers there.
Turning to the incident in the North Stand which has caused media and other
attention, this occurred immediately on commencement of the game. The whistle
was blown for kick-off about one minute before 3pm and the problems escalated
from then until four minutes after kick-off when the Referee stopped the match
and took the players off the field. When the Stewards at the perimeter gates
saw the fighting they immediately opened the gates and this is a direct result
of their training following Lord Justice Taylor's Reooninendations. They are
trained to respond and open the gates without commands from anyone although in
this situation there was no public safety problem such as overcrowding or large
numbers of spectators pressing on the fences or the gates. Fighting between
rival fans in this area developed and at that time there were very few police
officers immediately at hand.     Officers were however sent to deal with the
incident and assist those who were already there. However, the build up of
police officers was fairly slow at first due to two factors. The first was the
fact that the state of tension and disorder already occurring in the Kippax
Stand had caused me to deploy all of the reserve staff available to me within
the Ground and I was extremely loathe to reduce the number of officers dealing
with that problem for reasons I have outlined above. The second problem was one
of timing. % Tactical Aid Group officers, who were well and truly sufficient
to deal with the North Stand incident, were, as planned only just about to enter
the Stadium.    The build up of police officers to meet the incident was
nevertheless done in an orderly manner, the fighting was suppressed and about
150 fans who had moved onto the pitch through the perimeter fence were
shepherded along to a quadrant area at the opposite aid of the Ground where
there was space for than to be accommodated on terracing. There was no invasion
of the pitch which by definition must imply a quite different scenario to this
one where those who went onto the playing area did so either to escape the
fighting or to secure a better position in the Ground away from Manchester City
fans.

The reduction of capacities inposed by Lord Justice Taylor's Recormendations
meant that with a near capacity crowd the scope for making wholesale transfers
of fans from one area to another was very limited indeed. The fact that there
was a vacant area in the quadrant I have described (apple pie corner) was due to
the fact that, firstly, the area is used to segregate one group of fans from
another and secondly the area is not used at the present time as it is
technically unsafe. This is a technicality however due to the positioning of
barriers and aisles and I decided to put these displaced fans in there as they
were in relatively small numbers and only occupied a small portion of the apple
pie comer.    Importantly, these displaced fans, albeit they were United fans,
had shewn no tendency whatever to misbehaviour and at all times when they were
on the pitch and when they were shepherded along they were orderly and well
behaved. My only other option with these was to eject them all from the Ground
and this seemed to present a much greater problem as I can guarantee they would
have become very disorderly indeed.

Returning to the disorder in the North Stand this was restored in a relatively
short time and within about five minutes of play being stopped I took the view
that the match should then be re-started immediately with the object of
distracting those inclined to disorder and bringing about a state of normality.
Communicating with the Referee who had not been located to his normal place
during this break took a further four minutes and after a total break of nine
minutes the match restarted and the major tensions around the Ground were
inmediately reduced. Pockets of fighting nevertheless continued to occur during
the first half hour of play but from that point on the home team demonstrated
that they were going to easily win this match and large numbers of Manchester
United fans drifted away from the Ground. One large pocket of some 150 - 200
United supporters left the Ground as a group before the half time stage and
there was concern that they were bent on causing trouble and possibly damage to
motor vehicles and property. They were escorted by horses and dogs until they
dispersed without much incident.

There were no further significant incidents.

As Match Commander there were two areas of major concern to me in the
controlling of this match;

      Firstly, the arrangements for the sale of tickets for this all ticket
      match by the Maine Road Club Administration were unacceptable. On this
      occasion tickets had been allocated on production of vouchers and there
      were no restrictions on numbers of tickets supplied to individuals who
      produced the necessary vouchers. The vouchers had been issued at a
      previous match and there appears to have been littlecontrol on the supply
      of these vouchers. People were able to obtain almost         any number on
      request, there are repx>rts that the vouchers were issued in wads at the
      end of seating rows with the request that they be merely passed along and,
      perhaps worst of all, the vouchers were un-numbered.

      Secondly, when incidents reached a crescendo and tension was at its
      greatest height at the beginning of the match I had difficulties in
      comnunicating with key and senior supervisors in thecperational arena.
      Amid all the requests for assistance and other calls which saturated
      our radio air time capacity it was extremely difficult through the single
      Communicator to give command directions to those key and senior
      supervisory officers. All was not lost in this respect and I was able
      to make certain deployment directions but this over-capacity led to a
      great deal of frustration on my behalf at being unable to deploy staff
      quickly and effectively. It also led to other senior staff deploying
      without being able to communicate this to the Control Room and myself.
      (This and many other of the problems I have described in my report are
      amply demonstrated in a twelve minute video taken at the salient time
      from the Police Control Room).


The first matter above relating to the tickets has been the subject of a meeting
between the Club Secretary, Mr. Bernard Halford and myself on the Monday
following this match and he has undertaken, along with his Chairman, to review
and make necessary changes in the allocation of tickets with a view to
preventing a recurrence of this type of incident. He has undertaken to allow me
to review and comment on any proposed changes before they are implemented and
for the meantime I regard this as satisfactory.

With regard to the second matter above relating to Communications I have
requested the Chief Superintendent in charge of Police Camiunications to provide
me with an efficient, separate Command Channel in order that I can ccrnnunicate
by radio with senior supervisors and key officers separately from the main
operational channel. This would accord with procedures I am familiar with in
Public Order Training in the Force anyway.       This Command Channel is being
provided with immediate effect and will be in place for the very next football
match and remaining matches. I consider that this will do much to alleviate
problems in future.

At the start of this Season and immediately following receipt of Lord Justice
Taylor's Report I selected a Sergeant and gave him exclusive responsibility with
no other duties to test out every aspect of the Recommendations at the Maine
Road Stadium. This has proved to be very successful indeed and at each match he
deals with various if not all aspects of the Recommendations and then follows up
to monitor the progress where problems have been highlighted. This is done by
the production of a report which contains simple enumerated problems which are
then seen and endorsed by me for action with monitoring procedures for the
follow up. This has proved highly successful in achieving various aspects of
the recommendations and I have made these reports available both to the Club
management and to the Local Authority even though there are aspects which have
concerned the police operation (not where it effects Force Policy in any way).
One exairple of achievement in this area is the recent purchase by Manchester
City Football Club of sophisticated and expensive hydraulic cutting equipment
which can be used at my direction by trained club staff.

Another major problem with this type of all ticket match is that of ticket
touts. A very unsatisfactory old chestnut indeed. Having had experience at one
match already this year where ticket touts were expected I laid certain plans to
deal with the matter. On the previous occasion I had a small squad of Plain
Clothes Officers who arrested most of the touts and took them to Platt Lane
Police Station where they were found to be in possession of large amounts of
tickets. By the time it had been established that none of the tickets were
forgeries the match was well under way and the tickets were valueless. Prior to
the latest match I had received intelligence that there would be forged tickets
available and I therefore deployed six Plain Clothes Officers and six Uniformed
Officers with the sole function of observing the activities of ticket touts and
arresting than if necessary on suspicion.       Although ticket touting is not
illegal it may be described as illicit and if forgeries were about this is where
I would expect to find than and my operation was based on those grounds. In the
event the ticket touts turned out to be numerous but highly organised. Most of
them had small, sophisticated cel-phone radio telephones and/or walkie-talkie
equipment through which they communicated with a series of runners who held the
tickets away from the scene until called forward. Others used a sort of tic-tac
method to call the runners forward but the ticket touts were found to be in
possession of very few tickets on their person. Two touts were arrested and
taken to Platt Lane Station but they had about three tickets between than and
although these two individuals were rendered ineffective they had nevertheless
beaten our operation.

I am well aware that it is an old chestnut but there is a crying need for
legislation against ticket touting at sporting events. It may be cynical of me
to suggest that touting makes tickets available to those who might wish to enter
Wimbledon or Lords but my concern is football matches and to a lesser extent,
but nevertheless importantly, to certain rugby matches. The effect of touting
being a criminal offence would be wider than mere individuals, it would enable
criminal proceedings against syndicates for conspiracy.

I have no doubt that we can in some way meet this new technique of the ticket
touts but not nearly so effectively as we could given proper legislation.
There are a number of lingering problems at the Maine Road Stadium arising from
the Taylor Report Recommendations but every effort has been made from the
beginning of the Season by the police to comply. In fairness the Club and the
local Authority have responded well in many areas and numerous changes have been
made, some quite drastic, to meet the recommendations, but there is still much
to be done. One of the main stumbling blocks has been the slowness of the Local
Authority to form an Advisory Group in accordance with the recamvendations.
This is new in the final stages of arrangement by the Local Authority and is to
be chaired by Mr. Neil Warren (Councillor) Chairman of the Manchester City
Council Environmental Services Department.      When this Advisory Group gets
underway I feel that some of the remaining sticky problems would be resolved.
These largely involve Club Stewards and the training of Club Stewards.

It is a lamentable fact that with the exception of a few Gate Stewards the
majority of the Stewards at Maine Road are entirely unpaid and their only
remuneration is a free view of the match. When trouble developed at this match
the Stewards seemed to disappear. The whole aspect of Stewarding is a difficult
one which the Club will have to address and I am confident that the Advisory
Group will be able to enforce this within a comparatively short time.

The single solitary issue which has not yet been finalised at Maine Road is the
matter of a written agreement between the Police and the Club, however I
understand that this is being addressed by the Force and the Police Authority.

Finally Police relations with the Club management, through the Club Secretary,
appear to be excellent and the Club Secretary has demonstrated almost
continually that he is prepared to take the advice of the Police and to
endeavour to implement the recommendations of the Taylor Report.




Chief Superintendent.                         29th September 1989
RS/MMC
