E.R.
                         \                       4   *   1
                                           ^                       cc:   Mr Cogbill - C4 -
                                                                         Mrs Lee - I Div.
                             /L   •■^V 'P V ^'




   Mr Goddard
   F8 Division


   BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES


        Thank you for your notes of 21 December 1990 and
   15 January.


       ^   2.   I am afraid that I am continuing to see difficulties
   in drafting instructions for the missile throwing and chanting
   offences.     I set out these difficulties later in this note.
   It might be helpful to have a meeting to discuss them before I
   attempt a revised draft of these Instructions.


           3.   I do not foresee difficulties in revising the parts
   of the Instructions dealing with the ticket tout and pitch
   invasion offences.        As respects the latter, I accept that a
   defence of "reasonable excuse" would be too vague.                               However,
   since that defence was proposed by Taylor, I think we should
   explain to Parliamentary Counsel why we are departing from
   that proposal since the Bill is intended to give effect to the
   Taylor proposals.     Instructions to Counsel should aim to fully
   inform them of our thinking.                              The Instructions might thereby
   become lengthier but I hope that this approach will limit the
   correspondence with Counsel about the Instructions.


           4.   With reference to paragraph 7 of your note of
   15 January, Parliamentary Counsel do not, in general, take
   kindly to suggestions as to the phrases a Bill should use.                                  I
   therefore propose to include the information provided by
   paragraph 3 of your note of 21 December (which I had not
   received when I sent you draft Instructions under cover of a
   note of the same date) in revising paragraph 2.7.                              However, I

                                                                                                   1
#
    E.R.
       will attempt to nudge Counsel in the direction of "organisers
       of the game".


            5.    With reference to the suggestion at the end of
       paragraph 2 of your note of 15 January, do you think it will
       always be the case that the matches designated for the
       purposes of these offences will always be the same as those
       designated under section 1(2) of the Football Spectators Act
       1989?


            6.    Paragraph 22 of your note does not answer the
       g ^ s ti ons in paragraph 13 of mine.     Clearly those listed in
       F^fegraph 22 of your note are not exhaustive of the persons to
       be allowed on the pitch because you use the words "should
       include" and do not, for instance, include the players.        But
       should I now omit from paragraph 3.24 of the draft
       instructions persons such as the disabled in wheelchairs and
       press photographers?     I had included these (and others) in
       response to your instructions dated 17 December.


            7.    The suggested amendments in paragraph 14 of your
       note certainly succeed in shortening the instructions and in
       making the prose more elegant.     Unfortunately they depart in
       two associated respects from the objects that instructions to
       Counsel are meant to achieve.     First, they fail to describe
       what activities should be, and what activities should not be,
       covered by the proposed offence.        Secondly, by resorting to
       general phrases such as "would be likely to cause offence
             on grounds of public decency" they might be taken as
       attempting to suggest to Counsel the way in which the Bill
       should be drafted.     Put simply, it is for Counsel to devise
       the wording that is appropriate to give effect to our policy
       once he knows what activities we want to be covered by the new
       offence.   I realise that this is an area where our examples
       cannot be taken as being exhaustive.       Nevertheless I fear that
       you will need to answer the questions about the extent of the
       proposed offence of missile throwing which were raised in


                                                                            2
E.R.
   paragraph 7 of my note of 21 December, unless we can find some
   other way of formulating this offence (as to which see
   paragraph 11 below).


        8.     In any event, I doubt whether the formula proposed
   would actually be effective.    In particular, I doubt whether
   the offence of throwing of objects "which caused, or would be
   likely to cause, offence ....    racially .....   to a reasonable
   person present at the scene" would actually make banana
   throwing an offence, which is presumably what you hoped it
   would.    Incidentally the concept that throwing an object could
   ca^se "racial offence" is not one that is immediately easy to
   gwrsp.    I ask again whether you have objects in mind other
   than bananas?   Even in relation to bananas, I think it is
   necessary for the Instructions to explain why they are
   regarded as racially offensive and hence I think more of the
   opening of paragraph 3.12 needs to be retained than is
   envisaged in paragraph 15 of your note.


        9.    With reference to the formula you propose for the
   new offence, I very much doubt whether "a reasonable man" or,
   perhaps, "a man of reasonable sensitivity" would regard banana
   throwing as racially offensive for the reasons indicated in
   paragraph 3.12 of the current draft instructions.     I retain
   the notion that such activity is too silly to give offence;
   the concept I have in mind is that a remark or gesture has to
   get somewhere near a sensitive target if it actually to "bite"
   and cause offence.    If we are to retain the causing of offence
   as an element in the offence, I think this is a point that I
   should at least raise with Counsel.    I would much prefer to be
   told that I am out on a limb than, by failing to raise a
   potential problem, have an offence in legislation which does
   not work (or produces inconsistent results in magistrates'
   courts).




                                                                       3
E.R.
        10.     You also use the phrase "public decency" in your
   formulation of the proposed offence of missile throwing.        The
   difficulty with such phrases is the uncertainty as to their
   meaning.     This difficulty is made worse by adding "or
   otherwise" as you have done in your attempted formulation of
   the offence.     What are those additional words intended to
   cover?     I am afraid that instructions along these lines would
   almost certainly produce difficulties with Parliamentary
   Counsel who would (reasonably in my view) want to know what
   activities we wished to cover so that they (the professional
   draftsmen) could adopt the appropriate formula.     Perhaps
   significantly you did not answer the question in my note of
   2lP3ecember asking whether the throwing of a roll of lavatory
   paper should be an offence.     It seemed to me to be a useful
   test in deciding how far you wanted to go.


        11.     Nevertheless, I willingly concede that there are
   formidable problems in trying to make a list of what it is
   permissible to throw and what it is not.     Accordingly, I
   wonder whether it is worth considering a different approach to
   the problem.     Should it be an offence at a designated football
   match to throw anything onto the pitch or at another
   spectator?     As respects the latter, I can see that we may need
   to exclude activities such as throwing an (unlighted)
   cigarette at a friend when he is too far for the packet of
   cigarettes to be passed to him.     Ditto, boiled sweets etc.
   The proposed offence should also not cover activities such as
   throwing a hat into the air.    But Counsel might be able to
   cover such activities by making it a requirement that the
   recipient (or would-be) recipient (where there is one) is
   known to the person doing the throwing and that the things
   thrown are not noxious.     I concede that there may be
   difficulties in describing throwing activities which are
   "innocent".    Nevertheless an offence along these lines does
   seem to have the merit of greater certainty than an offence
   which relied on the views of a bench of magistrates as to
   racial offensiveness or offensiveness as respects public


                                                                         4
ft
     E.R.
        decency.     Unless there are objects which you think it should
        be permissible to throw onto the pitch, that offence (at
        least) could become more clear cut.


             12.     I am afraid that I have similar objections to the
        proposed formula in paragraph 18 of your note about the
        "chanting" offence.


             13.     The racial element in the offence is probably the
        most straightforward, at least in relation to words as opposed
        to sounds.     However, it is worth noting that "the reasonable
        man" or "the man of reasonable sensitivity" would not be a
               of the race at which the chants etc. were directed.
        Nevertheless, I do not think this need cause any problems;
        indeed, it would cause problems if we tried to have regard to
        the sensitivities of persons of the race at which the abuse
        was directed since that would be liable to involve a string of
        expert witnesses.     It is to be hoped that phrases that involve
        abuse directed at a named racial group would be offensive to
        any reasonable person.


             14.     Difficulties arise with the words "public decency"
        and "or other grounds".    As to the former, Counsel will
        reasonably ask what sort of phrases we intend to catch.     If
        there was a shout of "You f...ing idiot" after a particularly
        unskilful piece of play, should this be caught?     My instinct
        is that it should not be caught.    Nevertheless a particularly
        prudish bench of magistrates might convict.     It would be easy
        to construct slightly stronger variations and, of course, the
        stronger they become the greater the likelihood of conviction.
        Nevertheless, it seems doubtful that there would be any
        consistency in the decisions of magistrates and there may well
        be regional variations.    Granted Taylor's desire for
        certainty, the inconsistencies that are bound to follow the
        use of such vague phrases as "public decency" seem to be
        highly undesirable.




                                                                           5
I




    E.R.
            15.   What "other grounds" do you have in mind?


            16.   If we are aiming for certainty in the offence
       involving chanting, is it sensible for it to extend beyond
       racial abuse?


            17.   I fully appreciate that you will find it extremely
       difficult to answer some of the questions in this note because
       they focus on the extent of the offences which you have been
       required to put forward.      I realise that these offences are
       not suggested by you and have been foisted upon you by the
       T ^ l o r recommendations.   I very much sympathise with your
       ^Idicament in being required to give flesh to the bones of
       proposals you might well not have put forward.     Nevertheless,
       as I have indicated, Parliamentary Counsel will almost
       certainly ask the questions I have raised in order to give
       effect to them in a draft Bill.     Furthermore, Parliament is
       surely entitled to ask our Ministers about the extent of
       offences that they are recommending.     It is hardly a
       satisfactory answer for Ministers to say that they do not know
       and that the matter is for the courts. Nevertheless, it is
       because I distrust the vagueness of the current proposals that
       I have raised (in paragraphs 11 and 16 above) the possibility
       of producing offences whose extent is clearer.




                                                              R J CLAYTON
                                                   Legal Adviser's Branch

       24 January 1991




                                                                          6
