*   ►




        INQUIRY     INTO      THE        HILLSBOROUGH
                                                         15,
               STADIUM               DISASTER




                             Before


                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                         MR. B. JOHNSON
            (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                               and

                        PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                           (ASSESSORS)




                               At

                         The Town Hall,

                           Sheffield,

                               on

                    Tuesday, 6th June,    1989.




                   TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                       (Afternoon Session)



             From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                  Official Shorthand Writers,
              55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                   INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                   (Afternoon Session)

                                             Page

J.J. BENNETT Recalled

     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Glasgow         69
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Woodward        74

S. PAYNE Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                 77

G. DUFFY Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips                 81
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. King             85
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Jackson          86
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward         86

D. EVANS Called

     Examined by M r . Collins                90
     Cross-Examined by     Mr. Jackson        98
     Cross-Examined by     Mr. Gibson-Watt   100
     Cross-Examined by     Mr. Glasgow       100
     Cross-Examined by     Mr. Woodward      100

A. BEST Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                101
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward          105

B. HUCKSTEPP Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips                106
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. King            112
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Jackson         113
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward        114

A. TAYLOR Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                 116
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward          119

J. MORGAN Called

    Examined by Mr. Goldsack                 123
    Cross-Examined by   Mr. King             133
    Cross-Examined by   Mr. Muller           133
    Cross-Examined by   Mr. Maxwell          134
    Cross-Examined by   Mr. Glasgow          134
              FIFTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                TUESDAY. 6th JUNE, 1989

                   (AFTERNOON SESSION)


         INSPECTOR JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT Recalled

             Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW;

Mr. Bennett, when you turned up inside A Gate it was apparent
from what you were told and what you could see through the
little window, that a serious problem had built up on the
other side? - A. Yes sir.

Can you now do your best to put a time on that;as accurately
as possible? - A. I would think that would be 20-to to quarter-
to-3.

You moved to your left towards the Turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes.

And presumably went through the little whole in the wall,
the gateway in the wall and met Inspector White? - A. Yes.

Can you recall whether or not C Gate was definitely shut
at that stage? - A. I would have remembered had it been
open, I am sure. As far as I am concerned it was closed.

And in summary what   you were saying to Inspector White was:
"I” or "We have got   a problem at Gate A, I am going to
need some Officers"   and he was saying:  "Mine are all
fully committed"? -   A. That is correct.

It was also apparent to you at that stage, if not before,
that a similar problem existed at B Gate and C Gate? - A.
I had no knowledge of the situations at those other two
gates at that time.

Once you got on to the roof you could see? - A. On the
roof it was obvious, yes.

And again I don't mean to be rude, but it must have been
fairly foreseeable that if there was such a bad crush as
to be worrying both you and the gateman on A, it was likely
that that was a crush that was affecting the entire turn­
stile area? - A. Gate A only controlled that one enclosure
that I was immediately concerned with.  Gates B and C in
fact were concerned with people who were entering the
terraces rather than the North Stand.

Yes, but if there was the scene of real pressure that you
had seen for yourself through the little glass door in
Gate A, it must have occurred to you fairly soon that that
was an overall position that was likely to be affecting
all the gates? - A. It was likely but not essential because
people were queueing up to enter different parts of the
ground.
                                  J.J. BENNETT


You were concentrating on A because that was the gate where
you had actually been asked for assistance and where there
were some Police Officers already ready? - A. Yes.

You thought more were needed? - A. Yes.

Did it occur to you or so far as you were aware from your
conversation with him to Inspector White, that similar
precautions ought to be taken in respect of B and/or C
to get some Office® ready on the inside? - A. There were
already Officers there with Inspector White but he did not
have any Officers spare to come to the assistance with
the other turnstiles.

That is what I was wondering about.   Did you understand him
to be saying when he told you that all his Officers were
committeds  "I have got the same problem      here and my men
are needed here" or that his men were all working on the
turnstiles? - A. I did not ask what his problems were but
he said his men were fully committed.

I am sure it is not for you to argue with a man of the same
rank as to where people were needed and doubtless you
were appreciative of his problems? - A. I looked in the
most obvious place for men to employ behind the turnstiles;
they were not immediately available so I asked via the
radio for Police Control to send another Serial and that
is what I did.

You asked for that Serial specifically to be sent to A Gate?
- A. Yes, to those Turnstiles 1-16 which are adjacent to
Gate A.

Can you just help us now as an observer rather than the
man responsible about the situation that you saw inside
A-G turnstiles and C Gate.  You saw Inspector White and a
number of Offices^? - A. Yes.

Can you remember how many roughly? - A. It appeared to me
there was a full Serial there, so I would say 10-12 men.
Obviously I did not count them but Mr. White had what
appeared to me to be a full Serial at his disposal.

Doing what, Mr. Bennett? - A. Checking people coming in
through the turnstiles and also people who were climbing
in over the turnstile roof at that stage.

At that stage there was not any concentration of Officers
inside C Gate on the inside? - A. No, there was a Serial
there that I expected would be there.

You expected that the Officers that you saw in the area of
A-G would be able to act as a reception committee for any­
body coming in through C Gate in the same way that you
were trying to organise that for A Gate? - A. Yes.
                                   J.J. BENNETT


Did this conversation with M r . White take place before you
heard anything over the radio about gates being open?
- A. Yes, certainly.

But after that conversation had taken place did you then hear
a conversation about the opening of the gates? - A. To the
best of my recollection radio messages about opening the
gates were transmitted whilst <1- was on the turnstile roof.

So you were then occupied with an emergency situation above
ground level where you were concerned for the immediate
safety of people climbing over? - A. Yes.

You heard those messages did you although there was no way
in which you could react to them yourself? - A. I can't
say that I heard full messages because of the noise of the
crowd and being obviously deeply involved with what was
happening.  It is not possible to have your radio stuck
in your pocket and listen to it. You have to take the radio
out of your pocket if you want to hear the messages, so part
of the time I would take the radio out of my pocket to try
and monitor what was happening elsewhere and part of the time
I would not know what was happening on the radio because it
would be in my pocket.

One other matter please, Inspector Bennett, the problems
with the turnstiles.  Can I bring you back to ground level
and ask you to deal with that again? — A. Yes.

There were two particular matters I wanted to ask you about.
On one occasion you saw a turnstile operator leave his
place and chase after a man, I think, or did somebody else
tell you that had happened? - A. No, I saw that.

Was that at a time when for some reason the Police Officers
on the inside were depleted in numbers and that there was
not anybody? - A. That was after I had been to see Inspector
White and in fact when I returned to those turnstiles other
Police Officers had returned before the extra Serial
arrived, so there were other Police Officers there but
they were not at full strength.

In an ideal situation each turnstile and turnstile operator
has the assistance of two Offiers, doesn't he, one on the
inside and one on the outside? - A. There were six Officers
I think from Serial 11 employed or deployed behind those
first nine turnstiles which gave access to the North Stand,
on the inside.  I don't know who was outside, obviously I
did not see those.
And again in a perfect world if things are working sensibly
and as intended, if somebody does crash a gate in any sense,
if I may use that vulgar expression, you have a gate crasher
coming through, there should be a Police Officer there
to deal with the situation? - A. Yes.
                           72

                                     J.J. BENNETT


Q. But if for any reason that Officer has been taken away either
   dealing with an arrest or an ejection or there is somebody
   on the roof, the turnstile operator has got to decide for
   himself whether the incident is sufficiently serious to
   call for physical intervention or whether it is best just
   to let the person go? - A. Yes.

Q. And if we take extremes, if the person is simply getting in
   without a ticket, you probably would not expect the turnstile
   operator physically to go chasing after him? - A. I have
   never seen a turnstile operator actually leave his turnstile
   before, but the turnstile operators were suffering the same
   frustrations as everyone else there.  I was not particularly
   surprised to see it.  I am not saying that he left his post
   because he only left the turnstile in fact for a few seconds
   whilst he was arguing with the man who had come through his
   turnstile.  I think he was joined within a matter of seconds
   by Police Officers.  They resolved the matter and the turn­
   stile operator returned to his turnstile.   It was not intended
   as any criticism of the turnstile operator.

Q. The last matter, Mr. Bennett:  people getting up to the turn­
   stile and finding they were in the wrong place. Would it
   be fair to say by the time you arrived at the inside of
   Turnstiles A-G people were being carried through the crowd
   in a particular direction regardless of where they wanted to
   go? - A. I was behind Turnstiles 1-16.

Q. No, by the time you got through Turnstiles A-G where you spoke
   to Inspector White or for that matter to any of the turnstiles,
   the crush of people pressing towards those turnstiles would
   have been carrying any individuals within it remorselessly
   towards whatever turnstile they could get to? - A. As far
   as Turnstiles A-G were concerned it did not matter because
   they all allowed access on to Leppings Lane terrace, but
   certainly Turnstiles 1-16 roughly half of them were for
   the North Stand and half of them were for access into the
   Leppings Lane terrace and certainly if someone arrived at
   the wrong turnstile there was no way that they could transfer
   themselves across to an alternative turnstile, the crush was
   far too excessive.

Q. And it would be stupid to pretend at that stage somebody
   who had, if they had, got themselves mislaid or been mislaid
   as to going to the wrong turnstile, there is no way that
   that individual would hold matters up by attempting to go
   round the other way, he would simply have to come through?
   - A. It was physically impossible for that to happen.
   In fact several people at an earlier stage they were coming
   through the turnstiles.  If they had tickets and they had
   come through the North Stand entrance and they wanted to
   gain access to the turnstiles the stewards inside would allow
   them to transfer to the gate to get to the proper enclosure.

Q. Mr. Bennett, however regrettable it may be and however
   confused individuals may have been about their tickets, the
                                  J.J. BENNETT


fact that they were finishing up in small or large numbers
at the wrong turnstiles was not actually adding to the
delay in a sense, was it, because they were coming through
just as fast as everybody else? - A. I think it must have
contributed to some delay because there was discussions at
the turnstiles whether they were at the right one or not
and they certainly did not get through as quickly as they
would have done if they had presented themselves at the
correct turnstile.   I don't think it would have added too
much to the delay, certainly not as much as anyone without
a ticket or someone trying to pay.

We know and it is accepted as a matter of commonsea®e, apart
from anything else, that the turnstiles do not operate
as smoothly when they are under intense physical pressure
as they do when people are queueing one by one in an orderly
fashion? - A. That is true because if there is pressure on
the turnstile before the operator releases it it will not in
fact release . The person putting pressure on the turnstile
has to stand back to allow the turnstile operator to release
the turnstile.

And again with the best will in the world it must have been
quite impossible for some people to stand back to allow that
to happen? - A. Yes.

Were you aware from what you saw and from what we can see
now that it has been explained to us on the video, that on
occasions Officers had to come into the receiving end of
the turnstile and press people back in order that the turn­
stile could be released on the foot? - A. I did not see
that but I am sure it must have been necessary on occasions.

The last matter which perhaps you could help us with,
Mr. Bennett, there were instances of individuals throwing
their tickets back over the turnstile wall, were there, to
people on the other side or trying to? - A. Some people
tried to do that.  I certainly stopped all those that I
saw attempting to do that but whether or not anyone else
was successful that I did not see I cannot say.

But there was quite a pattern of that going on, was there,
quite a number of people? - A. I felt so, yes.   There was
not a particularly large number of people that I allowed
over the wall but there were perhaps 3,   4, 5 of that group
who tried to pass the tickets back.

Generally to the crowd at large or did you get the impression
that there were specific intended recipients of them? - A.
It was impossible to tell because there   were so many people
below.  I could not tell from what they   were saying whether
they intended to pass them to any particular individual.

And also there were numerous occasions when two or three
people tried to come through as a unit on one turn of the
A»
t                               74


                                             J.J. BENNETT


       turnstile? - A. Yes, I did not see that.      That was reported
       to me.

     Q. What I wanted your help on was bearing in mind those two
        particular instances of apparently agreed procedures for
        getting non-ticket holders into the ground, did it occur
        to youat the time that there was at least some orchestrated
        evading of ticket control, i.e. there had been some agreement
        between may be small groups to get together to beat the
        turnstile system, this was going on fairly regularly? -
        A. There was clearly some sort of orchestration there but
        the extent of that I have no way of establishing.

              MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you for helping as far as you can.
        Thank you sir.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.


                      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD;

     Q. Mr. Bennett, may I ask you about the gateman on Gate A? -
        A. Yes.

     Q. When you came to the gateman on Gate A he was clearly agitated?
        - A. He certainly was sir.

     Q. And had already by the time you had got to him taken certain
        steps to maintain the integrity of that gate, to save it?
        - A. Yes, he had already locked Gate A which normally is
        kept unlocked.

     Q. It has substantial bolts in it, does it, to keep it Closed?
        - A. Yes, bolts at the top and bottom.

     Q. And in addition to that there was a lock.   Ordinarily one
        would just rely on the bolts? - A. I don't know how they
        operate the thing normally but on this occasion the thing was
        locked completely.

     Q. Now he is a member of the ground staff? - A. Yes, indeed.




                                     /Q. There would be members
[4^\>
                                      75



                                                      J.   J . BE N N E T T



        Q. And there would be members of the ground staff on the
           other gates as well?   A.   Yes.

        Q. Were there any stewards around about with this gateman,
           did you notice, at Gate A?   A.   I am sorry, I cannot
           differentiate between the stewards and ground staff.    There
           were people employed by Sheffield Wednesday.

        Q. Were they wearing any sort of distinctive clothing?
           Or was this man on Gate A wearing anything distinctive?
           A.   I d o n ’t remember.

        Q.    But he had got the key?  A.   I can say that I recognised
             the man because I have worked several football matches there
             over the years and the face was familiar to me.

        Q. Did you see other stewards or officials of the Club around
           the gate at that time?   A.   There were stewards allocated
           to a gate in the fence which separated the North Stand
           supporters from the Leppings Lane supporters.

        Q. That is the fence that is on the ground side of the
           turnstiles?   A.   No, the one lower down than that.

        Q. The metal fence?   A.   That's it.   There is a gate in
           there which is manned by stewards and there were further
           stewards at the end of that gate, in fact, the place where
           the turnstiles are divided because there were fans coming
           in through the wrong turnstiles and they were allowing
           them through into the Leppings Lane terrace entrance.
           There would be further stewads at the bottom of the steps
           leading into the West Stand as well.

        Q. The problem of people pushing in, trying to get through
           without tickets, succeeding in getting through, creates
           a dilemma, does it not, for the Police Officers?
           A.   Indeed it does, sir.

        Q. In particular, how does it affect their efficiency and
           performance of control at the gate?   A.   If they have
           to take action against large numbers of individuals, it
           leaves no Officers at the gates to supervise entry.

        Q. In the circumstances, did it become necessary on this
           occasion to exercise some discretion and not deal with
           people who otherwise perhaps should have been ejected
           from the ground?   A.   When I first arrived at those
           turnstiles, there was only one Police Officer there, so
           matters had perhaps gone a little bit too far at that
           stage and that is why I asked for reinforcements to come,
           a reserve serial.

        Q. You saw Mr. White?    A.        Behind turnstiles A-G,        yes.

        Q. And you saw Mr. Higgins with his serial.           A.      Yes.
                                                     76



                                                                                                J.             J.   BENNETT



Q. Did you know that there had been a point where Gate A had
   been locked and access through it had been refused to
   a Police Serial to go out?  A.   No, I wasn't aware of
   that.

Q.    There came a time when you climbed up on to the                                                                                             top of
     the turnstiles?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   In your statement you describe, I think, the scene that
     met you.   A*e you     to say what time that was that you
     got on to the top of the turnstile?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you know, Mr. Woodward, he
     has told us that twice - once in chief and a few minutes
     ago in answer to Mr. Glasgow, he said 2.40-2.45.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:     When you had got up to the top there,                                                                                                  were
     you able to see that there were Police horses out?
     A.    Yes, sir.

Q.   Were there Police                      horses out by the perimeter gates, by the
     blue gates?   A.                        Yes, they were outside the perimeter
     gates.

Q. Were they in a sort of line?   A.  I didn't notice initially
   but later they were joined by further mounted Officers
   and I certainly  later saw - this was within a few minutes
   because I was only up there ten minutes, perhaps, on the
   tu rns til es .

Q.   There were a    number of them out there? A.    There were
     quite alarge number    of mounted Officers andI did   see
     that at one stage they had formed a definite line outside
     the blue gates.

Q.   At that   time had you seen Gate A or Gate B or Gate                                                                                                C
     opened?     A.   No, I hadn't.

Q. And at that time did you see how far the crowd extended
   beyond those line of Police horses?   A.  Yes, indeed.
   At one stage - the busiest stage - the crowd extended
   all the way across Leppings Lane.   I didnTt have a view
   too far to my left because there are trees near to the
   bridge but the roadway was completely filled to the left.

Q. Right across the carriageway?   A.   Yes, and to the right
   I could see possibly 50 yards along Leppings Lane and the
   whole road seemed to be filled.

Q. Did you happen to notice where Mr. marshall was at that
   time?   A.   Yes, certainly.    When I first climbed up
   on to the roof of the turnstiles Mr. Marshall was        On the
   end of the bridge th(9re is a stone structure which really
   is the end of the bridge - he was sort of half climbed on
   top of that, so he was standing out above the crowd.




                 v'.,   . .   .   ______ ....   1.        , ■,_________________________ .___—   . .. .......        ^ __ ..   ................   — ...       iih:
^0   •

                                       77



                                                         J.    J.   BENNETT


         Q. Did the mounted Officers as you saw them at that time
            appear to be holding the line?   Was there any gap on
            the ground side of them?   A.   After the line of mounted
            Officers had been formed for a short time, in fact,
            there Was a space of several feet between t h e h o r s e s and
            the perimeter gates.   For a short time they seemed to
            have succeeded in holding the pressure back from the
            people who were already in the enclosures to the turnstiles

         Q. Did you see that line then broken by the crowd?   A.   Yes.
            It wasn't clear to me how that had happened but that the
            line of mounted Officers was completely overwhelmed and the
            space that had occurred just for a few moments was, in
            fact, filled very quickly.

         Q. Of course, that brought more pressure on to the people
            waiting to go through the turnstiles.   A.   The pressure
            then went straight to the people immediately inside the
            perimeter gates which was relayed obviously towards the
            tu rns til es .

         Q. That brought a great surge upon them?   A.    I wouldn't
            say a surge, but certainly additional pressure.

                              SERGEANT STEPHEN PAYNE, called

                                Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

         Q. Sergeant Stephen Payne,     is that right?        A.    Yes, sir.

         Q. Mr.   Payne,   you were in charge of serial 16?         A.   Yes, sir

         Q. And you were to be responsible in the build-up to the match
            for searching peoplecutside Turnstiles A-G.   A.  That is
            correct, sir, yes.

         Q. And I think you paired your serial off and stood them
            one to each pair of turnstiles.   A.   Yes, there are
            four actual openings, three pairs of two and one single
            turnstile and I used eight Officers, two to each opening
            plus two Officers to pair up with myself and Inspector
            Purdy.

         Q. You were paired,     I think,   with Police Constable Duffy.
            A.   Yes, sir.

         Q. Was it your intention that your serial should remain in
            those positions right up until 3 o'clock?    A.  Yes, sir.

         Q. In the early stages doubtless they would be able to search
            everyone going in?   A.   Yes, the turnstiles were due to
            open at 12 a.m. —  I am sorry, 12 mid-day.  One or two
            actually opened earlier at about 11.30 and from that time
            there was just a trickle of people coming in and for an
            hour or a couple of hours, just a gentle stream.
                                         S.   PAYNE


From what stage did they have to be selective?
A.   I left the area at about twenty to two and up to
that time I would say the majority of people had been
searched.

Can I deal with your leaving the area?   I think two
people were arrested going through those turnstiles.
A.  That's right, sir, yes.

One male   and one female.   A.   Yes.

For trying to take alcohol into the ground?   A.   I
think the female was afested for that and I arrested the
male for obstructing Police Officers.

Was it a female Officer who arrested thefemale?
A.   Yes, sir.

That is Police Constable Huckstepp? A.    Yes.

Can we just deal briefly with what you have to do when
you arrest someone.   You take them, do you, to the Detention
Room, which is under the North Stand?   A.   Yes.

Does that have to be done by the arresting Officer?
A.   Escort could be done by other Officers but the
arresting Officer has to attend in order to give the
circumstances of the arrest to the Custody Sergeant.

I am just wondering whether it was necessary for you
as the Sergeant to leave your position and go? A.    Yes^

Because you had inade the arrest?  A.  Because I had made
the arrest and it was down to me to explain the circumstances
of the arrest to the Custody Sergeant who would decide
whether to accept the charge or not.

There is obviously some paperwork to be filled in when
someone gets to the Detention Room.   A.   Yes.

Did you discover on this occasion that there was no
other person there to look after arrested females?
A.   That's right, sir, yes.

And so you lost your Police Constable Huckstepp on, in
effect, warder duties.   A.   Yes.

She had to stay with the person she arrested,     A.    That's
right, sir, yes.

Did you return to your serial at all prior to the kick-off?
A.   No, I didn't get chance.

What were you doing for that hour and twenty minutes?
A.   For the first 20 minutes, that was the time taken to
process my prisoner who, I believe, was booked in first.
Some minutes after that was taken in dealing with the
a

                                79


                                                S.   PAYNE



         booking in of the female prisoner and then the paperwork
         which has to be done there and then in the gym.   A short
         file has to be prepared and I ended up having to do my
         file and the Policewoman's file in view of the fact that
         she had been taken away from her -- for warder duties.

    Q. The amount of time that you were away from your position,
       an hour and twenty minutes, is that normal or excessive?
       A.   It would be excessive in the circumstances of my own
       arrest but it was not excessive bearing in mind that I
       had two files to complete and bearing in mind the time
       taken to book prisoners in who were being awkward.

    Q. When you talk of completing a file, does that involve much
       more than you simply making out a statement and a very short
       report?   A.   There is a summons report or charge report
       which gives details of the charge, a statement and another
       form, leave and that sort of thing.

    Q. Whilst you were in the Detention Room, presumably it is
       reasonable quiet in that room itself?   A.   Depends on the
       circumstances.   At that moment in time I believe we had
       to wait a few minutes for another prisoner to be booked
       in in front of us.

    Q.    I am really interested in the period between half two
         and 3 o'clock when you were in the Detention Room itself,
         were you?    A.   No.

    Q.   Where were you then?   A.   I    was in the gymnasium.

    Q.    Was it fairly quiet in there, compared with outside or in
         the ground?   A.    Yes.    I mean, there were probably a
         couple of dozen Officers in there.

    Q. Did you have your radio on during that period?        A.   Yes.

    Q. And it was on talk-through?       A.   Yes.

    Q. Were you able to hear messages with comparative ease?
       A.   Comparable with outside, yes, because it was relatively
       quiet in the gym so I could hear the messages.

    Q. So you heard, did you, messages to the effect that people
       were being crushed and injured, that crowds were out of
       control and that the Police were over-whelmed?   A.   Yes.
       I cannot remember the exact words but that would sum up the
       messages from around quarter to three.

    Q. Did you appreciate that those messages related to the
       Leppings Lane end?   A.   Not at first.   They were ---
       albeit I could hear the radio with relative ease, the
       messages were coming over with very loud background noise,
       crowd noise, some static.

    Q. At what stage did you appreciate that these problems were
       where your serial was stationed?   A.  probably around
       five to three that I realised that it was at the Leppings
                          80



                                                 S.   PAYNE


   Lane end when I heard a shout or a message to the effect,
   "Open the gates".

Q. Was it not   possible for   you, in view   of the urgency of
   the situation then,   to return to your serial?   A.  It
   would have been possible but at the same time I was aware
   that from those same messages other Officers had been
   requested and one man would not have made a lot of difference.
   The serial I left behind were all experienced Officers
   who were competent in dealing with the duties they had
   got.

Q. The reality of the situation is that throughout the build­
   up of these o problems where they were right in the thick of
   it, their immediate senior Officer was elsewhere.     A.   I
   am the supervisory Officer as Sergeant for tltert team of
   ten men.    When I left the Inspector or the Inspectors in
   that area would automatically, I believe, take on the --
   alrfeady be doing another supervisory function.

Q. So your next involvement was when you heard the general
   call after   kick-off for all Officers    to go to the Leppings
   Lane end?     A.   To the pitch, yes. If I may say,   it is
   always one of the dilemmas of policing football matches
   as to when you arrest and when you do not arrest and
   bearing in mind that arrests do deplete manpower and
   my and the Policewoman's arrests were the first on that
   gate at twenty to two.




                                  /Well,   if you are right   ...
                                              S. PAYNE



If you are right, on that day, deplete Police manpower
for considerable periods of time as well? - A. In my
specific circumstances, yes.   In the case of one
prisoner, probably half that time.   I would say half an
hour to forty-five minutes would be the norm, bearing in
mind time taken to book in.   It could even be longer
than that, depending how many prisoners are waiting to be
booked in.   You have to queue up.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you very much,
Sergeant.

      MR. PHILLIPS:    Police Constable Duffy, please.

                 GRAHAM DUFFY C a l l e d :

              Examined by MR. P H I L L I P S :

You are Police Constable Graham Duffy? - A. Yes,         sir.

You were on Serial 16 under Sergeant Payne, who has just
given evidence? - A. That is right, sir.

Your task was to be concerned with entrances A to G? - A.
Yes, sir.

Were you aware that your duties involved maintaining
order and ensuring that orderly queues were formed? - A.
Yes, sir.

Had you been given any specific directions as to how you
were to carry this out? - A. We were searching people as
they came to the turnstiles for offensive weapons, tins
of alcohol etc.

Were you asked to consider whether the people turning up
at the turnstiles had tickets? - A. I was approached on
several occasions by people who had not got tickets and
who were told to leave the area.

When you started duty I think you found things going
reasonably well until sometime after two o'clock, is that
right? - A. That's right, sir.

Then you started to get queues forming at the turnstiles?
- A. The crowd started to build up rather steadily from
what it had been prior to that, sir.

Were you able to keep these people in queues at this
time? - A. At that stage people form their own queues.
People will only queue if they wish to.   There is very
little you can do to actually form a queue out of people
who do not wish to form t h e m . . .
%
                               82




                                              G. DUFFY



    Q. Were you able to continue searching from 2.15 onwards? -
       A. It became more selective then, sir.

    Q. Did you get many people who had not got tickets, or who
       had got the wrong tickets? - A. There were quite a number
       who had not got tickets at all.    In fact, on one
       occasion I was approached by one gentleman who asked
       where the ticket office was.    I think if he had an
       interest in football he would have known that tickets
       were not on sale.   Persons were actually coming to the
       turnstiles, in my own opinion, to see exactly what the
       Police operation was there.

    Q. At this time were you able to remove these people from
       the queues waiting to go into the turnstiles? - A. Well,
       we just turned them away.   None of them argued, they did
       go away, sir, and left our immediate area.

    Q. Were they able to move back through the crowd towards
       Leppings Lane? - A. They were directed away and they made
       their way away.   At that time you are relating to the
       crowd was not so bad that they could not get back.

    Q. What happened then? - A. At about 2.30 the crowd did
       build-up quite considerably.

    Q. Do you regard 2.30 as being the time then when things
       became... - A. Two-thirty and just beyond that time.

    Q. Did you see any particular instances of difficulty within
       the crowd? - A. Yes.   People started to be crushed
       against the funnel, what I think is referred to as the
       funnel barrier, which was to my left as I was looking
       away from the turnstiles.

    Q. Against which turnstile were you stationed? - A.   I had
       got my back to the turnstiles at this time, sir,   and I
       had got my back to the wall which was separating   two
       turnstile entrances.   The exact one I could not   tell
       you, sir.

    Q. Were they the turnstiles nearest to the river or nearest
       to the middle of the ground? - A. There were two
       turnstile entrances immediately to my left looking away
       from the entrances towards Leppings Lane.

    Q. There were two more to your left? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You would be about the middle of those turnstiles then? -
       A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You were originally with Sergeant Payne? - A. Yes, sir, I
       was.
                                 \
3'
                                83




                                                  G. DUFFY


     Q. However, he had gone off with somebody he had arrested? -
        A. That is right, sir.

     Q. Was there any other Officer with you from then on? - A.
        The only Officer I was aware of being with was PC Evans.

     Q. Where was he?   Was he on the same set of turnstiles as
        you? - A. He was just to my right.

     Q. Did you or any of the other Constables have a radio? - A.
        No, sir.

     Q. Who had the radio? - A. Sergeant Payne,    sir.

     Q. Did you find things change as time went on from 2.30? -
        A. At about twenty to three from being a manageable
        crush, it became unmanageable, where we were actually
        being pushed back and we were not able to make any room
        to manoeuvre.

     Q. By this time, of course, you would not be able to carry
        out any searches? - A. That is right, sir.   We had
        abandoned searches at that stage.

     Q. What were you doing in fact, having abandoned searches? -
        A. Trying to make sure people got through the turnstiles
        without being injured.   Trying to make sure they got
        through reasonably quickly to try and relieve the crush.

     Q. The turnstile you were next to, was that working
        efficiently or not? - A. It seemed to be working
        reasonably well, but the crowd was so great that we were
        fighting a losing battle.   We could not get the people
        through quickly enough.

     Q. Did you then see Inspector Purdy? - A. I did,     sir, yes,
        to my left looking towards Leppings Lane.

     Q. Did he tell you to leave the area? - A. A short time
        before that I had in fact fallen on the floor in the
        crowd and I was picked up by spectators.   I would like
        to thank them now because I do not know who they are, but
        they did pick me up and prevented me from being injured.
        I think after Inspector Purdy had seen this he did
        realise we were having a problem and required us to come
        out.
     Q. How did you get out? - A. I was actually pushed through a
        turnstile and over the top of that.   I did not climb
        over, I was pushed over it.

     Q. Where did you go to when you went through the turnstile?
        - A. I got into the area at the back of the turnstiles
        and went back out through gate C and then went to the
                           84



                                          G. DUFFY


  other side of the funnel barrier to assist people who
  were being crushed out of there into the space we had
  behind that crush barrier.

Q. How many people did you help out of the crowd then? - A.
   Three or four underneath the barrier and then one small
   boy who was passed over hands from the centre of the
   crowd and back over the barrier to where he had some
   space to recover.

Q. These were people who were affected by the crush? - A.
   They were, sir, yes.

Q. What about the rest of the crowd that was in that area at
   this time?   How was it behaving? - A. The people in that
   area were reasonably well behaved.   It was the people
   behind them who were pushing and causing the people in
   this area to be crushed and then they were starting to
   panic.

Q. Who was starting to panic? - A. The people at the front
   of the queue.   They were becoming crushed.    Obviously
   they got to a stage where they began to panic because of
   it - the crush that was being exerted on them.

Q. Did you hear them, or any of the crowd, shouting for
   anything to be done with the gates? - A. Yes, sir.   They
   were pleading with us to open the gates to relieve the
   pressure.

Q. Which part of the crowd was that?   That at the front or
   that at the back? - A. The people who were at the front
   who were being crushed.

Q. I think you saw the exit gate open on the first occasion,
   is that right, for a short time? - A. I think the
   occasion I saw it it was the second occasion.    I cannot
   remember the first occasion it was opened.    I think I
   was busy at the crash barrier, although I was aware it
   had been opened, but that was only later.

Q. This was gate C, was it? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Did the crowd get through that?   How did it go through?
   - A. Is this on the second occasion?

Q. Well, the occasion that you saw it. - A. On the occasion
   I saw it a large number of people - it was somewhere
   between a run and walk.

Q. Did those people who had been in front of turnstiles A to
   G manage to get through that gate? - A. These people who
   went through the gate had come from around the side from
   the river side of the funnel barrier.
                                           G. DUFFY


These people had been effectively behind the ones waiting
at the turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes, I would imagine so.

After they went through, were those people who had been
in front of A to G able to get   through those gates? - A.
It did relieve the crush to an   extent, sir, yes.

Did you form any view about the particular part of the
crowd that was pushing on to those behind the section you
were concerned with? - A. They   were of a different
demeanour than those I had seen at the front.     They were
more rowdy.   A lot of them had obviously been drinking.

Did you form any view as to their intentions? - A. It is
my opinion that there was a concerted effort by people at
the back of the crowd to cause some sort of a disruption,
to facilitate their entrance into the ground other than
by a ticket.

How did you come to that conclusion? - A. It is my own
opinion, sir.   I have heard of this happening at other
football grounds and this seemed to be exactly what
happened.   The crush came too quickly.   It was not just
a build-up, it was a concerted effort that created the
extreme crush at the front of those turnstiles.

Had you experienced this kind of thing before yourself? -
A. I have not experienced it personally, no.

Had you had experience of policing at Hillsborough
before? - A. Yes, sir.

But this sort of thing had not happened before? - A. No,
sir.

      MR. PHILLIPS:    Yes,   thank you.

              Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Just one question, Officer.      You had no radio? - A. No,
I did not.

If you had had a radio you would have been in a position
to communicate that which you obviously were aware of,
the distress of the people around you in the crush? - A.
I would have liked to have had a radio, yes.

You would have liked to have made a communication earlier
than before Inspector Purdy arrived on the scene? - A.
Yes, sir.
                                             G. DUFFY



            Cross-Examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

Just one   matter.   At   your briefing, who actually       gave
you your   instructions   as to that which you shou|d do at
the turnstiles? - A. I    believe it was Inspector Purdy and
then we had a further     one from Inspector Sykes.

Were you   at either of those briefings told that part of
your duty was to maintain an orderly queue outside? - A.
Yes, sir.

What did you understand that to mean? - A. You can only
go as far as to direct people where to go.   I always
take it as that.   You give them directions and they take
it from there.

If you look at the funnel outside the turnstiles A to G,
do I understand that the Officers were quite properly at
the turnstiles searching people, both inside and out?
Your serial and also Serial 14? - A. I cannot speak for
those inside, sir, because I could not see them, but
certainly ours were, yes.

You were searching outside? - A. Yes.

Does it not mean that between there and the end of the
funnel bars as they are called, there would be only the
fans to organise themselves into queues? - A. Yes, sir.

Would it not mean that as soon as that area become full,
some time around 2.15, any possibility of an orderly
queue would have gone forever? - A. I think as I said
earlier on, sir, people will only queue if they want to
queue.   If they do not want to queue there is nothing I
or any number of Officers could have done to stop the
situation that developed.

That may well be true of certain situations, but I am
concerned only with this particular situation.   Whatever
the people in that funnel had in mind, because of their
very numbers it would have been impossible to form seven
or eight queues? - A. Yes, sir, it would.   I see your
point.

That would mean that through no-one's fault at all, from
quarter past two onwards, the flow through the turnstiles
would have been materially slow? - A. Yes, that is right.

      MR. JACKSON:     Thank you.

           Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :
                                        G. DUFFY


You have policed a number of football games, have you? -
A. Yes, sir.

Were you there in 1988? - A. No, sir.

Have you been to any of the semi-finals? - A. Yes, sir.

Would it be right you have also policed, apart from the
generality of football games, games where there have been
capacity crowds? - A. Yes, sir.

On this occasion, 1989, when you were given your briefing
did you have any doubts as to whether or not you could
do, whether or not you could follow the usual practice,
and follow what you had been asked to do in the briefing?
- A. No, sir.




          Q. The briefing talks
                                               G. DUFFY



The briefing talks of maintain order and ensure that
orderly queues are formed? - A. Yes.

And you interpreted that according to the practice, did you?
What did you understand by that? - A. Just to ensure that
people went through the turnstiles in an orderly manner.

And they took their turn? - A. Yes, sir.

And   how did you expect to go about to see that occurred? - A.
You   can only advise them, but if they d o n ’t wish to listen to
the   advice, once the crowd has built up there is very little
you   can do.  They will only queue by consent.

And of course, the question of the number of Police Officers
there may become oppressive, but in the past when you have
been on that sort - have you done this sort of duty before? -
A. Yes, sir.

On the previous occasions when you have done that sort of duty
had you encountered any difficulty in ensuring that people
took their turn? - A. No, people are very responsible because
they realise in the main that it is for their own safety.

In 1989 you describe the experience of being at your post
between particular turnstiles.  Were other Officers similarly
arranged in front of the turnstiles doing what you were doing?
- A. Yes, sir.

Did the system seem to be working? - A. It did, sir, until
round about 2.30 and beyond.

At 2.30 you talk of some sort of change occurring.  You spoke
in your evidence a few moments ago of the situation from being
manageable to becoming unmanageable? - A. Yes, sir.

Did that happen fairly quickly? - A. It did, sir, yes.

Was it anything like any previous experience you had had? - A.
Not, it was not, sir.

Had you any forewarning of that being about to occur? - A.
Other than seeing a build up of the crowd in front of me.  I
never expected the crush that was to come.

Of course, there can be quite a lot of people, and
nevertheless they will be reasonably ordered and co-operative?
- A. Yes, sir.

The element of drink has been mentioned amongst a number of
fans.  Did you notice any increase in the alcoholic level
amongst the fans during that afternoon? - A. Certainly those
that I saw come from the back of the funnel barrier, a lot of
the ones that came later on had been drinking to varying
degrees.
                                              G. DUFFY


Of course, those people who were at the front waiting to take
their turn would have little control over what happened behind
them, but the further one gets to the back one gets to people
who must have been pushing and thrusting on? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

Had you noticed during that afternoon any particular number of
people turning up without tickets at the turnstiles? - A. Yes,
sir.

What was happening to them when they got to the turnstile? -
A. They were coming and asking us whether they could get
tickets, and we were turning them away, because at the early
point we were stood some distance, in yards anyway, from the
actual entrance to the turnstiles.

So the picture one should have is not of an Officer being
right up at the gate at the beginning but some yards ;away
from it? - A. Yes, sir.

Directing people to take their turn? - A. Yes, sir.

Searching them, and the crowd co-operating? - A. Yes.

You describe having an impression of some organised endeavour
to frustrate the Police's policing.  Do you have any doubt
about that? - A. It is a personal opinion, but no, I have no
doubt at all, sir.

What in particular causes you to have that view? - A. It was
the increase of crowd pressure.  It went from being virtually
nil to being able to create some room in front of where I was
working, to not being able to move at all.

Would it take very much for that situation to be brought
about by a few determined people? - A. No, the        pressure was
so great I couldn't move at all.      I was pinned against a
w a l l . I could not move a foot forward.

You have heard of such a stratagem in relation to other ga m e s ,
have you, other matches? - A. Yes, sir, I have.

When did you first hear of that? - A. I have heard it in
general when we have been talking about football and the
policing of football matches.

That there are some people who have a deliberate intention to
embarrass the Police to yield or to open gates? - A. I think a
lot of them come late who have not got tickets, hoping that
such a situation that happened at Hillsborough would occur.

And opportunists seize upon the chance? - A. Yes.

                 Re-Examined bv MR. COLLINS:

Your view arose because between about half-past-2 and about
20-to-3, in those sort of 10 minutes, the pressure got worse
                                            G. DUFFY


and worse until eventually you were effectively crushed
against the wall? - A. Yes.

So it was a gradual build up over a period of about 10 to 15
minutes, was not it? - A. It built up gradually to a point,
but then it increased in a matter of moments from being
manageable as I said before, to being unmanageable.

There is always going to be that threshold, is not there, at a
particular moment in time when you have got a build up? - A.
Yes, sir.  At one point we were being assisted by a Police
horse, and in that matter of minutes or moments in fact, the
Police horse became ineffective as well.  That is the moment
I referring to, the Police horse became ineffective, and we
were pinned up against the front of the turnstile wall.

I am not saying you are right and I am not saying you are
wrong about your impression, but it is simply your theory? -
A. Yes, sir.

             POLICE CONSTABLE D. EVANS Called

                 Examined bv MR. COLLINS:

Mr. Evans, another Serial 16? - A. That is right, sir.

I think you are very familiar with policing Hillsborough, but
you had not actually done that particular duty before.   Is
that correct? - A. Yes, sir.

Your position was outside D and E.   Is that correct? - A. That
is correct, sir, yes.

And in the initial stages after the gates opened all was
relatively straightforward and friendly.  Is that right? - A.
The perimeter gates?

No, I mean where you were positioned? - A. When the crowds
first came in?

Yes. - A. Yes, it was all right.

When the fans first started to arrive? - A. Yes.

And it was your duties as I understand it to search
effectively to ensure there was not alcohol or offensive
weapons or whatever? - A. That is correct, sir.

Did you also ask about tickets? - A. It became apparent that
some people were coming through, getting past me, as it were,
and going into the turnstiles without tickets and causing the
turnstiles to in fact stop.  So after that occurred I decided
to ask them, because I did not want them to block the
turnstiles up.

This was with a view to turning away those who did not have
tickets? - A. Yes.
                                              D. EVANS


Did you in fact see anyone go through a turnstile without
paying or without a ticket, rather, or try to go through a
turnstile without a ticket? - A. I saw certainly three or four
people who attempted to go through in the initial stages
without paying, and I turned them away.

I think you helped Police Sergeant Payne at about 1.40 with
his arrest? - A . That is correct. I escorted the gentleman
to the Police room and then returned.

But you returned to your post? - A . That is correct, y e s .

And we know that the situation really gradually got worse
towards about half-past-2.   Is that right? - A. My
recollections were that I was working with Police Constable
Yates.  He was, I think, on the other side of turnstile D and
I was on turnstile E. He mentioned to me he was going to the
Police room with another prisoner together with another
Officer whom I did not know.   That was about 2.25. Up to that
time things were manageable at that time.

The way you put that, by then even it was beginning to get a
bit difficult? - A. Oh, yes, it was certainly getting
difficult.

By then was that simply because there were more and more
people, or was there a change in attitude at all? - A. Not
really a change in attitude, sir.  It was more the mass of
people that actually were there.

By now your serial was somewhat depleted?    - A. Yes, sir.

How many of you were left outside A-G by then? - A. I could
not see into turnstiles A, B and C.  I was aware there were
not Police Officers there.  I was aware that Police Constable
Duffy was to my left-hand side, and that was it.

Effectively out of 8 there were only about 4 or 5 left? - A.
If that is correct, yes, sir.

Were you aware of Inspector Purdy at about this stage or
shortly afterwards? - A. Mr. Purdy asked me about my welfare
on three occasions.  He was stood on the metal crash barrier
that is adjacent to turnstile G.

So by now, what are we talking about, when the crush had got
such that you were in potential difficulties? - A. I would
certainly say just after half-past.

What had happened to you? Where had you been? - A. I was
still conscious of the fact of spectators going into the
turnstiles and clogging the turnstiles up, so I stood between
turnstiles D and E. There is a piece of wood that runs from
floor to ceiling, and I stood in front of that piece of wood
and put my arms out against the entry to sort of monitor the
people going through, not letting people through without
tickets.  If there were small areas, and I must say small
                                              D. EVANS


areas at the side of the turnstiles which would accommodate
only two to three people, if they had not got tickets I was
not letting them through.

How long were you able to keep this up? - A. A very few
minutes.  The mounted Officer came up and said "Get out of the
way", because he was concerned, I feel, for my safety.

So did you try to get out? - A. There was a very small sterile
area between turnstiles E and F, and I stood there, and there
joined P.C. Duffy.      We did attempt to get out.  There was a
mounted Officer some 3 to 4 yards in front of us.      As his
horse was backing away it was leaving a wake so we tried to
get out that way.      At that time I didn't realise how deep the
crowd was, and we attempted to get out that way.       Police
Constable Duffy fell to the floor and he got back to his feet.
I said, "We can't go out that way.      There is just no way we
can get out that way.      The horse can't get us out.  We can't
get out that w a y " .

So the decision was made, was it, to try to get out by going
through the turnstiles? - A. P.C. Duffy initially suggested
going through the crowd that was basically outside turnstiles
F-G out on to the side near to the river, but I said that was
virtually impossible;  we just could not get through.  We were
well penned in.

Of course, if you were in that state, everyone around you was
also in the same position and no doubt beginning to get
worried and upset? - A. At that stage they were worried but
they were having a joke, if you can understand, with myself,
because at that time sweat was absolutely pouring out of me.
It was coming down my face from my helmet.  I was extremely
warm.

So there was no hostility? - A. No hostility towards us at
all, sir.

Did that remain the case before you managed to get out of it,
or did it remain good humoured so far as you were concerned? -
A. As far as I was concerned I can only speak about the people
who were around me, and that would possibly number only 10 to
15, and they were all right.  There was no problem.

Eventually I think P.C. Duffy managed to get through? - A.
Yes, sir.

But you were not so lucky initially? - A. No, sir.

And you got stuck against the same wall by E and F? - A. Yes,
sir.  I didn't see P.C. Duffy go through the turnstiles.  I
could not understand how he had got through, and then I was
crushed against the wall and could not move.  I couldn't move
my arms.  I couldn*t move anything at all.

                       /Q. How eventually did you manage
                                  D. EVANS


How eventually did you manage to get in? - A. There was a
couple in front of me and the woman I later found out was
pregnant and the man who was either her husband or father of
the child kept shouting:  "My wife is pregnant, my wife is
pregnant" and that caused a release of pressure because the
people behind him started pushing away, so there I saw I
could help the woman and also get out of the situation, so
I got behind the woman and pushed her through the turnstiles.

And you then managed to get through yourself, I think? - A.
That is right sir, yes.

Did you stay inside for a bit? - A. What happened by that
time I was out of breath and in regaining my breath I heard
an argument within the turnstiles and I think it was
Turnstile E.  I turned round and there was a man in the
turnstile, probably 30/35, who was arguing with the turnstile
operator.  I went up and it was apparent from talking to the
turnstile operator that the man was trying to say that he
had given his ticket in and the turnstile operator was not
letting him through.

He was spinning a yarn about having lost his ticket or having
given it in? - A. That is right sir, yes.

And eventually I think you ejected him? - A. Yes sir, I
very shortly thereafter pulled him out and because he had
been drinking I got the assistance of another Officer to
eject him out of Gate C.

At that stage you could get him out of Gate C. Were there
people outside Gate C? - A. There were people outside Gate C-
sir, yes.

Was it a crush against Gate C at all? - A. No sir, not at
that stage.

What sort of time have we reached now, can you remember? -
A. It is very difficult to say, sir.   I would imagine certainly
gone 20-to, probably up to quarter-to.   I am not really
certain on the time sir.

I think you went back to the turnstiles, that is the inside
of the turnstiles.   You were aware by this time supporters
were coming through in an obviously distressed condition.
Is that right? - A. They were coming through sir. They
were extremely distressed, red in the face, saying that they
were getting crushed out there and people were going to die
if we did not do something.   On looking through the turnstiles
actually D and E, I could see several people being crushed
up against the turnstiles and at one point I could see a
gentleman he had got a child on his shoulders to get him out
of the crush and the child was man handled through the turn­
stile by other Officers.   I think he was a Sergeant who man
handled him through.
                           94

                                     D. EVANS


Q. Did you decide to go out again yourself to see whether you
   could assist outside? - A. Very shortly after that, sir, I
   decided that I had got to get out.  I did not realise what
   the problem was outside.

Q. You went out, did you, by Gate C again? - A. I went out by
   Gate C, yes sir.

Q. Having got out there I think very shortly afterwards you
   were aware of Inspector Purdy, were you not, coining towards
   the gate? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. Did he say something? - A. I was walking out to try and find
   Mr. Purdy because I was aware that Sergeant Payne had been
   detained in the Police Room, so I was walking out to find
   Inspector Purdy and as he was walking towards me through the
   crowd there was certainly a crowd between us when Mr. Purdy
   was shouting that the gates had got to be opened.

Q. Did you say something when he said this? - A. Yes sir, I said
   to him that we could not open the gates because there would
   be trouble inside.

Q. What trouble were you thinking of inside? - A. The amount of
    persons by opening a gate it would allow to enter intOv that
   confined area and we would have trouble, not the trouble that
   did occur, but trouble with the crowd like violence or such
   like.

Q. I see, you weren't specifically thinking of where they would
   go, that is to say where they would eventually go, you were
   concerned with having a crowd in the concourse? - A. I was
   concerned with having a crowd in the concourse and also
   with opening the gates.  In opening the gates you have also
   got to shut the gates and that is what I was concerned with.

Q. You thought once open it would not be possible to shut them?
   - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. In fact did the gate open? - A. It did open, yes sir.

Q. We now know that was because of someone being ejected but
   at the time what did you believe? - A. I believed it was
   because of the order that Inspector Purdy had given.

Q. It was opened for a short period and then was shut again
   with the assistance of a mounted Officer? — A. 20—30 seconds
   it was open sir from between I would think 8-10'.

Q. So it was not fully open? - A. In my opinion, no sir.

Q. Were you aware of the gate being opened subsequently for
   a second time? - A. I was aware that the gate was going
   to be opened, yes sir.

Q. When you say "was going to be", how were you aware it was
                                     D. EVANS


going to be? - A.Mr.   Purdy   said he was going to put the
horses in a position   so as   to filter the crowd through in
a manageable sort of   order   and discipline to go through in
a stream rather than   a big   rush.

That was presumably because although the gate had been
opened on that one occasion which you have described, the
crush still was not alleviated? - A. I did not realise what
the problem was outside at the turnstiles. All I knew was
in the immediate vicinity of the turnstiles.  I had not
seen •••••

Once you were out you could see there was a great crowd of
people? - A. I could see there was a great crowd but that
was not until I moved away.

Were any people, any of the fans waiting in that crowd saying
anything about opening gates? - A. They wanted the gates to
be opened again.  They got their tickets.  They were raising
them in the air and they were saying:  "We have got our
tickets.  We have got our tickets.  Let us in. There is
somebody going to be killed".

When the gate was eventually opened people went through and
we have all seen the video and clearly they went through
in a relatively order fashion and that is your recollection,
is it? - A. Yes sir.

Can you help us as to whether it was your view as to whether
most of those   had tickets or not? - A.I don't know sir,

I think at about this time you were aware of problems at
the perimeter gates.  Is that correct? - A. That is right.

Is this after Gate C had been opened? - A. That is right sir,
yes.
What was happening at the perimeter gates when you went up
to them? - A. My recollection is that the gates were slightly
open as such and people were still coming into that area
that we were trying to clear.

Was there anything to stop them coming in if the gates were
slightly open? - A. There were mounted Officers and other
foot Officers at the gates.

Yes, but were  they blocking the way in or was there a gap
through which  people were coming? - A. I think it was more
they were blocking but there were certainly gaps where
people were coming through.

Anyway what did you do to assist, if anything? — A. I told
Mr. Purdy that I was going to go up and try and stop the
people ccamlng into that particular area and in doing so
I walked past the crush to the turnstiles which was still
                          96

                                     D. EVANS


  there probably 20 people deep, something like that.  I walked
  past that and tried to stop the people coming through but
  obviously I spoke to the mounted Officers and they said they
  were monitoring it, then I turned back to go back to the
  crush.

Q. So you did not take any direct part in the line as it were
   at the perimeter gates? - A. No sir.

Q. But did it appear when you went up to be holding reasonably
   or subject to this gap you have told us about? — A. Yes,
   fromny position it was only a few seconds glimpse.  It did
   appear to be holding at that time.

Q. I think you were aware at about this stage too when you
   turned round and Inspector Bennett as we now know it to be
   on the roof of the turnstiles? - A. That is right.

Q. Because you had got over to that side had you by now? -
   A. No, I was behind the actual people that were being
   crushed as such in the sort of gap that was left. There
   is like a wall ....

Q. The wall the Usher is pointing to? - A. That is right, there
   is a wall which is a metal wall where the people were climbing
   over from the other side of the turnstiles on the opposite
   side of the wall into our side.

Q. Did you try to do anything about that? - A. I tried to stop
   them, sir, but a Policewoman said to me that there was an
   Inspector on top of the turnstiles allowing them to do that.

Q. I think you were aware at some stage of   another of the
   gates being opened.  Is that correct? -   A. I could hear
   another gate opened which was obviously   Gate B.  I could
   hear it because I could not just see it   as it was out of
   my vision.

Q. Do you know how long Gate B was open? - A. No sir, I don't.

Q. I think shortly thereafter the crowd cleared away and then
   you were aware of the message summoning all Officers to
   the pitch? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. I think you then went to the pitch initially.    Is that
   correct? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. Having got to the pitch, having been asked to form a line
   by Inspector Purdy did you in fact go elsewhere? - A. That
   is right sir, yes.

Q. What led you to going elsewhere? - A. A uniformed Sergeant
   asked me to go round with the back of his Serial to the
   back of the terraces to pull the people away from the back
   of the terraces.
                                   D. EVANS


Do you know who that Sergeant was? - A. I think it is
Sergeant Morgan.

Is that Sergeant Morgan at the back there with the beard?
- A. Yes sir.

You joined   him, did you? - A.Yes.

And when you got to the back, that isthe tunnelpresumably,
the central tunnel at the back.  Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

When you went down that tunnel what was the position.   I
mean were there other Police Officers ahead of you or was
your lot, as it were, the first into the tunnel? - A. I
can only speak for the Officers I was running with.   They
all ran down the tunnel first in front of me.  I was not
aware of any other Officers joining us but they may well
have done.

Was anyone   else in the tunnelwhen you first   went   in? -
A. Nobody.No supporters, nobody.

You remember when you got there, you may not have noticed,
whether the turnstiles were still open? - A. The turnstiles?

Yes, when you had come running round to go down the back
of the tunnel had the turnstiles been closed by then? - A.
I can't say.

Were there any fans, as far as you can recall, in the tunnel
when you went down? - A. Not that I can recall sir, no.

It follows that there were no injured people in the tunnel
itself? - A. As far as I could see sir, no.

When you got to the other end of the tunnel, that is the
ground side, what did you do? - A. As I said I was probably
the last of the Officers accompanying the Sergeant there
and the other Officers went down actually on to the terraces.
If stopped at the mouth leading on to the terraces to pull
the people away because the order was to get the people off
the terraces, so I stopped there and I assumed they were
going to be staggered down to pull people back.

Did you have any difficulty in persuading people to leave?
- A. The people that were distressed as such initially
came out under my instructions and I told them to go to
the end of the tunnel.  Towards a few seconds into it,
minutes into it, I had to pull the people away from the
terraces and tell them to go down to the end of the tunnel
and wait there.

Why did they not want to come, did they tell you? - A.No
sir.  I think the inference was that the football match
may well have been started but nobody said:  "We are going
to stop and watch the football match",nobody said anything.
                                     D. EVANS


Q. Was the match still going on then? - A; No sir.

Q. You mean it might have restarted? - A. That is what they
   were thinking at that time.

Q. Were you aware when you were at the back of the terracing
   of what the true position was down the front? - A. No sir.

Q. Did it appear to you or did you gain any impression as to
   whether those, the fans at the back were really aware of
   what was happening down the front? - A. X can only speak of
   the fans that were in the mouth of that entrance and I don't
   think they initially were.

Q. I think in fact it was not until a later stage that you
   realised that people had been killed? - A. That is right
   sir, yes.

Q. The only other thing I would like to ask you is this: when
   you were in the crowd and I am going back to outside the
   turnstiles now, were you aware of alcohol? - A. In checking
   people if you searched them correctly face to face and
   started at the bottom and work up or work from the head down
   you can smell their breath.  Initially when the gates was
   opened there was not a very pronounced smell of alcohol
   on the breath, they were more sort of families, men/women,
   no problem.  Later on it became apparent through my searching
   of people that they had been drinking.

Q. Was there anyone that you searched who had been drinking to
   such an extent that you would have considered him drunk
   enough to exclude? - A. Not in my opinion sir, no.

Q. Did you at any stage see anyone in that state? - A. There
   was one man who came up to the turnstiles and was stopped
   by Woman Police Constable Huckstepp who was extremely
   extremely drunk.

Q. Subject to that one person was there anyone else in the
   condition that I have described at any stage that you
   can recall? - A. Not that I can recall sir, no.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Evans, from your statement I understand that you have
   policed Hillsborough since the days when the Premier Teams
   were there in 19J4? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. May I ask you about a new matter. We understand that
   publicity was circulated asking people to arrive between
   10.30 and 2. We have seen letters from various Chief
   Constables about it and we understand there were statements
   made over the radio in Liverpool and in Nottingham.

          Using you as a typical example, what would you expect
                                  D. EVANS


the position to be if four young men arrive in Sheffield at
about 1 o'clock; travel two or three hours over the Pennines
a warm day, where would you expect them to go? - A. To the
public sir.




               /Cross-Examined by 6®. GIBSON-W&TT
                                             D.    EVANS


            Cross-examined by MR.   GIBSON-WATT:

Very briefly, Officer.  You have been a Police Officer
for about 15 years, I understand?   A.  16, sir, yes.

In that time you have policed 100football matches? or          more?
A.  That is correct, sir, yes.

And I think on one occasion at a match in Bramall Lane
you had experienced a gate being broken down?   A.  Yes,
sir.

But apart from that you have never in your experience
known of a gate being opened by Police to admit fans in
this way.   A.   That is correct, yes.

              Cross-examined by MR.   GLASGOW:

Officer, just one matter on your previous experience.    I
think you say that you have policed almost every area of
the Hillsborough ground over your years?   A.   That is
correct.

Can you recall whether you have ever personally been
involved in the policing of the terraces, particularly
the West end terrace?    A.   Many years ago, sir,
because from 1973-1974 I was at Attercliffe Division
which we were sort   of summoned to go there possibly
every other Saturday.

Can you remember whether you had ever done that job
after the radial fences were put in to separate the --- ?
A.   No, sir, the majority of the time since that has
occurred I have worked at the Spion Kop end.

     MR. GLASGOW:   I will not waste your time,      then.
Thank you very much for trying.

              Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Officer, of the many games you have policed, have you
policed other games at the Leppings Lane end?    A. Yes,
I have, sir, yes.

Have you policed capacity crowds?     A.   I have,    sir, yes.

The method of policing that was being practised by you
and your serial on the day in 1989 when this tragedy occurred,
was that in accordance with your ordinary standard method of
working?   A.   That is correct, yes, sir.

Which had proved in the past to be successful?       A.      Yes,
£ >£2-   *
                                           101




                                     P.C. ANDREW BEST, called

                                    Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

             Q. Police Constable Andrew Best?        A.        That's right, sir,
                yes.

             Q. Also on Serial 16 outside Turnstiles A-G?                A.    That's
                right, sir, yes.

             Q. I think you were on turnstile G.          A.      Yes, sir,     the one
                nearest to the barrier.

             Q. With Police Constable Huckstepp.          A.      Yes, sir.

             Q. There are two Police Constables Huckstepp - is this the
                lady?   A.   That is the lady,yes, sir.

             Q.   Wehave heard that you lost her company at          about twenty to
                  two that afternoon.  A.   Yes, sir.

             Q.   Up   until then had you had any particular problems?
                  A.     No, sir, none at all.

             Q. During the time that you were at those turnstiles on that
                day, did you have people coming up without tickets at all?
                A.   Yes , s i r .

             Q. Can you give us any idea of the numbers?            A.        Not really,
                sir, no.   At least half a dozen ---

             Q. Was it every so often or on a fairly regular basis?
                A.   Every so often.  Every so often some would come up
                and try to either pay at the turnstile or ask if they
                could buy a ticket somewhere else.

             Q. What did you do with those people?   A.   Told them there
                were no tickets on sale, it was an all-ticket match and if
                they hadn't got a ticket they could not get in.

             Q. Were you also conscious that there were Liverpool supporters
                coming to the turnstiles with Kop tickets?   A.  Yes, sir.

             Q. What was the policy concerning those?   A.   Initially,
                when the crowds outside were low, manageable, the people
                on the turnstiles allowed them through, even though their
                ticket was for the Kop end.   They were obviously people
                from the Nottingham area who supported Liverpool and wanted
                to stand with the Liverpool supporters and not with the
                Nottingham Forest supporters.

             Q. Were you aware whether the turnstile operators were doing
                that on their own initiative or on instructions?
                A.     It was certainly decisions made by them andnot by
                us•   The stewards were there behind them and aware.
                Whether they were ordering the turnstile operators or
                not, I do not know.
                             102



                                               A.    BEST



Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     You say "and aware"?        A.    Yes.

Q.       MR. GOLDSACK:    Did you see what happened to those
     people once they were inside the ground?   A.   No, sir.

Q. Do you know whether they simply went into the Leppings
   Lane end or were despatched?   A.   I believe so, yes.

Q. You say that was the policy initially?           A.   Yes, sir.

Q. What changed?   A.   As it became busier, obviously the
   crowds inside the ground must have swelled and after that
   time they said, "No" and they had to go back, or make their
   way back through the crowd, which later on became impossible.

Q. So can yoUihelp as to the time at which they were being
   turned back through the crowd?    A.   Exactly,   sir, no.
   Something between 2*00 and 2.30.

Q. And then by what stage were they being let in again because
   it was impossible for them to get back out?   A.   Beyond
   2.30 it was impossible;  they were blocking the turnstiles.

Q. Are you only talking about those who came to Turnstiles
   F and G?   A.   That's right, sir, yes.

Q. Again, I know it is difficult but can you give us any
   idea of the number of people whom you saw go into that
   end with Kop tickets?    A.   I would say at least 20 or 30
   went through the Turnstiles F and G.

Q.   Just through Turnstiles F and G?     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   With tickets for the wrong end.      A.   Yes, sir.

Q. By sometime after half past two, how would you describe
   the crowd   that had built up? A.    The people's behaviour,
   you mean, or the volume?

Q. Yes.   A.    The behaviour was good.  The people at the front
   were no problem at all.    They consisted of families,
   children, but obviously there was a very intense crush there
   up against the wall.

Q.   What about the people who joined at the back?   A.    Obviously
     they were some yards away from me  butthey were chanting,
     pushing, obviously been drinking, generally misbehaving.

Q.   Generally -- ?   A.   Misbehaving.

Q.    What do you mean by misbehaving in that context?
     A.     Pushing from the back. Obviously   the singing and chanting
     we expect.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, I missed that.
     A.   The singing and chanting ---

Q. Pushing from the back and doing what?        A.       The singing
                                             A.   BEST



and the chanting and jumping up and down and generally
causing problems at the back.

       MR. GOLDSACK:    We are talking about twenty to three
now,   are we?   A.    Yes, sir.   Yes.

By then where precisely were you?   A.  Having been pushed
up against the wall and unable to move, I was very near
to the funnel bar as it has been described and I managed
to get through there and stand outside the crush but
obviously still marshalling or attempting to marshal the
crowd from that side of the barrier rather than being
pushed up against the wall.

What was happening to the crowd near to that funnel bar
as you have called it?   A.   A number were pushed ---
From the inside of the crush, you mean?

No, I mean from the outside.   A.   The people that were
causing problems at the back were making their way down
the outside of the crash bars or the funnel bar and trying
to get in at the front of the queue through the turnstile.

Was that just the odd one or two persons or large numbers?
A.  Quite large numbers.

Did those people fall into any particular category?
A.   Yes, the drunken, rowdy element.

What effect did they have upon the people who were already
the other side of the barrier?   A.  Obviously they were
causing more problems at the front which upset the people
at the front who had been waiting and had been crushed for
some time and scuffles broke out between the supporters,
the ones trying to get in and the ones that were already
in.   They also scuffled with Police Officers trying to
remove them from the area.

How many Police Officers were there near to you at this
stage?   A.   Four or five, maybe half a dozen.

Were you    to extract those who were pushing in?
A.   There was one character I pulled out two or three
times but the majority of them were pulled away,yes, sir.

Do you know, was there any way of tilling whether those
who were pushing in at that stage had tickets?    A.   I
didn't search them, sir.  They hadn't got their tickets in
their hands.

What about these people who had been waiting fairly
patiently?   Had they got tickets in their hands?   A.     Yes,
they had got their tickets in their hand.

Your attention I think at about this stage was taken up
by one particular individual, is that right?   A.   Yes,
sir, that is correct.
                             104


                                                    A.   BEST



Q. What was his condition?   A.   He was so drunk he had no
   idea where he was.   He was blindly going for the turnstile.
   He had been assaulted several times by people in the crowd
   and it was more for his own safety that I had to detain
   him.

Q. Of course, the effect of arresting him was that you then
   had to take him off to the Police Room.   A.   That's right,
   sir, yes.

Q. ^y then do you know how many of your serial were still
   left in position?   If you do not know, say.  A,   There
   were at least four or five where I had been stood.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What sort of time do you
     think this is?   A.   Round' % o u t 25 to, 20 to 3.

Q. I am just wondering,   hav6 you got Composite Album 1, 28A?
   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. Is that you in profile?         A.   It is, sir, yes.

Q. I think we have been told that is a minute out, about
   2.34.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. So that would be just before this had happened,              would it?
   A.   That's right, sir, yes.

Q. What do you say the mood of those people just beyond you was
   then?   A.   The people who have come down the outside of
   the barriers were rowdy, drunk, trying to force their way
   into the front.   There were people inside the barrier who
   had been waiting and generally were well behaved.

Q. Just turn back a page or two to 26A, that is a couple of
   minutes earlier. A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   And 25A, which is just about a minute       or so before that.
     A.   Y e s , sir .

Q. Those sort of people one can see there, are those the ones
   you are referring to?   A.   Yes, sir,  they will be.

Q.   They do not look too bad on   there, do they? A.    Things
     developed quite quickly.   This is a few moments earlier,
     obviously.    The crush behind the barrier does not seem too
     bad there; people are stood there and they are not
     struggling.    At the time this happened there were people
     holding tickets up asking for the gates to be opened
     because people were in danger.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Anyway,   that is you.        Thank you
     very much.

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   Having arrested the individual you have
     just described, that involved you taking him to the Detention
     Room, the Police Room.   A.  That's right.
                                           A.   BEST



And then going to the gym.    A.   Yes, sir.

Were you conscious of anyone in either of those rooms having
a radio?   A.   No, sir, there wasn't a radio.

Did you not come across your Sergeant,   Sergeant Payne,      when
you got there?   A.   No, sir.

So is this the position, that from the time you were in
those rooms you had no idea of what was happening outside
at all?   A.   That's right, sir, yes.

Did it take you until after kick-off time to complete the
necessary formalities?   A.    it was about ten past three
when I left the gymnasium, sir, yes.

              Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Just one matter, Officer, in relation to the dealing with
the prisoner, you speak of a time which is in the order of
half an hour or so.    That is the time it takes to follow
the procedure that you have to follow.     A.   That's right,
sir, yes.    There were a number of people waiting to be
booked in having been arrested.    I had to weit for that
first of all and then a short time afterwards:

But if one was to say to you, "How long will it take?
How long do you expect to be away dealing with a prisoner?"
the answer would be, "In the order of about half an hour
or so."   A.   That's right, sir, yes.

And that is dealing with it as quickly as you could deal
with it.   A.   Yes, that's right.

May I ask you aboutthe stewards and the people being let in
who had got tickets for the Kop.    A.  Yes, sir.

You say there were stewards by the gate there, by the
turnstiles?   A.   I believe so, yes, sir.

And this direction or this letting in of such supporters was
with the knowledge of the stewards.     A. They were certainly
aware, sir, yes.    Whether they made the decision or not,
I don't know.    Certainly the turnstile operator allowed
the people through.

And then you say the policy was changed but that was not
something which you were involved in.   A.   No, sir.

Or so far as you know the Police were involved in.
A.   Not at all, sir, no.

It seemed to be something the Club had done.      A.   Yes,   sir.

Were there stewards around in that area throughout the
period of time that you were at the turnstiles?
A.   On the occasion I looked back and saw, on this occasion,
                                   A.   BEST


there were stewards there.   Obviously the rest of the
time my time was occupied with working outside the turnstiles.

Those people, those stewards, would have no difficulty in
observing what was happening through the turnstiles and the
predicament that you were in?   A.   That's right, sir, yes.

                P.C. BRIAN HUCKSTEPP,          called

                  Examined by HR.       PHILLIPS:

You are Constable Brian Robert Huckstepp,           i*i that right?
A.  Yes, that's right.

We have heard of another Woman Constable Huckstepp, is
that a relation of yours?   A.    Yes, she is my wife.

And she was in the same serial as you on this day?
A.   Yes, that's right, sir.

You I think were on duty in Serial 16 on the turnstile
nearest to Gate B, is that correct?   A.   Yes, that's right,
sir.

So you were in the corner, therefore, of the area in front
of the turnstiles?   A.    Yes, right next to Entrance Gate B.

Who were you with?    A.      P.C. Taylor.

And during the course of the build-up to the game until
about 2 o'clock did things go reasonably well?   A.  Yes.

Did you find subsequently, by about 2.30, that a number
of the Officers from your serial had departed?   A.  Yes,
that's right.

The serial should have been one Sergeant and ten men.
Can you say how m a n y w e r e left about 2.30? A. Whilst I
was still outside the turnstiles ---

Yes.   A.   -- I could only see P.C.           Wright to my left.

What had happened to the Constable  who was with you, Mr.             Taylor?
A.   P.C. Taylor had gone off to deal with a chap, I
think, who had his ticket stolen.    He had taken him to
the Police Room to investigate it.

Can you say when he did that? A.        I would think it would
be something around 2.15.

For how long was he away?   A.    I can't remember seeing
him again outside the turnstiles.

We know your Sergeant left,    that was some time after 2.30,
was it not?   A.   Yes.

No, I am sorry, it was before.   That is right, it was before
2.30.   He had gone some considerable time earlier.   You
                            107



                                             B.   R.   HUCKSTEPP



     did not see your Sergeant at all from that time onwards,
     did you?   A.   No, sir.   Sergeant Payne went with three
     other Officers with the two prisoners, yes.

Q.    With three other Officers?  A.    Yes, I believe there
     was three Officers to escort two prisoners.

Q. How were things at 2.30 outside those turnstiles?
   A.   At 2.30 I think they were just beginning to develop
   into the situation that later ensued.

Q. Were you able to keep people in any sort of order to go
   through the turnstiles at that time?   A.  Well, I was
   dealing with two turnstiles myself.   I was just stotid
   in the centre of both of them and people were passing
   either side of me in queues and then it just seemed to --
   they just seemed to swamp me.

Q.   Were you .able to stay in that position in thecentre  between
     the two turnstiles?    A.   No, I was forced away into the
     corner nearest to Entrance Gate B.

Q. What happened to Constable Wright who was over to your
   left, was he not?   A.   Yes.

Q. He had been on the next set of turnstiles,      had he not?
   A.   Yes, he was.

Q. What happened to him?   Did he come towards you or did
   you go towards him or what?   A.  I just kept looking
   across to my left because, as I said, he was the only
   Officer I could see.   I was just checking on him and he
   was checking on me.

Q. What was the mood of the crowd at this time?    A.   The
   people around me - I can only speak for the people directly
   near to me - they were okay.   They were apologising for
   pushing into me.  They were saying it was people from the
   back that was pushing.

Q. Did there come a time when you left that particular
   area?   A.  Yes, P.C. Wright shouted across to me that
   Inspector Purdy had told us to go through the turnstiles.

Q.   What time would that be?     A.   I would think it would be
     something around 2.40.

Q.   Were you able to do anything effective at all at that
     time?   A.   No, I had my arms pinned up against my chest
     and a Police horse had been right up to the turnstile
     and that had failed to regulate the fans, so I was ineffective

Q. Do you think if more members of your serial had been still
   there it would have made any difference?   A.   No, sir,
   I don 11 .



                                        /   No.        A.   Not at that   ..
1                                 108



                                                B. HUCKSTEPP



    Q. No? - A. Not at that time because the crush was just
       becoming too intense.

    Q.   Did you go through the turnstile? - A. Yes, I did.

    Q.   Before you went through the turnstile had you  been able
         to see how those turnstiles were operating? - A.
         Obviously I had had my back to them and when I had been
         pushed off to the right hand side I could not actually
         see into the turnstile, but people were certainly still
         going through them.

    Q. You went through yourself? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Where did you go then? - A. I went around and   back out
         through entrance gate C.

    Q. When you went through gate C, did anybody come in through
       that gate? - A. No.

    Q. Where did you go to once you had got out of gate C? - A.
       I went alongside the blue barrier, the funnel bar.

    Q. Therefore you could see   across the crowd that was waiting
       outside turnstiles A to   G? - A. Obviously I could only
       see the people who were   closest to me.   The crowd was
       just intense and packed   in.

    Q. Did you assist in helping somebody passed over the heads
       of the crowd? - A. Yes, there was a young lad passed
       over.

    Q. What was the state of the people in that part of the
       ground approaching those turnstiles? - A. I think they
       were, as the minutes were going oh, becoming more and
       more panicked and some people were becoming hysterical.
       They were obviously in distress.   There were people red
       in the face, shouting.   They were all trying to push
       back away from the barrier.

    Q. Back away from the barrier? - A. Away from the blue
       barrier.   There were people using that as a brace to
       push themselves away to keep themselves off the barrier
       and also they were being pushed towards the turnstiles.

    Q. Did you hear them asking for anything to be done?
       Anything about the gates? - A. Yes.   Many, many people
       came up to me and asked, "Why cannot you just open the
       gates?   We have all got tickets and there is no problem.
       Why cannot you just open the gates, you will save all the
       crush".
                                        B. HUCKSTEPP


Did you see any more of the crowd behind those towards
Leppings Lane? - A. I cannot really say I noticed.
Obviously I can remember seeing some Police horses up
near the perimeter gates, something like that, but there
was just a heavy crowd all over.

You saw people climbing over the turnstile walls to get
into the ground? - A. Yes, that is right.

Did you then hear about gate C being opened? - A. I
believe I heard Officers discussing that the gate was
going to be opened and Inspector Purdy instructing
people.   There were Officers directly outside gate C,
warning them that the gate was going to be opened.

Were you one of those Officers outside gate C? - A. I was
outside gate C but I was not directly outside it.  I was
more towards the crush barrier.

Now you were there when it was opened for the first time?
- A. Yes, sir.

What happened when it was opened for the first time? - A.
There was just the influx of people.   They went in at
quite a fast rate and it just emptied the area directly
outside gate C.

Had you remained where you were against that barrier, the
blue barrier? - A. I am not quite sure, sir.   I think I
was looking into gate C as they had gone in.   I cannot
be quite sure.

For how long was it open? - A. I would say thirty to
sixty seconds.

All those people who had been in that area cleared away
straight away, did they? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you see them having any difficulties as they went
through? - A. I am sure I saw somebody stumble but I did
not see anybody actually fall to the ground.   They were
going in at quite a fast speed.

It seems that it was closed with the assistance of a
Police horse.   Do   you recollect that? - A. I do not, but
I have seen since that it was.

You certainly know   it was closed after thirty to sixty
seconds? - A. Yes, sir.

How were the people then still outside behind that blue
barrier you are talking of? - A. The crush was still as
intense as ever.   It had not alleviated their problems.
It had just cleared that area.
                           110




                                          B. HUCKSTEPP


Q. Were they still in this state of distress? - A. Yes.
   There were still people coming up and saying, "Open the
   gates".

Q. You were there again, I think, when the gate was opened
   again? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. What happened on this occasion? - A. On this occasion I
   do not know if the gates were opened any wider but the
   influx of fans was much more sedate, more well organised.
   I remember I was stood virtually directly outside the
   gate and they all had to walk around me and it was just
   an orderly entrance into the ground.

Q. Many of them would have to go back to get round the blue
   barrier? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Had they gone through first or the people who had been
   behind them? - A. I would think the people behind them,
   but also people were streaming underneath the barrier.
   They were just coming from all over.

Q. But nevertheless walking in a reasonable fashion? - A.
   Yes, that is right.

Q. When the bulk of these people went through there was very
   little problem outside? - A. For the second time?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

Q. Was anything done with gate C after the bulk of the
   people had gone through?   Do you remember it being
   partly closed? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.  It was
   narrowed down and then the access for the fans was even
   more restricted.   I think they were walking past a
   Police horse and then virtually in ones and twos and
   showing their tickets to the stewards.   There was a
   steward on the gate.

Q. There was a steward on the gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Were the gates narrowed down to fit one person through or
   a bit wider than that? - A. One possibly, or two.   I
   remember the fans were just going in very orderly then.

Q. Was this steward taking any part of the ticket from these
   people or just having it shown to him? - A. I do not know
   what he was doing, sir.   I think he might have just been
   checking them.

Q. Did you remain on the outside or did you remain on the
   inside of the gates when the gates were closed to like
   this? - A. When the steward on the gate I was stood
                             I l l



                                              B. HUCKSTEPP


     directly outside because the fans were just passing to my
     right.

Q. For how long did this continue, this business of people
   going through one at a time, showing their tickets? - A.
   I would say a few minutes.

Q. Had you access to a radio at all while you were outside
   there? -A. No, I had not.

Q. Did you get to know about problems on the pitch? - A.
   Yes.   Obviously once the area had cleared I re-grouped
   with other Officers.

Q. Where did you re-group? - A. It was outside entrance gate
   B, I believe.   I believe somebody said there was a
   message of a pitch invasion and we made our way into the
   ground.

Q. So you then went into the ground.   You did a lot of work
   to help get people out of the terracing, is that right? -
   A. I was taking injured people from the Officers who were
   at the fence and taking them on to the pitch and treating
   them as well as I could.

Q. Also assisting other Officers who were doing the same
   thing? - A. That's right.

Q. Did you - I do not want to go into the details of that,
   not to make light of it, but because they are matters on
   which we have had other evidence, do you understand? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. I want to ask you about your appreciation of what was
   going on around you.   The communications you had
   received when you were in this position.   Were you
   satisfied with the communications that you had?

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      You are talking about
     outside the turnstile?

           MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, I am, sir.

            B. HUCKSTEPP:   For communications, if you mean
     radio, sir, I could only rely on the Sergeant and the
     Inspector.    As I have said before, I did not have a
     radio.

Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:   No.  Do you think you would have
     been assisted by having one? - A. I think it would have
     helped.
                                        B. HUCKSTEPP


Did you know what was going on at all, apart from the
immediate area surrounding you? - A. No, sir.   It was
too difficult to see.   The crowd was all over.

You did not really know what was going on just on the
other side of the turnstiles, did you? - A. When was
that?

When you were on the outer side of the turnstiles you
would not have a clue what was going on inside the
ground, would you? - A. That is right.   As I have said,
I could only see PC Wright to my left and people around
me.   I was trapped into the corner.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Officer, is this correct:  you had no means of
communicating with Ground Control? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

You had no means of communicating with any Supervising
Officer save that if one happened to pass you by? - A.
Obviously I could talk to them.   It depended on any
given time at which you are referring to.

However, if they are not physically next to you you have
no means of communicating with them? - A. Not in that
crowd situation, no.

Did you also form a view yourself as to the general
situation which prevailed on that day, because I
understand that you knew Leppings Lane reasonably well,
this terrace, is that right?   You had some experience of
it? - A. Not as a Police Officer, as a football
supporters.

Yes, as a football supporter.   Do you have experience of
how that Lane end fills up? - A. Only from watching it
from the Kop.   Obviously when I have been to watch the
games there the two central pens fill first normally.

Did you then form a view yourself as an ordinary football
supporters that on this day it would have been much
better if some system had been introduced to direct the
fans away from the central pens and into the side ones? -
A. Possibly.   Looking back, obviously yes.

You actually put that in your statement, did you not? -
A. Yes.

It was something which was obvious to you as an ordinary
person? - A. Yes.
                                       B. HUCKSTEPP


Did you, as a Police Officer, form a view, after the
event perhaps, that there could have been better control
outside the ground by the Police? - A. Obviously you are
always looking to have bettered the situation that
actually happened.   I cannot actually think of anything
we could have done.

Did you not actually put in your own statement:   „„____

      "The crush outside the ground could possibly have
      been better controlled with more Police Officers"

A. That is my own opinion, as you have said.  I am not
sure how they would have been deployed to have achieved
that aim.

But that is your opinion? - A. Yes, that is just my own
opinion.

Is it also your opinion that there could possibly have
been better regulation of the flow of fans up to the
turnstiles? - A. Possibly, yes.

That is your opinion also? -A. Yes.

The only person who had a radio who you knew for certain
had a radio who was over you was the Sergeant, Sergeant
Payne? - A. And Inspector Purdy.

Sergeant Payne had disappeared a long time before the
crush? - A. Yes, with a prisoner.

            Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

May I just dot the "i" and cross the "t" on that point?
Serial 16, which we have thought for some three weeks
consisted of a Sergeant and ten men at the turnstiles A
to G, you can now tell us was actually quarter strength
at the time when this tremendous problem blew up? - A. I
would think it would be something like that, yes, sir.

It is rather important.   Your Sergeant had gone away at
twenty to two, along with Police Woman Huckstepp, and you
say "and two others"? - A. I might be mixing it up, sir.
I saw PC Yates leave and PC Coney as well as PC Taylor
with the inquiry I have mentioned earlier.

PC Taylor, Police Woman Huckstepp had gone and the
Sergeant.   Therefore five of the serial which was
supposed to be doing their best at turnstiles A to G,
were, during the hour of the build-up, absent on other
Police duties? - A. As far as I could see.   Obviously I
know now that some Officers had returned and I had not
seen them.
                                        B. HUCKSTEPP


You were in fact on your own trying to look after two
turnstiles? - A. That is right, sir.

           Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Mr. Huckstepp, you are only able to speak of the Officers
you saw? - A. That is right, sir.

In those circumstances are you able to help the Inquiry
concerning the blue gates, the perimeter gates?   Are you
aware that any of your serial going to the blue gates to
help? - A. The ones beyond the turnstile, sir?

The ones on the Leppings Lane side, that's right? - A.
Yes, I believe PC Wright went out to those gates.

Was Mr. Taylor around? - A. He was.     I did not see him
but he was.

So you were about, Mr. Taylor was about, Mr. Wright was
about? - A. PC Best, Cerrone and Duffy, Inspector Purdy.

Of course you are not able to account for where they
happened to be at any particular moment? - A. Obviously
not, sir, not in the crush.

This problem of dealing with spectators, of course if a
decision is made to arrest or process them, then that
involves the Officer having to deal with them? - A. That
is right, sir.   You cannot ignore things like that.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I   suppose one more person
who had to be arrested in your   vicinity and there would
have been nothing left of your   serial at all? - A. That
is right.   I think there were   contingencies for relief
Officers.

Bringing reserves in? - A. Yes, sir.

      MR. WOODWARD:    If you had been confronted with
having to arrest someone then you would have had to go? -
A. That is right, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Plus another?   Mr. Wright
would have had to go with you? - A. Normally, sir, you
are supposed to have two Officers to escort one prisoner.

      MR. WOODWARD:   So five people and that is it? - A.
Yes, that is right, sir.

Have you policed Leppings Lane end before? - A. Only on
one occasion, sir.
                            115


                                           B. HUCKSTEPP


Q. Which game was it, do you recall? - A. It was an FA Cup
   Tie against Everton.   Sheffield Wednesday against
   Everton.

Q. What role did you fulfil then? - A. We were just
   receiving the fans at Wadsley Bridge and escorting them
   down to Leppings Lane end.

Q. You were on escort duty? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been asked by Mr. Jackson, and it was put to
   you, concerning your observations after the event.
   Would it be right that you have thought about it a lot? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Have you been able to devise or arrive at any firm
   conclusion as to what you would do? - A. No, sir.   It is
   very easy to think about things after they have happened
   and to suggest reasons or answers.

Q. May I ask you about the opening of gate C?   You saw that
   opened on two occasions? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. The first opening of the gate, the gate was not opened
   for very long? - A. That is right.

Q. However, at that time, quite a number of people went
   through? - A. Yes.

Q. Were those people who went through supporters? - A. Yes.

Q. There has been some evidence given of about fifty Police
   Officers going through the gate at one of its openings.
   Did you see anything like that happen? - A. I do not
   recall any Police Officers going through and if they did
   I am sure they were just caught in the little rush.

Q. There was clear evidence given by somebody of fifty
   Officers coming through the gate? - A. Obviously it was
   not that occasion I saw.

Q. You did not see anything like that? - A. No.

         MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

         MR. COLLINS:    I have no re-examination, sir.
   Thank you, Officer.

         Police Constable Taylor please.
    «   >




1                                         116


                                                          A. TAYLOR



                                 ALISTAIR TAYLOR Called

                                Examined by MR. COLLINS:

            Q.   Alistair Taylor? -A. That is right.

            Q.   Another Serial 16.    Which turnstile were you posted to
                 originally? - A. I was working at turnstile A.

            Q. There came a time, I think about 2.15 as we have heard
               from the last witness, when you had to escort a Liverpool
               fan who said he had had his ticket stolen? - A. Yes, that
               is correct, sir.

            Q.   When did you try to get back? - A. Approximately half
                 past two, although I am not too clear of the times.   I
                 think it was somewhere around the region of half past
                 two.

            Q. You had gone in by gate B? - A. That is correct.

            Q. Were you able to get out again by gate B? - A. No.  I
               returned to gate B hoping I could get back out to
               turnstile A again.   The steward at the gates said there
               was no way I could get through there.   I looked through
               the gate, the window on the gate, and there was just a
               sea of people, so I went round to exit gate C, where I
               was able to get out of the inside of the ground.

            Q. Having got out, you obviously saw this crowd of people
               outside turnstiles A to G? - A. That is correct.

            Q. Did you manage to get back to your position? - A. No.
               My intention was to go back to the turnstiles and
               obviously I knew I had left PC Huckstepp there by himself
               and my intention was to go back to turnstile A.
               Unfortunately it was impossible to get back to that
               position, sir.

            Q. How far did you manage to get? -A. I got to the crash
               barrier and that was it.   There was no possible way I
               could get any further.




                            Q. You are talking about that
f ■/   *
                                     117

                                                          A. TAYLOR


           Q. You are talking about that barrier which the usher is
              pointing out now? - A. Yes.

           Q. So what did you do? - A. At that point a senior Officer came
              towards me and instructed me to go to the perimeter gates.

           Q. Can you recall who that was? - A. No, I am unsure who that
              was.  He was of a senior rank, that is all I know, sir.

           Q. Can you remember whether it was a Sergeant or an Inspector? -
              A. I don't believe it was an Inspector.  I believe it was
              somebody above Inspector rank.

           Q. What was happening at the perimeter gates when you reached
              them? - A. The gate nearest the river was the gate I was
              instructed to go to.   I believe it is a double gate, but just
              one of them was open, and there was a stream of people coming
              through i t . I was instructed to close that gate to avoid
              people going through that gate.

           Q. Who gave you that instruction?   This same senior Officer? - A.
              That is correct, sir.

           Q. Did you manage to get the gate shut? - A. Yes, I shut the
              gate.

           Q. What was the effect of doing that upon the people outside? -
              A. It stopped the people who were going to push in at the
              front of the queues.   Some people were unsure where to go.
              People with tickets for the South Stand wanted to go through
              there, and indeed people with North Stand tickets wanted to go
              through that gate.   Obviously I instructed them on the ways to
              get round that.

           Q. Did they appear to be pleased or otherwise that the gate had
              been shut? - A. Obviously they were not very pleased about it.

           Q. How did they show that displeasure? - A. They were shouting.
              Many people were shouting towards me.  Obviously there was
              nothing I could do in my position.  They were just displeased,
              and then they moved away and tried to get through the other
              gate s .

           Q. You were the only Officer on that gate at that time? - A. Yes,
              I was, sir.

           Q. When you shut it were you able to bolt it down in anyway? - A.
              No, I would have had to do that from the inside.  I was on the
              outside of it.  I held the gate shut and held the one that was
              locked so it was shut fully.  I held on to that and the other
              gate.

           Q. You were pretty vulnerable.  It would not have needed a lot of
              pressure from people to make the gate open? - A. That is
              right, s i r .

           Q. How long did you manage to hold your position? - A. It is
V'
                               118

                                                   A. TAYLOR


        impossible to say.  I couldn't really tell you.  On one
        occasion I opened the gate to let a pregnant woman through,
        and a father and small child.  So although I was holding the
        gate I did allow people like that through because obviously
        they were very vulnerable.

     Q. Which way were you facing then? - A. I was facing towards
        Leppings Lane.

     Q. Did you manage to continue to hold the gate, or did there come
        a time.... - A. There came a time when there was a surge.
        Obviously I made sure I let go of the gate that would open
        first, so I went behind the closed gate, and then people just
        came through.  Then there came a time when I was able to shut
        it again, which is what I did.

     Q. Again, you were on your own by this gate, were you? - A. Yes,
        I was still on my own, sir.

     Q. Did you see at any stage what was going on at the turnstiles?
        - A. Initially when I returned to the turnstiles I saw a mass
        of people.

     Q. I am sorry, I am talking about the time you are at this gate?
        - A. No.  I saw people.  Occasionally I would turn round to
        see what was going on.  People were climbing over the roof of
        the turnstiles to get into the ground, and there was a lot of
        pushing and shoving going on in the middle if the crowd.

     Q. Did you continue to hold the gate on the outside of it or did
        you manage to get to the inside at any stage? - A. No, I held
        the gates on the outside of it basically because it fastens at
        the bottom, and there was no way I was going to bend down to
        make sure it was fastened with the crowd outside it.

     Q. You have described one occasion when you had to open it and
        you managed to close it again.  Did you keep it closed after
        that? - A. There was another almighty surge.  In between
        closing it and people climbing over the fence to my left by
        the river bank, there many people getting in that way.   Then
        there was a massive surge and there was no way of holding the
        gate, and people just kept coming through it.

     Q. Shortly before this or at the time you were on your duty
        holding this end gate, could you see what was the position at
        the other perimeter gates? - A. No, I could not see what was
        happening there because I was surrounded.   I saw there two
        mounted Policemen in the middle, but apart from that I could
        not see any other Policemen near the gates.

     Q. When this surge happened and for the second time t h e ^ a t e
        opened, did you see where the fans went? - A. No, I didn't
        really look because there were people falling on the ground by
        the gate, and obviously I was more concerned for their safety
        than wondering where they were going.

     Q. Did the crowd clear fairly quickly after that? - A. Yes,
3,
                                       /
                                 119

                                                      A. TAYLOR


          extremely quickly.   I could not believe how quickly they
          cleared.

     Q. And then you were aware of the gate having been opened? - A.
        Yes, sir.

     Q. I mean the concertina gate? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q. Could you see gate C? - A. Yes, I could from where I was.

     Q. And you could see that that was open, could you? - A. Yes.

     Q. Are you able to help us as to whether that was open when the
        surge you described occurred? - A. No.  I have obviously
        thought about that afterwards.  I believe that people outside
        the perimeter fencing had seen the gate open and surged then,
        and it is a coincidence then there were two surges and the
        gate was opened twice.

     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You think the two surges were
          caused by people seeing the gate open? - A. I think that is a
          possibility.  I could not really say because obviously I was
          not looking at the gate.

     Q.        MR. COLLINS:   You know the times now.  The first opening
          for a short period was about 2.48, and the second was about 4
          minutes later, 2.52 or thereabouts.  Obviously I don't expect
          you to remember times, but is that about right that the first
          surge occurred about 4 or 5 minutes before the second? - A.
          Yes, that is correct, sir.

     Q. I think shortly after that you were aware that you were
        required inside the ground.  Is that right? - A. That is
        right, sir.

     Q. And I think you went on to the pitch and you helped with
        attending to the injured and indeed helping with the bodies? -
        A. That is correct, sir.

     Q. Again I am not going into details of that, although I know you
        gave some considerable assistance.

                        Cross-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD:

     Q. Mr. Taylor, were you aware of any of your fellow serial
        members attempting to close and man the other perimeter gates?
        - A. No, I was not aware of that, sir.

     Q. Your concentration was given to the gate that you went to? -
        A. That is right, sir.  Throughout the incident I was not
        really concerned about what other Policemen were doing.   It
        was just where I was and people around me that really
        mattered, sir.

     Q. You fought to close the gate, did you? - A. After the first
        surge I did, yes, sir.
A'
                                     120


                                                          A. TAYLOR


         Q.   When you went to the gate it was open? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q.   And you endeavoured to close it? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q.   Was that easy? - A. At that stage it was not too    bad. There
              were a lot from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club going
              through the gate, and once they had gone through itwas quite
              easily shut at that point.

         Q. So you were able to close itwithout    much difficulty?   - A. At
            that point, yes, sir.

         Q.   So there was not a great throng of people being pressed by you
              closing the gate? - A. Not at that gate. There was in the
              centre two gates where there were a lot of people.

         Q.   And having closed      it you then had to struggle to keep it
     m        closed? - A. That is right, sir.
              up.
                                                 That is when the crowd built


         Q. That was because the crowd had got upon it? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. And you were on the outside of the gate, were you? - A. Yes.

         Q.   Does that mean you had your back to the people or your back to
              the gate? - A. I had my back to the gate, sir.

         Q. And in what manner were you keeping the gates closed? - A. I
            had one arm holding the gate that was already shut, that was
            fastened shut, and the other arm holding the gate that would
            open.

         Q. And there came a time when you could not hold it any longer? -
            A. That is right, sir.

         Q. So you were not able to see why that was? - A. No, that is
            right, sir.

         Q. Save that you were being pressed by people coming from
            Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct.

         Q. Who strove to overcome you as you stood by the gate? - A.
            Yes, sir.

         Q. Were you asking them to stand back and hold off? - A.
            Obviously, yes, sir.  I was not happy with the situation as it
            was.  I was telling them to get and at that time there was
            nowhere for them to go.  There was no room inside the
            perimeter fencing for them to go.

         Q. There was no room for them to go inside? - A. Yes.

         Q. So it was pointless them going through the gates? - A.
            Exactly.

         Q. And yet they didn't hold off? - A. That is right, sir.
                          121


                                               A. TAYLOR


Q. At the time you closed the gates there does not appear to have
   been a great press of people coming up against them? - A. As I
   say, not at that gate, no.

Q. There was a great surge? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was that a sudden pressure coming from behind those people who
   were immediately confronting you at the gate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. No just a gentle increase but some deliberate pressure? - A.
   No, there was pressure on me all the time, but when that surge
   came it was a deliberate surge to get through the gates.

Q. It was something very heavy and deliberate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Had you noticed before this time whether there were people
   hanging about in the bridge area? - A. Yes, right from the
   start when I was at turnstile A there were large groups of
   youths hanging around on the bridge area at Leppings Lane.

Q. Not at that time making any attempt to come into the ground? -
   A. No, it was noticeable that say one of the lads from the
   group would come to the turnstiles, be searched and then not
   go in the turnstiles, and return to the group, and the rest of
   the group were not making any attempt to come towards the
   ground at a l l .

Q. So we can be clear about what you are saying, there were
   youths hanging about in the bridge area in groups, and then
   occasionally one would come from the group, make his way
   towards the turnstile, submit to search? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And then what? - A. Obviously he would get to the turnstiles
   and then turn away, come from behind us and go back to the
   gr o u p .

Q. And you saw that occur on a number of occasions? - A. I saw
   that occur on about three occasions, yes, sir.

Q. Did lads from different groups? - A. I could not be sure if
   they were from different groups.  They were different lads
   coming to the turnstiles, yes, sir.

Q. Did that strike you as rather odd behaviour? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you see what happened to those groups of people
   eventually? - A. No, sir, I did not.

Q. It would seem they must have joined the throng and come in? -
   A. Well, presumably they were there for a reason.  Presumably
   they were there to get into the ground by some way or another,
   yes, sir.

Q. That is how it struck you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Something odd was going on? - A. The groups of youths appeared
   odd stood on the bridge area, yes, sir.
                            122


                                                 A. TAYLOR



Q. It was curious behaviour for people who wanted to go in to see
   a football match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Roughly how many are we talking
     about? - A. There was one group of about 20 youths.

Q. Was there more than one group? - A. It was hard to tell
   because there was a lot of people milling about at the time
   who had arrived on coaches and things like that, who were
   walking up and down Leppings Lane in groups.  There were
   groups of 12 or above on numerous occasions walking up and
   down, sir.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   And this behaviour of someone detaching
     themselves from the group and coming to the turnstile was in
     relation to distinct congregations or a group of people? - A.
     Yes, sir.

Q. When the gate was forced upon, the perimeter gate, did it just
   lead to people coming through, or were people knocked down by
   that? - A. There were a number of people who staggered through
   the gate who had been forced through the width of the gate
   from the outside like a funnel, and a number of people fell to
   the floor, sir.

Q. And they were disregarded by those people intent on coming in,
   were they, or did people pause to help them up? - A. The
   people right at the front of the surge held back, and I moved
   across the surge on a number of occasions shouting for them to
   get up and get going into the ground, but the people behind
   obviously did not realise or just were not bothered, sir.

Q. They just kept coming on? - A. Yes.

Q. Of course, what was happening to gates A, B and C was all
   behind you? - A. Yes.

Q. And would it be right you are not able in precise terms to
   relate what was happening to those gates to what was happening
   where you were? - A. Yes, sir, I can't relate it.  It was just
   my opinion, really.

Q. You are not able to say that one happened because of the
   other? - A. No, sir, not at all.

Q. But at about the time the gates were being opened, A, B or C
   g a t e s , there was this behaviour of the crowd around the
   perimeter gate where you were? - A. Yes, sir.       By the time of
   the surges I did not realise the gates had been opened.

Q. So far as you were aware there was nothing behind you to
   warrant what was happening in front of you? - A. No, that is
   correct, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you very much.
*   «




                                    123


                                                          J. MORGAN


                         POLICE SERGEANT JOHN MORGAN Called.

                              Examined bv MR. GOLDSACK:

        Q. Sergeant John Morgan? - A. That is correct, yes.

        Q. I think you have been a Sergeant in F Division for some 8
           years? - A. Yes, 8-and-a-half years.

        Q. And so you have been present in an official capacity at 150
           or so football matches at Hillsborough? - A. At a rough
           estimate, yes, I would say that.

        Q. And does that include all parts of the ground over the years?
           - A. Mainly at the Leppings Lane end, but also including the
           South Stand and the North Stand.

        Q. And so you have been present, have you, at the other Semi-
           Finals? - A. I have, yes.

        Q. Was that at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Well, matches seem to
           merge in my memory, but last year certainly I was on the
           track.  I was in charge of the serial on the track.

        Q. Serial 1? - A. Yes.      The year before that I was on the
           Leppings Lane e n d , y e s .

        Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was the year kick-off was
             postponed? - A. That was Coventry-Leeds, I believe.

        Q. Was it?    Not 1987? - A. Yes, that was the Sunday, was not it.

        Q. 1987 on a Sunday? - A. Yes.

        Q.       MR. GOLDSACK:    The kick-off was delayed? - A. I can't
             remember.

        Q.   But you were on Leppings Lane that match?    - A. Yes.

        Q.   You were in charge this year of Serial 18,  who were positioned
             outside turnstiles 9 to 16? - A. That is right.

        Q.   Performing a similar job to that which     we have   been hearing
             about this afternoon with the Officers inSerial 16? - A. Yes.

        Q. Were you conscious during the build up that there were people
           coming to the turnstiles with tickets for the Kop end? - A.
           Yes, I was.  It was very confused.  Constantly throughout the
           afternoon people were approaching me with brown coloured
           tickets for the North Stand, purple coloured tickets for the
           terraces, orange coloured tickets I believe which were for the
           Kop, and I was constantly sending people to the correct entry
           poin t .

        Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Before we go on, what was your
             reading of that? That they were just being stupid or had had
             too much to drink or that the ticketing denominations were not
V
                                124

                                                         MORGAN


         as clear as they should have been, or what? - A. I don't think
         the ticket denominations were as clear as they should have
         been, the colouring on the tickets, and also the signs on the
         actual turnstiles.  They were just squares of colour as I
         recall.  Certainly on my turnstiles they were red squares at
         the sides of the doors, which were totally inadequate.

    Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   The actual markings on the turnstiles
         themselves, have they been like that for some time? - A. I
         can't remember what they were like last year because I was on
         the track.  The year before is just a blur, really.  I can't
         be specific, but certainly this year I am certain about the
         situation.  It was very, very confused.

    Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    If we look at West Midlands 1, the
         slim bundle with printing on the outside. Youare referring,
         for example, on photograph 10 to that smallish area of purple
         to the left of turnstile A? - A. That is right, my Lord, yes.

    Q. I see.  I am sorry, I had not noticed it until now. - A. The
       same situation existed, if you look on photograph 7 of that
       bundle, by the gate C you will see red squares with "West
       Stand" written on them.

    Q.       MR. GOLDSACK:  The ones you were actually  responsible for
         were red? Some of the others were purple? - A . Y e s .

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I imagine when the people are
         actually queueing there that would be obscured? - A.
         Invisible, yes.

    Q. If you are going to have them you would rather have them
       bigger and higher? - A. Yes.

    Q.       MR. GOLDSACK:    Are you aware of any other match that you
         have policed over the years where there appeared to be so many
         requests for assistance to get to the right turnstile? - A. We
         always seem to act as ushers at every match.   As a matter of
         course people approach Policemen if they have got a problem,
         and that has always been the case in my experience, but this
         year seemed to be more confused than other years, as I
         remember.




                                      /Q. Well, now, so far as you.
                            125


                                            3   .   MORGAN



Q. Well now, so far as you were aware, what policy was being
   adopted at Turnstiles 9-16 if people had tickets for the
   Kop end?   A.    I was sending them to the Kop end because
   I had been told there was a contingency to house people in
   that end of the ground.    There is a raised triangle area
   which has been used in the past for people from the      by
   rival supporters, if you like, with the wrong tickets.

Q. If, as the Sergeant of a serial based near the turnstiles,
   you had in fact been aware that the turnstile operators,
   with or without the knowledge of stewards, were letting
   people in at that end with Kop tickets, would you have
   taken that matter any further?  A.Yes, I would.

Q.   What would you have done?  A.    I would have asked for
     clear instructions and I would have asked for a Club official
     to be contacted and to join me at that location.

Q. You, of course, have a radio?     A.     Yes,     I do.

Q.   Would you have done that at your own       level or would you
     have gone to a senior Officer?   A.         I would have done
     that myself.

Q. Up until about 2.15 or so where did you position yourself?
   A.   In front of my men on the concourse between the outer
   perimeter gate and the turnstiles.

Q. Now, were you conscious of people being there without tickets
   at all?   A.   No, I was not, not initially, no.

Q.   I mean, generally up until kick-off.  A.   People did ask
     if they could buy tickets so I presume that they had not
     got tickets themselves.   They were asking where the Ticket
     Office was.

Q. Over the day generally did you form any assessment as to
   whether there were more or less people there than usual
   without tickets?   A.   It didn't strike me as being
   dramatic, no.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The numbers without tickets
     did not strike you as being dramatic, you say?   A.   No.
     No, my Lord.

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   I think you 'Were involved in one
     incident involving someone who had been selling tickets.
     A.    Yes.

Q. And you had a discussion with a Club official as to
   whether they  were, in fact, forgeries.   A.   Yes, I did.

Q. What was the conclusion?   A.   He concluded that they were
   not forgeries but he took a sample of the tickets away with
   him to check with someone else in the office.   He was a
   gentleman with grey hair who I have seen many times but whose
u
                                 126

                                                  3   .   MORGAN



       name I cannot remember.

    Q. Was he a steward?   A.    No, he was not a steward;  he was
       a Club official.   ye had a radio with him and I have seen
       him many times.   Perhaps Mr. Glasgow could assist.    I
       cannot remember his name.

    Q. If he had a radio, it narrows the field considerably.
       I think you then became involved at about 20 past 2 or so
       in an incident where you had to take someone through to
       the Police Room.  A.   Yes, I thought it was about ten
       past two.

    Q. You may well be right.      My mistake.   A.        An off-duty
       Police Officer ---

    Q. I do not think we need go into the details of that, Mr.
       Morgan, I am really concerned with how things had changed
       by the time you came back.   A.   Quite alarmingly.    I
       have heard other Officers had left their posts and
       unfortunately I felt obliged to leave my post but I left
       my post because an off-duty Police Officer was reporting
       to me a crime complaint, the theft of his wallet and four
       football tickets and I was not really satisfied;   I thought
       he was trying to pull the wool over my eyes, so I wanted
       to have a word with the C.I.D. Officer in the gymnasium
       per sonally.

    Q. Whilst you were on your way back to the turnstile area,
       it would be - what - 20 past 2 or so, by then?
       A.   I think so.   I can't be specific but I would assume
       that it was.   I think I arrived back at the turnstile
       area at about half past two.

    Q. I would just like to ask you; about your experiences so
       far as the radio was concerned.    I think you changed
       your battery.   A.   I did, yes.

    Q. Was there some difference in your assessment between the
       reliability of the reception from Officers within the
       ground and those from Police Control?   A.   Messages
       from Officers on the ground were much more clear.    They
       were clear and continuous whereas messages from Police
       Control were broken and I think they have been ifescribed
       as stacGato.   That is a good description of the messages
       which were passed by Police Control.   In fact, when I
       was at the gym I saw a radio engineer who was obviously
       being directed to the Control Box.

    Q. As far as you were concerned, did that siutation change
       at all between half past two and 3 o'clock?     A.   After
       I got back to the turnstile area, I cannot honestly remember
       listening to the radio again until % heard the message to
       go on to the track.   The noise was pandemonium and my
       attention was drawn to several other important and urgent
       things which were happening and I;Lca(b't remember hearing
       the radio at all, I am afraid.
U--y(3
                                     127



                                                     J.   MORGAN



         Q. Well now, in the few minutes that you had been away, the
            crowd had obviously built up a great deal outside the
            turnstiles.   A.   Yes.

         Q.   Can I bring you forward a little to the time when Gate C
              opened for the first time and there was an influx of
              people.   A.   Yes.

         Q. Were you just inside that gate at that stage?            A.    Yes,
            I was.

         Q.   Did you appreciate why it had been opened?   A.   I did.
              I had already formed the intention myself to open the gate,
              had it not been opened before it was op,ened, on my own
              initiative, because of the problem outside.

         Q. That is to say you intended to open it to allow a release
            of pressure from outside.   A.   Yes, I had.

         Q. I do not know whether you were here this morning;     someone
            from inside was intending to op.enit to   eject someone.
            A.   Yes, I was here this morning.   Yes.

         Q.   Had you given any thought prior to that     gate opening to
              where the people who came through would      go? A.   Not at
              all.

         Q.   In the event, where did they make for?      A. I can't
              remember any particular group.    The 200 that I estimate came
              through on that first occasion, I can't remember where they
              made for.    I can only ---   I stood in their path and I
              tried to push them back, tried to slow them down physically
              and I was thrown to one side.    Several people went down
              in the initial onslaught and I was concerned about them.
              When it cleared, I was amazed that nobody was lying on
              the ground injured, but I can't remember which direction
              they ran or walked after the initial entry.

         Q.    Your attempt to control them at that stage was to slow them
              down rather than to steer them in any particular direction?
              A.     Yes.

         Q. As we know, that gate did, in fact, close.     Where were
            you w+ien that gate opened for the second time?    A.    I was
            down *t>y the side of the funnel barrier, as it has been
            described previously.

         Q. So you had gone outside through C Gate,       had you?        A.      Yes.

         Q.    What were you doing alongside the funnel bar?    A.    I
              was pulling people underneath it.     I was pushing them
              down as if I was ducking them in water, pushing them
              underneath it and dragging them out.     Women, children,
              youths in distress.     I remember several times the crowd
              surging forwards and as they did so youths were pressed
              up against the bar with their ribs and they cried out in
              pain as the crowd repeatedly surged.     Some, in fact,
")&<
                                  128



                                                        J.   MORGAN



            were reluctant to leave that throng, which I was quite
            amazed by.   They didn't want to lose their place in the
            queue.

       Q. How many of you were doing that at that stage?    A.    There
          were several Police Officers in that location but I can
          only remember ---    I can remember Inspector White who was
          directly on my right.    I can remember Inspector Purdy
          and I think I can remember Inspector Delaney who was
          somewhere behind me.

       Q. Whilst you ;Were doing that, you had Gate B within your
          field of vision.    A.  Yes.

       Q. Did you see Gate B open?      A.   I did.

       Q. C an you help us as to the stage at which that opened
          in relation to the second   opening of C Gate?   A.   I
          believe that Gate B opened before Gate C had opened the
          se^Qnd time, but I cannot be sure.    Again, having seen
          the video I am amazed that Gate C opened for in excess
          of 5 minutes.    I cannot remember that at all.   I thought
          that Gate C was being opened repeatedly and allowing small
          numbers in at a time.    When I saw that on the video, I
          was surprised.

       Q.   If you are right that Gate B opened before Gate C opened
            for the second time, are we talking about just a few seconds
            or an appreciable time?     A. A fewseconds, yes.

       Q. What immediate effect did opening Gate B have?   A.   Very
          dramatic effect.   Certainly on the crowd in front of
          Entrance B, the entrance to the terraces.   It had a
          dramatic effect on the numbers that were there.

       Q. Which presumably relieved the pressure on a lot of people
          that you were trying to help at that stage?    A.   Yes.
          I would just like to comment on their attitude - the
          attitude of the people who were there.   They were
          aggressive and they were in great haste.    I have thought
          about it since and I think it was the lemming mentality;
          they wanted to get in there at any cost.

       Q. By that time, and we know we are talking about 8 or 9
          minutes to 3, what proportion of the crowd would you
          put into that category?     A.  Well, I have estimated
          the crowd outside when I first arrived there at in excess
          of 4,000.   Certainly I saw families, women, children,
          but a great many youths in their late teens, early twenties,
          and everybody seemed to be in a great state of haste and every­
          body was expressing the possibility that the match might
          start before they got through the turnstiles.

       Q. Well now, once Gate C had   infact been opened for some time,
          were you/able to reform your serial? A.      Yes, I went to
                      129

                                           J.   MORGAN


join them on the concourse immediately in front of
Entrance C, where they had been carrying out their
d u ti es .




                              /Is that where you were.
/I   ■

                                      130


                                                       J. MORGAN



         Q. Is that where you were when you heard Sergeant Goddard
            coming over the radio? - A. Yes.

         Q. What is your recollection as to what Sergeant Goddard was
            asking for? - A. Sergeant Goddard repeated a number of
            times, "All available Officers on to the perimeter track.
            Fans are invading the pitch".   Whilst I was outside,
            before that message was passed, I could see several
            people - I would think 80 to 100 people - standing about
            in various positions on the concourse and on the bridge
            obviously looking dejected as though they were resigned
            to missing the game.

         Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Outside the turnstiles? - A.
              On the forecourt, my Lord,    in front of the perimeter
              fence.

         Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:  Having heard that message from
              Sergeant Goddard, I think you made your way round via the
              entrance near the south stand? - A. Yes.   I went through
              a turnstile.

         Q. You then met Superintendent Murray? - A. I went through a
            metal railing gate.     I remember there was a man who
            clambered on to the   top of the gate. We opened it and
            as we did so he fell off catching the sleeve of his
            jacket on the spike on the top.    We ran through that
            gate and down the first gangway to the left in the south
            stand open section.

         Q. Where was it that you saw Mr. Murray? - A. Mr. Murray was
            coming in the opposite direction up that gangway.

         Q. Did any word pass between you? - A. Mr. Murray said,         "Do
            what you can".   His face looked ashen and he was
            obviously in a state of shock I would assume.

         Q.    Is he an Officer you have known for a good many years? -
              A. I have known him    for some time.  He has just
              recently been - well, I say "recently" - he has been at F
              Division now for in excess of twelve months.

         Q. Had you ever seen   him look like that before?    - A. No,    I
            had not.

         Q. Did he give you any further directions as to what you
            could or might be able to do? - A. No.

         Q.   So you made your way to the perimeter    fences? - A. I did.

         Q.   Were you very quickly able to assess the extent of the
              situation? - A. I was, yes.
                               131



                                               J. MORGAN


Q. That there were people clearly already dead? - A. Yes.
   People were being crushed up against the pen fence which
   was bulging under the pressure.    Their faces and necks
   and arras were blue in colour, like cyanosis, and there
   was blood and mucus seeping from their mouths and noses.
   It was obvious to me that people were dead already and
   were being maintained in an upright position by the
   pressure of the people behind.

Q. This would be the bottom left hand of pen 3 if we are
   standing on the pitch? - A. Yes, just to the left of the
   goal when you face the terrace.

Q. In those few seconds were you able to take in what
   individual Officers were doing, or how it was affecting
   them? - A. I saw Officers giving first aid, making
   frantic attempts to pull people through the small narrow
   gates, over the tops of the fences.   Officers were
   clambering on to the hoardings.   I saw people clambering
   over the radial fences to get into the other pens and I
   saw people climbing up into the west stand seats.   Other
   Officers were standing on the pitch itself and they
   appeared to me to be in a state of disbelief, really, at
   what was happening.

Q.   I think you took some of those with you? -      A. I did, yes.

Q.   You went round   to the central tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Why did you do that? -     A. Because it seemed    like the
   obvious thing to do.       There was no room to    work at the
   fence or at the gates.       I am familiar with    the ground
   and it just seemed the     obvious thing to do.     I just
   shouted to the nearest     group of Officers to    follow me and
   several did.

Q. You went round the back of the stand and through the
   central tunnel? - A. I did.

Q.   To the rear of   the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was anybody in  the tunnel? - A. No, it was deserted.
     The concourse at the back was deserted as well.

Q. When you got to the pitch end of the tunnel, were there
   any Police Officers at the back of the crowd? - A. Yes,
   there were.   There were three.   There were two females
   and a male.

Q. From your observations of them, did they appear to have
   any idea what was going on at the front? - A. They were
   oblivious to what was happening inside.   They were
   looking over the heads of the crowd in front and
3
                                132



                                                J. MORGAN


       everything was calm.   People were not trying to get out.
       People were not pushing.   It was just a different world.

    Q. Did you immediately inform those three Police Officers
       what in fact the position was? - A. I did.   I said,
       "There are dead bodies in there.   Get these people out".

    Q. Did some of those Officers and those who had come with
       you proceed to try and persuade people at the back to
       leave via the tunnel? - A. Yes, they responded
       immediately.

    Q. What about the people in the crowd who were asked to
       leave?   How did they react? - A. I entered the crowd to
       the right of the dividing railings.     That is, into pen
       3, in fact.   I did not have time for the niceties.       I
       just grabbed people and sort of pushed them away and
       said, "Get out".     Most people did as they were told.
       Some people resisted and it was a fight, literally.     I
       had to fight my w a y down to the front of the terrace.

    Q. Did you succeed in getting to the front? - A. Yes,   I did.

    Q. And to the position where, as we now know,   there were a
       lot of dead people? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were you the first Police Officer to reach them from the
       rear? - A. Yes, I was.

    Q. Were others quickly behind you? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were then able to arrange for some of those to be
       taken out the back way as well? - A. Yes.   I assisted
       with that myself.    I carried several deceased people and
       assisted with several injured people as well who were
       taken down the tunnel.    There was much work to be done
       on the terrace so I just left them with other people who
       were there, the Police Officers and other people who were
       rendering first aid.

    Q. During all of that time, did you at any stage look into
       pen 4? - A. No, I did not.   I seemed to be on auto­
       pilot most of the time to be quite honest.   I am not
       aware of other things which were obviously happening
       around me.   I was just interested in a very small area
       in which I was working and I can see things freeze-frarae,
       but most of the time I think I was on auto-pilot.

    Q. Do you know, can you give us any idea at all, how many
       people altogether were taken from that part of pen 3,
       back through the tunnel? - A. I would think a couple of
       dozen, two or three dozen maybe, but in addition to the
       deceased there were injured people as well.     Icertainly
       assisted in carrying three or four back in that
                                            J. MORGAN


direction, but there were other Officers working
alongside me.

When you speak of two or three dozen, is that two or
three dozen people altogether, or two or three dozen who
were dead? - A. Two or three dozen people who were dead
and injured - casualties.

      HR. GOLDSACK:    Yes,   thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Officer, as I understand your evidence you went to the
rear of the tunnel and saw the disaster from the
perimeter fence side? - A. Yes.

On your own initiative? - A. Yes.

You say you did so because it was obvious to you that was
the thing to do? - A. Yes.

It was obvious because what you had to do was to get the
people at the back out from the back to relieve the
pressure on the front? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MR. M U L L E R :

Just one matter.   When the people you saw had been
pressed up against that fence at the front, obviously in
a very bad way, at that stage, did it cross your mind at
all that somebody might make some effort to remove the
fence? - A. No, it did not because I could not see how
that could be achieved.

If there were, for example,    some instruments like wire
cutters? - A. Yes.

Would that have assisted? - A. That would have assisted.
Had I know that wire cutters were available I would have
thought of that.

At the front of   the fence you have got the fence and
below the fence   you have got a wall? - A. yes.

So even if the fence is removed the wall would still
retain people at the front? - A. Yes.    In fact when I
got down to the front of the terrace the pile of bodies
was something like waist high and there were several
people trapped up to their hips in dead and dying people.
My immediate concern during the course of all this was
for a ten years   old boy who I saw lying right at the
front with his face pressed up against the wall.     He
appeared to be alive.    He was breathing with very
shallow breaths.    I cradled his head in my arms and I
                                134



                                                  J. MORGAN


     was concerned that he did not scratch his fact against
     the wall for some reason.   However, yes, that wall
     presents quite a substantial barrier.

Q. To be absolutely clear, it would not be a question that
   if you removed the whole of the fence you would not have
   had everybody tumbling out?   They would have been
   retained, to a certain level at any rate, by the wall? -
   A. Yes.   People would have been retained, possibly at
   the front, but I think you would have had the problem
   then of people clambering over to get out and you may
   very well have caused many more fatalities.

Q. As far as you were concerned, it never crossed your mind
   because you were not even aware, you did not know whether
   there were any cutters available? - A. No, it never
   crossed my mind.

Q. Nor did you know whether anybody had asked for them? - A.
   No, I did not.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. M A X W E L L :

Q. Sergeant, when you ran down the tunnel knowing something
   awful had happened at the front of the pens, getting to
   the pitch end of the tunnel there were fans ahead of you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You had no view at that stage of the pitch end of the
   tunnel of the tragedy which had occurred at the front of
   the pen? - A. No.

Q. However, knowing what you did you fought your way through
   the fans? - A. Yes.

Q. How close did you have to be before you got any view of
   what had happened? -A. Half way down the terrace.  By
   that time people were sort of thinning out in front of me
   and I could see in front that there were people laying on
   the steps being tendered by Liverpool supporters.   May I
   say at this juncture the actions of numerous supporters
   on that terrace was magnificent.   They made commendable
   efforts to resuscitate people and rescue people.   They
   were marvellous.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. G L A S G O W :

Q. Can I ask for your help about the tickets first of all?
   I think you have got considerable experience of this
   ground over a very large number of years? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you remember the change as far back as when the radial
     fences first went in? - A. I can remember them being
     installed, yes.
                                           J. MORGAN


Do you remember after they first went in,     the initial
plan was to have separate numbers for the     separate
sections? - A. Yes.   I can remember that     at that end of
the ground there was segregation of rival     groups at the
same end of the ground.

Part of the object of that exercise had been that when
that end of the ground was used for visiting fans, the
radial fences would be used to segregate the various
groups? - A. Yes.

Particularly between 4, 5 and 6 where a "rat" run is
provided, a physical sterile area on the terrace? - A.
yes.

That had two uses.    It separated the fans when it was
appropriate to separate the visitors from the home
supporters? - A. Yes.

It also provided, in principle, an access way for Police
Officers to get to the back of the terrace if they needed
to? - A. That is right.

Could we deal with that first of all?   If that gangway
is preserved as a sterile area, it ought, in principle,
always to be free of fans? - A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    This is 5?

      MR. GLASGOW:    Five:

However, of course, to be fair to those who may have been
trying to organise what was going on, if all the
supporters on the terrace are from the same club, it
would probably not have been seen as necessary to keep
that sterile area 5 sterile? - A. That is right.   There
are two gates at the top, as I recall.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You would not get agreat
view from there? - A. No, my Lord, but supporters do some
weird things occasionally and if they think they might
get a better view from that position then they will
explore.

      MR. GLASGOW:   I do not know whether you saw it for
yourself, Sergeant, but it was quite apparent that at
this match people had occupied the area that is that
narrow confinement 5? - A. I was not aware of that, sir.




          Q. Well,   in principle you ought
w   *
^                                 136


                                                       J. MORGAN


        Q. Well, in principle you ought to have been able to get to the
           back of the terrace through that gangway, should not you? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. And it may well be it occurred to you in the heat of the
           moment it was much quicker to run with your men right round
           the back, but if the pens had been controlled in the way in
           which it had been intended that they were controlled when they
           were installed there should have been, may I use the phrase
           again not offensively, a rat run up there for people to get up
           to the back of the terrace? - A. Yes, there should.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I should think by then quite a lot
           of people had climbed into there from 4, had not they?

                MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, I think that is right:

        Q. I think you can only say what the situation was when you
           arrived on the perimeter fence, that by then you found people
           had climbed in there, and you would be unable to help the
           Inquiry as to whether they had been in there from the gradual
           filling process from the start of the game? - A. Yes.

        Q. If you had been on the perimeter fence yourself on duty on
           that day, ideally you would have liked to have kept that
           gangway clear so your Officers could get to the back of the
           terrace if necessary? - A. Ideally, yes, although there is
           another tunnel at the other e n d , the North tunnel.

        Q. Yes, indeed. - A. For access to that particular section.

        Q. Can we again explore your experience.  Has it been the
           practice over recent years for Police to attempt to keep that
           gangway 5 clear so that Officers can get to the back of the
           terraces if necessary? - A. At normal league games mostly
           either the central pens are used to house the visiting
           supporters or the pen under the Police control box, depending
           on the number of visiting fans.  At games where there is a
           full house the habit has been to open the gates in the radial
           fences to allow free access along the whole section, the whole
           terrace.

        Q. Yes, and coincidentally, but perhaps unfortunately, if you
           open the gates at the back and lock them in the open position,
           thereby enabling people to spill along the back wall if
           possible, you also automatically open gangway 5 to people who
           wish to drift down it? - A. Yes, you negate that particular
           rat run as you would refer to it.

        Q. Were you aware that the senior Officers in command of the
           ground on this day had believed that the way in which that
           terrace was to be filled was by natural easing out or spilling
           over without guidance from anybody? Did you know that was the
           scheme? - A. I have heard that since.

        Q. Forgive me being pedantic, and I don't mean to be rude, did
           you know it on the day that that was the way it was supposed
                             137

                                                    J. MORGAN


     to organise itself? - A. No, I did not.

Q. Do you recall that when the pens were first formed by the
   radial fences in the early days they haddifferent numbers? -
   A. No, I was not aware of   that, sir.

Q. Perhaps I could remind you by asking you to look at the
   photographs.  You could actually look at West Midlands 1.  It
   is probably clearer in 2, the fatter bundle, Sergeant Morgan.
   Photograph 17 is one of the best.  The big ”2" over the
   gangway, do you recall that? - A. Yes.

Q. Those pens were originally known as 2.       Does that jog your
   memory? - A. No, I d i d n ’t know that.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     How was itsplit,   Mr.Glasgow?
     That is 2. What were the      other ones?

          MR. GLASGOW:   My recollection has faded on this, sir,
     and I am treading   very carefully. It is difficult to do it
     without proper instructions.

          LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:Perhaps it     will come later.

          MR. GLASGOW:     While you have got it on your mind,sir,
     back to photograph 4 is the best help I can give y o u .   We
     think that those gangways, the division on that pillar was 3
     and 4, and that 1 would have been at the extreme alternative
     end, the extreme south end.

          LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:  1 would be now what is 1 and 2,
     and 3 and 4 would be now what   is 6 and 7?

          THE WITNESS:   I always understood that the numbers the
     Inquiry has been referring to, 1 and 2, 3 and 4, 5 and 6,
     referred in fact to the gates in the pen, those numbers.

Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   I think in order that both sides know they
     are looking at the same thing, Sergeant Morgan, the idea is
     that the gate for  each pen should have the number of the pen
     on it. - A. I see.

Q. That is right, is not it? Does that help you to refresh your
   memory? - A. I always thought that the gates of the perimeter
   pen on to the track were numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Q. You are absolutely right. - A. And that pen 1 and 2 is one
   entity, is not it?

Q. Yes.  - A. So I would assume 1 and 2 is in fact pen 1, and
   that the 1 and 2 refers to the gates.

Q. We need not ask for your help.  We do know about the gate
   numbering at the front corresponding to the pens as they now
   exist.  I was dragging into your memory if I could as to the
   days when an attempt was made to divide the pens themselves up
   and give different tickets to people coming into those. - A. I
                               138

                                                  J . MORGAN


     can't assist on that.

Q . You d o n ’t remember that? - A . N o .

Q. I won't press it further.  Bring you right up to date, though,
   this year I think as a result of discussions involving the
   Police as well as others the suggestion had been made that
   segregation would be easier to control if different colours
   were used as well as different labels? - A. Yes.

Q. You do remember that? - A. Yes.

Q. And without being rude to anybody, it is a fact that however
   carefully you try to label things some people will find that
   confusing? - A. Yes.

Q. Either through the fault of the person who is trying clearly
   to label, or through the fault of the person who is trying to
   read it? - A. That is right.

Q. And that solutions of various kinds are looked at over the
   years to try and improve on the clarity? - A. Obviously, yes.

Q. And that the idea of colouring the tickets was the latest idea
   in improving on clarity? - A. Yes.

Q. Now, the idea of colouring tickets does not help people much
   in terms of which end of the ground they should approach in
   the first place, does it? - A. No.

Q.   They have   got to know where they are    heading for in terms of
     the Liverpool end or the Nottingham Forest end, if I may talk
     in relation to this match? — A. Yes.

Q. And if everything is running smoothly, and I know that it does
   not through no fault of yours, the vast majority of supporters
   will have been shepherded, herded, urged, encouraged, whatever
   polite word you use, to the appropriate end long before they
   have to start looking for a gate number? - A. Yes.

Q.   The vast majority of the Liverpool supporters will have found
     their way along Leppings Lane to the Leppings Lane end? - A.
     Y e s , they wou ld .

Q. Unhappily, from what you have told us, Sergeant Morgan, it
   appears there had been some confusion and breakdown even in
   that exercise in that fans were arriving at the wrong end? -
   A. Yes, they were.

Q. And it follows from that that the all important principle of
   segregation which was very close to the Police heart had been
   breached for some reason that we have yet to find out about? -
   A . Yes.

Q. We had got Nottingham Forest fans turning up at the Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Yes, and Liverpool fans turning up with
   Nottingham Forest tickets.
4   * •» *
                                       139

                                                              J. MORGAN



             Q. And you were faced, amongst all the other things you had to
                do, with actually redirecting some people to the other end of
                the ground? - A. Constantly.

             Q. Could we look at the tickets together? Perhaps we could all
                look at the same ones rather than handing round specimens.
                You will find a black shiny bundle in front of you which is
                the club's skeleton bundle of documents.  If you could go
                through those with me to pages 163 and 164, we could look at
                just three tickets taken at random. - A. Yes.

             Q. Again for convenience, I can let you have the originals if it
                helps, but I think we can do the written bit, having discussed
                the colour differences, off these two pages.  Let us look at
                the complete tickets if we may, the bottom two.  One is for
                the West Stand and one is for the Leppings Lane standing? - A.
                Yes.

             Q. Could you help by going through these with me, Sergeant.  The
                West Stand has "West Stand" written on the ticket part, does
                it not? - A. Yes, it does.

             Q. And the counterfoil which is labelled underneath,   "To be given
                up", has "Entrance C ”? - A. Yes.

             Q. May I say I entirely accept that of course these things can
                always be improved upon, but if it is looked at with any
                degree of care the word "Entrance" and the letter "C" is
                pretty clear that that is the entrance you are going for, is
                it not? - A. It is clear to us, but to several numerous
                supporters it was not clear, because I was asked, "Where do I
                go".

             Q. Again, I d o n ’t want to be rude to anybody, but how on earth
                does confusion arise if somebody is in a reasonable state of
                sobriety and a recognised football supporter?      Where is the
                confusion in following the clear instruction, "Entrance C", as
                distinct from "Gangway W", "Seat 66" or "Row 20"? How could
                we make it clearer? Please help us? - A. I don't honestly
                know, because I think people as a matter of course, having
                read that information on the ticket, wish to confirm it.

             Q. I see.  That is very fair.  If we look at the reverse     of the
                ticket could you assume for me again     a state .

                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It might be said, as you have
                asked a rhetorical question....

                     MR. GLASGOW:   I mean to.

                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It might be said it would be a
                good idea to get the thing in order.   It is not much use
                telling people what row they are in until they are in the
                ground, so you might start off with the entrance.

                     MR. GLASGOW:   I appreciate that, sir.   It is perhaps the
                            140


                                                      J. MORGAN


     A, B, C point again:

Q.   Could we go then to the reverse of the ticket as well, just
     reminding ourselves that here we are looking for the West
     Stand.  If we have got a complete stranger who does not know
     the ground at all it would be fair to say we have got a very
     clear map on the other side with all the stands on the reverse
     of the ticket drawn out? - A. That is right.

Q. And again, accepting of course Lord Justice Taylor’s point
   that we could put them in order, if there is confusion about
   which end you are heading for or which stand you are heading
   for, however confused you may be by letters, it is drawn out
   in a picture on the back? - A. In fact, the plan on the back -
   correct me if I am wrong - contradicts the information given
   on the front, because it says on the back of the ticket,
   "Entrance D ” .

Q. Which one are you looking at here? - A. I am looking at the
   back of the tickets on page 164.  Now, entrance A, turnstiles
   1-9, give access to the North Stand.  Entrance C, turnstiles
   9-16, give access to the West Stand.  So in actual fact the
   order that should have been shown on that diagram on the back
   of the ticket was A, C and B.

Q.   You say the order is different from the order in which they
     appear on the back of the ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. I entirely accept that, Sergeant.     In a very simplified form,
   though, on the little drawing we do find entrance C beside the
   West Stand and a picture showing that the West Stand is beside
   Leppings Lane, d o n ’t we? - A. Yes.

Q. Thank you.  Returning to your colour point if we can, and
   again I entirely accept the point you make about the level at
   which you put the colour, once you get to the turnstiles the
   object of the exercise clearly was to have the colour of the
   ticket displayed at the turnstile you should be aiming for? -
   A . Yes.

Q. Perhaps we see a very small attempt at that if we go to the
   composite album 1.  I think possibly the only photograph that
   helps us with people in it is MWL.10/18A, which is about 4 or
   5 photographs in.  Have you got the photograph? - A. The South
   Yorkshire one?

Q. This is the South Yorkshire composite 1, Sergeant Morgan. - A.
   Yes.



                                  /Q. About 5 or 6.
V '& l                                141


                                                      J.   MORGAN



         Q. About 5 or 6 photographs in you will      find MWL/10/18A.
            A.   I have got that one, yes.

         Q. Again, I thought it only fair that we look at it when there
            are people around because, as Lord Justice Taylor says,
            when people are there it is much more difficult to see
            the colours.   A.   Yes.

         Q. But it would be fair to say, would it not, that even though
            this photograph is taken at such a long way away that you
            cannot even see the large letter A and B, you can clearly
            see the yellow squares.   A.   You can see the yellow
            squares but I think they should have been brown, should
            they not?

         Q. Well, the colour of them can be seen.    Did you have
            difficulty with people being confused by the different
            colour on the square on the ticket?   A.    I donTt think
            anyone saw the squares on the walls, to be honest.    I
            drew the attention of several people, as I lost patience
            during the course of the afternoon, I drew several people's
            attention to those squares.

         Q. And in acknowledgement of your point I think it is also
            right to say that you have already drawn attention to it -
            you need not have the photograph in front of you - but
            the red squares for some reason were put lower than the
            yellow ones.   A.   Yes, they were.

         Q. Sergeant Morgan, the other matter on which you perfectly
            reasonably asked if I could help, if I were to give
            a name to you for the grey-haired Club official, might
            that jog your memory or are youfsaying, "I might recognise
            him by sight but I didn't know the name."   A.   I might
            recognise him by my description of him.

         Q. The name would not help you?        A.   It might do.

         Q. Basil Jones,   does that help?      A.   Yes, Basil.

         Q. Basil does help you?      A.     Yes.

         Q. Thank you very much.  It helps us to make sure the right
            person is produced.   There are two other small matters.
            I am now taking you back to your attempts at policing the
            crowd outside the turnstiles ---

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Glasgow, it does not
            look as thought we can finish the witness this e v e n i n g s o
            shall we break off now?

                 MR. GLASGOW:      At your convenience,    sir.     I am sorry.
                       (The Inquiry was adjourned until
                      10.00 a.m. the following morning)
