            City of Bradford Metropolitan Council
                    DIRECTORATE OF ENTERPRISE AND ENVIRONMENT


                                                Director: David Kennedy
                         c / tV
Home Office                                     Jacobs Well
Research Section                                Bradford
50 Queen Annes Gate            (Idd) n/i{       West Yorkshire BD1 5RW
LONDON
SW14 9AT
                                            CC £r
                                                 K JibVvp>~_
2829PA002E33/PW-9
                                                       (Hca^ U
                                                ^^^bvenber 198'9



Dear Sir                                                        IW-J
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT
INTO TEE DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
                                                                   nh\
It is readily acknowledged that the recommendations of the Interim Report will
certainly enhance the future standard and level of safety achieved at places of
sport. The recommendations certainly highlight areas of vulnerability and
perhaps past complacency to which more attention must now be focused.

The outcome of the findings from the Hillsborough tragedy and the publicity
surrounding the incident show clearly that many existing football grounds are
unsuited for dealing with vast numbers of people. Design is often
anachronistic and location confined to narrow inner city streets with
inadequate facilities for parking and dealing with large volumes of people.

Cfoviously, it would be unrealistic to imagine that all football grounds should
be immediately transformed to super stadiums containing the latest facilities
located in open spaces away from city centres. This will only happen in a
minority of cases as the prosperity, fortunes and long term aspirations of a
city changes, and there is evidence of this in the Don Valley, Sheffield.

Since the introduction of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 safety
standards at football grounds have improved as more and more grounds have been
required to be in possession of a general safety certificate. Disasters
involving loss of life have always been at the fore-front of new legislation,
and changes tend to focus and place emphasis on the very issues that lead to
those disasters.

Prior to the Hillsborough disaster, those at Valley Parade Bradford and Heysel
Stadium, Brussels gave rise to a whole series of new recommendations and
concepts intended to provide good standards of safety at places of sport and
also restore public confidence attending such places. Many of those
recommendations were adopted at football grounds and rigorously applied by
enforcing authorities throughout England and Wales. Indeed, at Valley Parade

                                                                   Continued
 [ ^ ^ [ ] City of Bradford Metropolitan Council



2829PA002E33/PW-10

page 2

Home Office


Bradford, the existing ground was refurbished incorporating all the latest
recommendations emanating from the Popplewell Inquiry. At Scunthorpe a brand
new ground was constructed following the same principles. Both grounds offer
the latest standards in safety and yet to some extent those standards are at
discord with the recommendations of the Interim Report. Ironically, compliance
with all those latest recommendations will not necessarily improve standards of
  jfety, on the contrary, on occasion they could have a regressive affect, which

« uld undermine the work of the safety team and create untold frustration for
  the certificate holder.

The purpose of this letter is to request that consideration be given,
particularly, with regard to phase II, to formulating future recommendations in
terms which provide scope for discretion on the part of the local authority and
the safety team. To simply express standards in mandatory and inflexible forms
will only lead to anomalies and unreasonable standards. This is already being
experienced in the application of the Interim recommendations to football
grounds such as Valley Parade, Bradford.

Future requirements for improved standards must take into account the fact that
each ground is different and as such presents different problems requiring
different solutions. It is unreasonable therefore to draft requirements for
improvement work in prescriptive terms based on a single incident at one
ground, however, horrendous that incident may have been. It is most
questionable whether a packing density for standing spectators of 54 per 10
square metres is excessive meriting a 15% reduction. Indeed, where is the
evidence to substantiate this recommendation, I cannot believe that its
application to Hillsborough an 15 April 1989 would have changed the course of
events.   Likewise, there is the question of whether it is safer for pitch
perimeter fence gates to be kept fully open during a match or have them kept
closed but manned by an experienced steward able to open the gates immediately
the need arises. These are two exanples of recommendations that should be
applied, with discretion, taking into account other features and provisions
that may exist or be in operation at a ground.

Naturally, local authorities and safety teams do not take lightly their
responsibilities under sports ground legislation and require to be in a
position to take into account, when determining standards, numerous issues
local to the ground often reflecting practice that has became an established
custom.

The call for an Advisory Group can only be based on the failings at
Hillsborough and not on the success of efficient safety teams in other parts of
the country; safety teams comprising of local authority, the Police and Fire
Service and Building Control Authorities who have been able to work so well
together, in harmony, to achieve high standards at sports grounds.


                                                                   Continued..
              City of Bradford Metropolitan Council



2829PAD02E33/PW-11

page 3

Home Office


In conclusion, I would ask that future standards be formulated in the very same
manner as British Standard Codes of Practice, that is permitting the enforcing
body a degree of discretion that will allow local knowledge and experience to
prevail in determining acceptable standards of safety.




Principal Building Control Surveyor
Chairman of the Bradford Safety Team
with responsibility for imjkementatio
the Safety at Sports GroundsVAct 1975
