INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH      The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                • , London SW1H 9AT ,
                                    01-2732577/3602/2370




Ms Joan Ruddock MP
House of Commons
LONDON
SW1A OAA

                                    Date 12 May 1989




Thank you for your letter of 20 April about the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. Miss kannister
in her letter of 25 April mentioned that your
letter had been forwarded to me as the
Secretary to the Inquiry.

I have shown the correspondence to Lord Justice
Taylor who has noted it.


                                                           7
                                        RHww
                             R M WHALLEY
                        Secretary to the Inquiry
                            F rom   T he   P riv a te   S e c re t.v ry




                                                                               H   ome   O   ffice

                                                                             Q t'E E N ANNE’S GATE
                                                                              LON DO N SWIH9AT



                                                                            25 April 1989




     Q iv r    .k3 RcJde*-

            The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 20
^ p r i l making suggestions as to how another tragedy such as that which took
  place at Hillsborough might best be avoided in the future.

         As you know, an inquiry under the chairmanship of Lord Justice
 Taylor has been formed to investigate the tragic events at Hillsborough and
 to make recommendations.    I have therefore forwarded your letter to Mr
 Robert Whalley, Secretary to the Inquiry, who can be contacted at this
 address, in order that the Inquiry can take your views into account.

         The last paragraph of your letter concerns the Football Spectators’
 Bill and I am therefore copying this correspondence to Mr Colin Moynihan's
 office at the Department of the Environment to reply to you on that point.




                                                                MISS C J BANNISTER




Ms Joan Ruddock, MP.
                                           Joan Ruddock M P
                                           Lewisham, Deptford
                                           House of Commons London SW1A0AA
                                           Telephone 01-219 6206
                                                     01-219 4513
                                                     01 -219 3000
                                                 Fax 01-219 6045.




20th April 1989


Rt Hon D Hurd MP
                                                                        /•
Minister of State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1



Dear Mr Hurd,

Enquiry into the Hillsborough Football Tragedy

You indicated in your statement on Monday that the enquiry would be
wide-ranging and make proposals to ensure that such a tragedy could not
happen again.  That is of course most welcome.  I hope, to that end, you
will ensure that the experiences of my local club, Millwall FC, are
taken fully into account.

As you will know, Millwall experienced great problems with crowd control
over many years and have subsequently had remarkable success through a
package of measures.       One of    these  involves closed  circuit  TV
transmission of popular away matches at the home ground.      I have no
doubt that this has greatly reduced the temptation for ticketless fans
to travel to such matches.    While we cannot know at this stage whether
the entry of those without tickets caused the accident it is obvious
that their presence in such numbers did cause anxiety amongst the
police.

I believe that Millwall are also able to show how effective a voluntary
membership scheme can be and thus how unnecessary it is for the
Government to pursue the compulsory ID card legislation.

Yours sincerely,




Joan Ruddock MP
