 City of Sheffield           Metropolitan District

x 2B63 «xgiXXHSXa®Mto6& 2£Klitimxxxxxxx M. Webster, LL.B                         Administration and Legal Department
 Head of D epartment
                                                                                 Town Hall,
                                                                                 Sheffield S1 2HH

 Our reference
                       GP/262/WJD
 Your reference

 Date
                       4th December, 1989




     Mr. R, Whalley ,
     Secretary to the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry Team,
     50 Queen Anne's Gate,
     LONDON.
     SW1 9AT



     Dear Mr. Whalley,

     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended)
     The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
     Inquiry by Hie Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor
     Interim Report

     I refer to Chapter 24 of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor and in
     particular the section headed "Maximum Capacities for Terraces",
     Recommendation 2.

     For ease of reference Receommendation 2 reads:-

             "2.       Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance
                       with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide figure*')
                       subject to the following qualifications

                       (a)   in arriving at "the Green Guide figure", proper and realistic
                             allowance must be made for all factors which should reduce
                             the permissible density in accordance with the range of
                             maximum figures specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the
                             Green Guide;

                       (b)   after assessing "the Green Guide figure", a deduction of 15%
                             should be made to improve the safety margin."

     It has been put to me that there are two alternative interpretations of this
     Recommendation:-

     Alternative 1

        (l)(a)         The capacity should first be calculated on floor area taking full
                       account of all the factors that should reduce the density figure;

           (b)         the capacity should then be calculated on the means of escape;




                         For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring   1?.^.?PA                          R4602

                                                   Telex 54243 (Administration 8 Legal)
   (c)    the lower of the two figures should then be taken and in
          accordance with Recommendation 2(b) a deduction of 15% should be
          made to improve the safety margin.

Alternative 2

(2)(a)    The capacity should be first calculated on floor area taking full
          account of all the factors that should reduce the density figure;

   (b)    a deduction of 15% should be made from this figure to improve the
          safety margin;

   (c)    the capacity should then be calculated on the means of escape.

If the means of escape figure is lower than the density capacity (which
includes a 15% reduction) the means of escape figure should be adopted.

I would be grateful for some guidance on which interpretation you feel to be
correct.  I enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope for your reply, but
would appreciate a facsimile message as soon as possible as I feel that the
matter needs urgent clarification.

Should you need any further information or clarification of any of the
points I have raised above, please do not hesitate to contact my Chief
Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds), Mr. Derricott, on the number given on
the first page of this letter.

Yours sincerely




Head of Department



enc.




6/JJJ
      BUSINESS REPLY SERVICE
      Licence No. SF. 388




vr
2
<A
J ^3                       THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT,
2    <£                    TOWN HALL,
                           SURREY STREET,
                           SHEFFIELD
      R4407                S1 1AY
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
       STADIUM DISASTER




               With the Compliments of
              the Secretary to the Inquiry


*y^ ri                               iJ.rtitg
         ti U’dfe ,                   ^ ca-




50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT
01-273 3602
