                                                                                            and
                                                                                             the
           .V T*.     ,      v v u u u u im ; v u n w u ut lv u u isieis to ensure mar tn e aid
                                                                                             aid
       provided through Lome Conventions III and IV to the Ethiopian Government is
       administered m the interests of, and actually reaches, those for whom it is intended.

 ^ M ?rl0ba          (Kingston upon Hull East): To ask the Secretary of State for
     Transport, if he has discussed the policing of the air travel organisers licencing
     systMa with the Civil Aviation Authority; and if he has any plans to ensure the
     tougner enforcement of the air travel organisers licencing regulations 1972.

 23 Mr Joha Prescott (Kingston upon Hull East): To ask the Secretary of State for
     .ir?°?Port-.how        prosecutions were initiated by the Civil Aviation Authority
     “      ^gairnt unjjcejjsgd persons offering accommodation on charter flights from
     tne United Kingdom in breach of the air travel organisers timming system; how
     fast o S a S ^ ^ j S t e d 1kffen M ^ average              or 606 imp^ed for: (a)

24 Mr R?bin Squire (Hornchurch): To ask Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, what the
    1989^90WUld ** ^ taX*ng d benefit for taxpayers at the 40 per cent, tax rate in

25 Mr Ardiy Kirkwood (Roxburgh and Berwickshire): To ask the Secretary of State
    for me Home Department, when he now expects Lord Justice Taylor to present his
    interim report on the Hillsborough disaster; and if he will make a statement.

26 Mr David Hinchliffe (Wakefield): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home /
    Department, what is the current number of special constables in England and (
    Wales.

27 Mr Jack Ashley (Stoke on Trent South): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department, what assessment he has made of the extent to which m entally in and
    mentally handicapped people are in prison as a result of under-provision of
    community care facilities.

28 Mr Barry Field (Isle of Wight): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department, what was the number of prisoners held m police cells at the most
    recent available date.

29 Mr BUI Walker (North Tayside): To ask the Secretary of State for Defence, if he can
    give details of the type of motor glider which has been selected to replace the
    Venture glider at volunteer gliding schools.

30 Mr Simon Hughes (Southwark and Bermondsey): To ask the Secretary of State for
    Transport, if he will list: (a) each occasion on which there was a prosecution by the
    Railway Inspectorate in each of the years 1980 to 1988 inclusive, (b) the defendant
    in each case, (c) the date of the first criminal proceedings in each case, (d) the court
    m which criminal proceedings commenced and (e) the outcome of the proceedings
    in each case.

31 Mr David Nicholson (Taunton): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department, if he will list in the Official Report the total deaths reported in the
    decades 1959 to 1968,1969 to 191$ and W 9 to 1988, inclusive resulting from
    crowd pressures or public disorder in the following circumstances: (a) political
    demonstrations, (b) queueing for places of entertainment, other than sports
    meetings, (c) queueing for or occurring at sports meetings, other than football
    matches and (d) queueing for public transport.
