S o u t h Wa l e s S e n io r At t e n d a n c e C entre
      c/o Crown Court Liason, Central Police Station, Cathays Park, Cardiff Tel: (0222) 44111 Ext 30.215
                        All communications should be addressed to Officer in charge
Cl Division,
                                                                     Your refs- CHN90 401/11/3
Room 324,
Home Office,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON,
SwlH 9AT.                                                            26th February, 1990,


Dear Mrs. SatJJter,

ATTENDANCE CENTRES- INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER.


With reference to your letter dated 7th February, 1990 dealing
with the above subject I do feel that to use Attendance Centres
to enforce exclusion orders and to open up the Centres to a wider
age group is a good idea but the practical side of it presents
some problems.


As the report states Centres normally open every other week.
This a system which is easy to follow therefore presenting very
little problems to both attendees and staff. Football league
teams generally play at home every other week also but their
deviation from this pattern is more frequent than that of my
centre. Furthermore I book the premises for my centre in October
for the twelve months commencing the forthcoming 1st January,
which is long before the fixtures for the next football season
are known.


At the moment the only team in the football league in the area
covered by my centre is Cardiff City A.F.C. but Merthyr Town F.C.
could well be in the football league in the not to distant future
and it tends to be the policy of the football league that teams
in the same area play at home on alternate Saturdays and if the
ploicy remains unaltered it would mean that if Merthyr gain admission
to the football league there would be a professional football
match being played every Saturday                   within the area covered by
my centre. Also there is a problem with cup matches and mid week
games. With cup matches the draw is made only a short time before
the games are due to be played and if the first game is drawn it
is usually re-played on the other teams ground within a few days


One possible answer to this could be that persons convicted of
offences commited at football matches and sentenced to attend
an attendance centre and persons to whom an exclusion order applies
should attend at the centre if it is open when the local team
is playing at home but it is not open or it is a mid week game
then they should report to the officer in charge of the centre
at a room which could be hired for that purpose and where some
in.   uction could be given. Some police buildings have rooms which
could be used for this purpose. The centre would still open every
other week as normal for other offenders maintaining the two weekly
pattern.




Yours sincerely, ,




Stanley Sulman.
Officer in Charge.
